Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included within Part II, “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. For additional information related to forward looking statements or information related to the basis of presentation and comparability of financial information, please see “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and Information” and “Basis of Presentation in this Annual Report on Form 10-K”, both of which immediately follow the table of contents of this Form 10-K.
Business Overview
NexTier Oilfield Solutions Inc. is a predominantly U.S. land oilfield service company, with a diverse set of well completion and production services across a variety of active and demanding basins. We have a history of growth through acquisition, including (i) our 2017 acquisition of RockPile, a multi-basin provider of integrated well completion services in the U.S. whose primary service offerings included hydraulic fracturing, wireline perforation and workover rigs, (ii) our 2018 asset acquisition from RSI to acquire approximately 90,000 hydraulic horsepower and related support equipment, (iii) our 2019 transaction with C&J Energy Services, Inc. (“C&J Merger”), a publicly traded Delaware corporation. This history impacts the comparability of our operational results from year to year. See Part I, “Item 1. Business” of this Annual Report for an overview of our history, including additional information on the acquisitions noted above, including the C&J Merger, and business environment. Additional information on these transactions can be found in Note (3) Mergers and Acquisitions of Part II, “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplemental Data.”
Industry Overview and Drivers in 2020
We provide our services in several of the most active basins in the United States, including the Permian, the Marcellus Shale/Utica, the Eagle Ford and the Bakken/Rockies. The high density of our operations in the basins in which we are most active provides us the opportunity to leverage our fixed costs and to quickly respond with what we believe are highly efficient, integrated solutions that are best suited to address customer requirements.
Activity within our business segments is significantly impacted by spending on upstream exploration, development and production programs by our customers. Thus, our financial performance is affected by rig and well counts in North America, as well as oil and natural gas prices, which are summarized in the tables below. Also influencing our activity is the status of the global economy, which impacts oil and natural gas demand. Some of the more significant determinants of current and future spending levels of our customers are oil and natural gas prices, global oil supply, the world economy, the availability of credit, government regulation and global stability, which together drive worldwide drilling activity.
The dual supply and demand shock that emerged in the first quarter of 2020 in response to increasing macro uncertainty related to the COVID-19 pandemic and significantly lower crude oil prices (partly resulting from production decisions from OPEC+) had immediate negative impacts on commodity prices and market conditions, which translated into lower completions activity in 2020. Crude oil prices have improved from their 2020 lows, which if maintained, we believe could drive a healthy level of investment and activity in U.S. shale, especially in 2022, if macro-economic conditions continue to improve.
There has been some attrition through consolidation and other events that have made some progress in realigning frac supply with demand. However, while well completion activity levels are improving, frac supply remains in excess of demand. Against this backdrop, pricing for our services remains highly competitive, as excess frac capacity pursues limited new opportunities. We continued to see pricing pressure and do not expect pricing to return to normal levels in the near future. In addition, horsepower intensity for each fleet continues to grow as our industry adopts more complex completion techniques; and we believe that when horsepower returns, it will likely be utilized across fewer fleets.
We have focused on reducing our marketed fleet to a level that we believe is more in-line with long term demand and with our strategy to harvest the investments made in our traditional fleets, while growing the portion of our fleet that offers better pricing and a lower emissions profile. Since the merger, we have announced a reduction of approximately 650,000 horsepower that can be considered as permanently out of the market. The major components from the decommissioned fleets have and will continue to be used over time as part of our maintenance inventory. Once consumed, we intend to cut up the frames and permanently remove them from our marketed base of equipment.
The following table shows the average historical oil and natural gas prices for WTI and Henry Hub natural gas:
The historical average U.S. rig counts based on the weekly Baker Hughes Incorporated rig count information were as follows:
As of January 2021, global liquids demand is expected to average 97.7 barrels per day in 2021. The EIA anticipates continued growth in the long-term U.S. domestic demand for natural gas, supported by various factors, including (i) increased likelihood of favorable regulatory and legislative initiatives, (ii) increased acceptance of natural gas as a clean and abundant domestic fuel source and (iii) the emergence of low-cost natural gas shale developments. As of January 2021, natural gas demand in the United States is expected to average 80.73 cubic feet per day in 2021.
The regions in which we operate, including the Permian, Marcellus Shale / Utica Basins and Eagle Ford, among others, are expected to account for a majority of all new horizontal wells anticipated to be drilled through 2021. As of December 31, 2020, rigs in these basins accounted for approximately 67% of the total, and were up approximately 47% as compared to low total U.S. rig count noted on August 14, 2020.
In January 2021, a new U.S. President took office. He has made statements regarding the desire to support alternative energy sources, reduce U.S. emissions of greenhouse gases and generally address climate change. This new administration has implemented executive orders in pursuit of those goals and has indicated a desire to reverse certain business and energy industry policies of the prior President. At this time, it is unclear what impact the new administration’s actions and policy platform may have on our business, our customers and our industry.
Operating Approach & Strategy
We believe that there is competitive value in providing integrated solutions that align the incentives of operators and service providers. We are pursuing opportunities to leverage our investment in our digital program and diesel substitution technologies (such as duel fuel capabilities), to provide a service strategy targeted at achieving emissions reductions, both for us and our customers. NexTier has been developing and building its digital program for some time, and we have now applied our digital platform to all of our operating fleets. We’ve also announced the expected addition in 2021 of a natural gas treatment and delivery solution that will power NexTier’s fleet with field gas or compressed natural gas. This addition seeks to address wellsites where there is not a reliable nearby gas supply, and thus, the full benefit and value of dual fuel or other lower emissions technologies may not otherwise be
fully realized. To address this situation, we are developing an integrated natural gas treatment and delivery solution designed to provide gas sourcing, compression, transport, decompression, treatment, and related services for our fracing operations. This integrated strategy will provide our customers with a streamlined approach to driving more sustainable, cost effective operations at the wellsite.
We believe our integrated approach and proven capabilities enable us to deliver cost-effective solutions for increasingly complex and technically demanding well completion requirements, which include longer lateral segments, higher pressure rates and proppant intensity and multiple fracturing stages in challenging high-pressure formations. In addition, our technical team and our innovation centers, provide us with the ability to supplement our service offerings with engineered solutions specifically tailored to address customers’ completion requirements and unique challenges.
Our revenues are generated by providing services and equipment to customers who operate oil and gas properties and invest capital to drill new wells and enhance production or perform maintenance on existing wells. Our results of operations in our core service lines are driven primarily by five interrelated, fluctuating variables: (1) the drilling, completion and production activities of our customers, which is primarily driven by oil and natural gas prices and directly affects the demand for our services; (2) the price we are able to charge for our services and equipment, which is primarily driven by the level of demand for our services and the supply of equipment capacity in the market; (3) the cost of materials, supplies and labor involved in providing our services, and our ability to pass those costs on to our customers; (4) our activity, or deployed equipment “utilization” levels; and (5) the quality, safety and efficiency of our service execution.
Our operating strategy is focused on maintaining high utilization levels of deployed equipment to maximize revenue generation while controlling costs to gain a competitive advantage and drive returns. We believe that the quality and efficiency of our service execution and aligning with customers who recognize the value that we provide are central to our efforts to support equipment utilization and grow our business.
However, equipment utilization cannot be relied on as wholly indicative of our financial or operating performance due to variations in revenue and profitability from job to job, the type of service to be performed and the equipment, personnel and consumables required for the job, as well as competitive factors and market conditions in the region in which the services are performed. Given the volatile and cyclical nature of activity drivers in the U.S. onshore oilfield services industry, coupled with the varying prices we are able to charge for our services and the cost of providing those services, among other factors, operating margins can fluctuate widely depending on supply and demand at a given point in the cycle.
Historically, our utilization levels have been highly correlated to U.S. onshore spending by our customers. Generally, as capital spending by our customers increases, drilling, completion and production activity also increases, resulting in increased demand for our services, and therefore more days or hours worked (as the case may be). Conversely, when drilling, completion and production activity levels decline due to lower spending by our customers, we generally provide fewer services, which results in fewer days or hours worked (as the case may be). Additionally, during periods of decreased spending by our customers, we may be required to discount our rates or provide other pricing concessions to remain competitive and support deployed equipment utilization, which negatively impacts our revenue and operating margins. During periods of pricing weakness for our services, we may not be able to reduce our costs accordingly, and our ability to achieve any cost reductions from our suppliers typically lags behind the decline in pricing for our services, which could further adversely affect our results. Furthermore, when demand for our services increases following a period of low demand, our ability to capitalize on such increased demand may be delayed while we reengage and redeploy equipment and crews that have been idled during a downturn. The mix of customers that we are working for, as well as limited periods of exposure to the spot market, also impacts our deployed equipment utilization.
Our Reportable Segments
Prior to the C&J Merger, the Company was organized as two reportable segments. Between the C&J Merger and the divestiture of our well support services business in March of 2020, our business was organized into three reportable segments. Additional information on these transactions can be found in Note (21) Business Segments. As of December 31, 2020, we were organized into two reportable segments, described below. This history impacts the comparability of our operational results from year to year.
•Completion Services, which consists of the following businesses and services lines: (1) hydraulic fracturing; (2) wireline and pumpdown services; and (3) completion support services, which includes our innovation centers and activities.
•Well Construction and Intervention Services, which consists of the following businesses and service lines: (1) cementing services and (2) coiled tubing services.
Completion Services
The core services provided through our Completion Services segment are hydraulic fracturing, wireline and pumpdown services. As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately 37 marketable hydraulic fracturing fleets, 116 wireline trucks and 80 pumpdown units capable of being deployed. Our completion support services are focused on supporting the efficiency, reliability and quality of our operations. Our Innovation Centers provide in-house manufacturing capabilities that help to reduce operating cost and enable us to offer more technologically advanced and efficiency focused completion services, which we believe is a competitive differentiator. For example, through our Innovation Centers we manufacture the data control instruments used in our fracturing operations and the perforating guns and addressable switches used in our wireline operations; these products are also available for sale to third-parties. The majority of revenue for this segment is generated by our fracturing business.
Well Construction and Intervention Services
The core services provided through our Well Construction and Intervention Services segment are cementing and coiled tubing services. The majority of revenue for this segment is generated by our cementing business. As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately 25 coiled tubing units and 101 cementing units capable of being deployed.
Historical Segment: Well Support Services
On March 9, 2020, we completed a divestiture of the entities and assets comprising our Well Support Services. This segment had focused on post-completion activities at the well site, including rig services, such as workover and plug and abandonment, fluids management services, and other specialty well site services. Our financials for the full year ended December 31, 2020 include operating results of the Well Support Services business prior to its divestiture.
How we calculate utilization for each segment
Our management team monitors asset utilization, among other factors, for purposes of assessing our overall activity levels and customer demand. For our Completion Services segment, asset utilization levels for our own fleets is defined as the ratio of the average number of deployed fleets to the number of total fleets for a given time period. We define active fleets as fleets available for deployment; we consider one of our fleets deployed if the fleet has been put in service at least one day during the period for which we calculate utilization; and we define fully-utilized fleets per month as fleets that were deployed and working with our customers for a significant portion of a given month. As a result, as additional fleets are incrementally deployed, our utilization rate increases. We define industry utilization of fracturing assets as the ratio of the total industry demand of hydraulic horsepower to the total available capacity of hydraulic horsepower, in each case as reported by an independent industry source. Our method
for calculating the utilization rate for our own fracturing fleets or the industry may differ from the method used by other companies or industry sources which could, for example, be based off a ratio of the total number of days a fleet is put in service to the total number of days in the relevant period. We believe that our measures of utilization, based on the number of deployed fleets, provide an accurate representation of existing, available capacity for additional revenue generating activity.
In our Well Construction and Intervention Services segment, we measure our asset utilization levels for our cementing business primarily by the total number of days that our asset base works on a monthly basis, based on the available working days per month. In our coiled tubing business, we measure certain asset utilization levels by the hour to better understand measures between daylight and 24-hour operations. Both the financial and operating performance of our coiled tubing and cement units can vary in revenue and profitability from job to job depending on the type of service to be performed and the equipment, personnel and consumables required for the job, as well as competitive factors and market conditions in the region in which the services are performed.
In our Well Support Services segment, we measured asset utilization levels primarily by the number of hours our assets work on a monthly basis, based on the available working days per month.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table sets forth our financial results for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Our financial results for 2019 include the financial and operating results of the businesses acquired in the C&J Merger for the partial period beginning November 1, 2019 through December 31, 2019.
A comparison of our financial results for the year ended December 31, 2019 and for the year ended December 31, 2018 can be found in the "Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Results of Operations" section in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed on March 12, 2020.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue. Total revenue is comprised of revenue from our Completion Services, Well Construction and Intervention Services and Well Support Services segments. Revenue in 2020 decreased by $619.0 million, or 34%, to $1.2 billion from $1.8 billion in 2019. This change in revenue by reportable segment is discussed below.
Completion Services: Completion Services segment revenue decreased by $663.6 million, or 39%, to $1.0 billion in 2020 from $1.7 billion in 2019. The segment revenue decrease was primarily attributable to a decrease in our average number of fully utilized fracturing fleets, combined with decreases in our wireline and pump down services. The decreases in all service lines were driven by less activity and price reductions as a result of the
continuing impacts from the unforeseen and sudden decline in commodity prices as well as the COVID-19 pandemic that began to impact operations in late first quarter of 2020. Price reductions were slightly offset by efficiency gains delivered at the well site.
Well Construction and Intervention: Well Construction and Intervention Services segment revenue increased by $35.3 million, or 56%, to $98.3 million in 2020 from $63.0 million in 2019. This increase in revenue is primarily attributable to the C&J Merger, partially offset by less utilization and price reductions given as a result of continuing negative impacts from unprecedented declines in the market and the COVID-19 pandemic that began to impact operations in late first quarter 2020.
Well Support Services: Well Support Services segment revenue increased by $9.3 million or 19% to $57.9 million in 2020 from $48.6 million in 2019. In March of 2020 we sold our Well Support Services Segment. For additional information on this transaction, see Note (21) Business Segments of Part II, “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”.
Cost of services. Cost of services in 2020 decreased by $371.4 million, or 26%, to $1.0 billion from $1.4 billion in 2019. This change was driven by several factors including decreased overall activity and fleet utilization, as discussed above under Revenue, combined with increased market driven severance and facility closure costs resulting from a suppressed market environment and COVID-19 pandemic impact that began to impact operations in late first quarter of 2020.
Equipment Utilization. Depreciation and amortization expense increased by $9.9 million, or 3%, to $302.1 million in 2020 from $292.2 million in 2019. The change in depreciation and amortization was primarily related to the assets acquired during the C&J Merger. (Gain) loss on disposal of assets in 2020 had a variance of $18.9 million, compared to a gain of $14.5 million in 2020 from a loss of $4.5 million in 2019. This change was primarily driven by the sale of our Well Support Services Segment. For additional information on this transaction, see Note (21) Business Segments of Part II, “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”.
Selling, general and administrative expense. Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expense, which represents costs associated with managing and supporting our operations, increased by $20.5 million, or 17%, to $144.1 million in 2020 from $123.7 million in 2019, primarily as a direct result of the increased labor force and footprint from the Merger.
Merger and integration expense. Merger and integration expense decreased by $36.2 million to $32.5 million in 2020 from $68.7 million in 2019. The $32.5 million in merger and integration expense in 2020 is lower due to the C&J Merger closing in 2019 and a reduction in associated costs in 2020. These costs consisted primarily of professional services, severance costs, and facility consolidation.
Other income, net. Other income, net, in 2020 increased by $6.0 million, or 1,338%, to $6.5 million in 2020 from $0.5 million in 2019. This change was primarily due to a $6.0 million gain on a financial investment we acquired in 2020.
Interest expense, net. Interest expense, net of interest income, decreased by $1.2 million, or 6%, to $20.7 million in 2020 from $21.9 million in 2019. This change was primarily attributable to a reduction in the Company’s finance leases and lower interest rates in 2020.
Effective tax rate. Our effective tax rate on continuing operations in 2020 was (0.43)% for $1.4 million of recorded income tax expense, as compared to (0.96)% for $1.0 million of recorded income tax expense in 2019. For 2020, the difference between the effective tax rate and the U.S. federal statutory rate is due to state taxes, foreign withholding taxes and a change in valuation allowance. For 2019, the effective rate was primarily made up of state taxes and tax benefits derived from the current period operating income offset by a valuation allowance. As a result of market conditions and their corresponding impact on our business outlook, we determined that a valuation allowance was appropriate as it is not more likely than not that we will utilize our net deferred tax assets. The remaining tax impact not offset by a valuation allowance is related to indefinite-lived assets.
2021 Strategy
We face many challenges and risks in the industry in which we operate. Although many factors contributing to these risks are beyond our ability to control, we continuously monitor these risks and have taken steps to mitigate them to the extent practicable. In addition, while we believe that we are well positioned to capitalize on available growth opportunities, we may not be able to achieve our business objectives and, consequently, our results of operations may be adversely affected. Please read the factors described in the sections titled “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A. of this Annual Report for additional information about the known material risks that we face.
Operating During a Pandemic
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have implemented measures to focus on the safety of our partners, employees, and the communities in which we operate, while at the same time seeking to mitigate the impact on our financial position and operations. These measures include, but are not limited to, the following:
Taking Care of our Partners and Employees. The safety of our partners and employees continues to be a primary focus. As the COVID-19 pandemic has developed, we have taken numerous steps to help customers and employees comply with current health-expert recommendations, including limitation of social functions and non-essential travel, hygiene protocol education, telecommuting as job responsibilities permit, protocols and procedures focused on establishing a safe work environment, protocol for employees who test positive for COVID-19, and a response and mitigation monitoring process.
Expense Management. With the reduction in revenue, we implemented cost saving initiatives, including (i) adjusting active frac fleet count to align with changing demand; (ii) consolidating our footprint; (iii) delaying non-essential maintenance projects; (iv) reducing or suspending other discretionary spending; (v) restructuring our organization in a way that maximizes our managerial talent with a streamlined team; (vi) reductions of salaries or cash retainers, as applicable, by 20% for our directors and executive officers; and (vi) reducing employee-related costs, including furloughing personnel, pay reductions by 15-20%, and moderating headcount. While many of these cost savings initiatives continue, with the increase in activity, we have been able to put most of our furloughed personnel back to work, and we have begun rolling out a portion of pay reinstatement, with the focus on field level personnel. We recognize that the COVID-19 pandemic and responses thereto also impact our suppliers. To date, we have generally been able to obtain the equipment, parts and supplies necessary to support our operations on a timely basis. While we believe we will be able to make satisfactory alternative arrangements in the event of any interruption in the supply of these materials and/or products by one of our suppliers, this may not always be the case. In addition, certain materials for which we do not currently have long-term supply agreements could experience shortages and significant price increases in the future.
Balance Sheet, Cash Flow and Liquidity Management. We have taken actions to increase liquidity and strengthen our financial position. As a result of these actions, our cash and cash equivalents balance as of December 31, 2020 was $276.0 million. For additional information on our liquidity and capital resources, see “Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
Fiscal 2021 Objectives
With commodity prices continuing to be volatile, we intend to closely monitor the market and will adjust our approach as the situation develops. At this time, our principal business objective continues to be growing our business and safely providing best-in-class services in all of our operating segments, while delivering shareholder value and maintaining a disciplined capital deployment strategy.
We are committed to continuing to manage our business in line with demand for our services and make adjustments as necessary to effectively respond to changes in market conditions, customer activity levels, pricing for our services and equipment, and utilization of our deployed equipment and personnel. Our response to the industry's persistent uncertainty is to maintain sufficient liquidity, preserve our conservative capital structure and closely
monitor our discretionary spending. We take a measured approach to asset deployment, balancing our view of current and expected customer activity levels with a focus on generating positive returns for our shareholders. Our priorities remain to drive revenue by maximizing deployed equipment utilization, to improve margins through cost controls, to protect and grow our market share by focusing on the quality, safety and efficiency of our service execution, lower emissions, and to ensure that we are strategically positioned to capitalize on constructive market dynamics.
Completion Services
In our Completion Services segment, our strategy remains focused on deploying our market-ready fracturing fleets and integrating more of our wireline and pumpdown units with our deployed fracturing fleets and on a stand-alone basis. We are focused on increasing our dedicated fracturing fleet count with efficient customers that allow us to achieve high equipment utilization, which should result in improved financial performance. Additionally, we are focused on integrating more of our wireline and pumpdown units with our fracturing fleets to increase operational efficiencies and profitability. With that said, current market conditions remain challenging, and our primary focus remains to lower our overall cost structure by aligning with efficient, dedicated customers with deep inventories of work and proven track records of efficient operations, many of which we have created long-term relationships with over the past several years.
Furthermore, as discussed in Item 1. Business and Item 7. MD&A Overview, as part of our lower emissions initiatives, we are focused on optimizing gas substitution across our fleet, enabled by digital capabilities like NexHub and MDT controls, and the launch of our power solutions business. We believe that natural gas-powered technologies and digital assisted logistics will be a key method of transitioning to lower emissions operations, which strategy we anticipate will be a key driver of returns.
Well Construction and Intervention Services
In our Well Construction and Intervention Services segment, after significantly reducing our footprint during the second and third quarters of 2020 as we seek to position ourselves for strong operational and financial performance in regions that will support both near-term and long-term levels of activity, our strategy remains focused on deploying our market-ready cementing and coil tubing equipment in focused basins where we expect to generate returns. In our cementing business, even though market conditions remain challenged due to customers releasing drilling rigs and declining E&P capital spending, we remain focused on providing high-quality, timely service and deploying more of our stacked units with efficient customers in our focused basins. In our coiled tubing business, we are focused on market share growth, high quality customer service, and deploying additional market ready units at a low cost in response to increases in demand from our customers. We will stay focused on controlling costs and improving market share with an efficient customer base that plan to maintain stable drilling rig counts and levels of activity in 2021.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Liquidity represents a company’s ability to adjust its future cash flows to meet needs and opportunities, both expected and unexpected.
Significant sources and uses of cash during the year ended December 31, 2020
Sources of cash:
•Operating activities:
-Net cash generated by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 of $68.9 million. We continue to closely monitor our discretionary spending to focus on working capital and net operating cash to support our capital expenditures and other investing activities.
•Financing activities:
-In the first quarter of 2020, the Company drew down $175 million on the 2019 ABL Facility. This borrowing was to provide the Company better flexibility while managing its cash position during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
Uses of cash:
•Investing activities:
-Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of capital expenditures, net of the cash received as part of the sale of the Well Support Services business segment.
•Financing activities:
-Cash used to repay our debt facilities (other than described below), excluding finance leases and interest, during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $3.5 million.
-In the first quarter of 2020, the Company drew down $175 million on the 2019 ABL Facility. This borrowing was to provide the Company better flexibility while managing its cash position during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. The borrowing on the 2019 ABL Facility was repaid in full during the second quarter of 2020.
-Cash used to repay our finance leases during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $3.8 million.
-Shares withheld and retired related to stock-based compensation during the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $2.6 million.
Significant sources and uses of cash during the year ended December 31, 2019
Sources of cash:
•Operating activities:
-Net cash generated by operating activities in 2019 of $305.5 million was a result of the thoroughness in receiving collections from our customers and controlling costs.
Uses of cash:
•Operating activities:
-Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019, included $61.9 million of merger and integration costs in connection with the C&J merger.
Investing activities:
-Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted primarily of capital expenditures. This activity primarily related to our Completion Services segment.
•Financing activities:
-Cash used to repay our debt facilities, excluding leases and interest, during the year ended December 31, 2019 was $3.5 million.
-Cash used to repay our finance leases during the year ended December 31, 2019 was $6.0 million.
-Shares withheld and retired related to share-based compensation during the year ended December 31, 2019 totaled $6.0 million.
Significant sources and uses of cash during the year ended December 31, 2018
Sources of cash:
•Operating activities:
-Net cash generated by operating activities in 2018 of $350.3 million was primarily driven by higher utilization of our combined asset base and increased gross profit in our Completion Services segment.
•Investing activities:
-Cash provided by the insurance proceeds received for losses resulting from the July 1, 2018 accidental fire was $18.1 million. For further details see Note (7) Property and Equipment, net of Part II, “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
-$4.7 million in proceeds from sales of various assets, including our idle field operations facility in Mathis, Texas, within the Corporate segment, and hydraulic tractors and light general-purpose vehicles within the Completion Service segment.
•Financing activities:
-Cash provided by the 2018 Term Loan Facility, net of debt discount was $348.2 million.
Uses of cash:
•Operating activities:
-$13.0 million of transaction costs, including underwriting discounts paid by the Company, primarily incurred to consummate the secondary stock offering completed in January 2018
-$7.9 million related to the portion of the cash settlement of our RockPile CVR liability that exceeded its acquisition-date fair value, with the remaining $12.0 million of the cash settlement cost reflected in the use of cash in financing activities as described below.
•Investing activities:
-Net cash used in investing activities of $297.5 million was primarily associated with our asset acquisition from RSI and our newbuild and maintenance capital spend on active fleets, offset by insurance proceeds and proceeds from various asset sales, as discussed above under “Sources of cash.” This activity primarily related to our Completion Services segment.
•Financing activities:
-Cash used to repay our debt facilities, including capital leases but excluding interest, was $289.1 million.
-Cash used to pay debt issuance costs associated with our debt facilities was $7.3 million.
-Shares repurchased and retired related to our stock repurchase program totaled $104.9 million.
-Shares repurchased and retired related to payroll tax withholdings on our share-based compensation totaled $3.6 million.
-$12.0 million related to the portion of the cash settlement of our RockPile CVR liability that was reflective of its acquisition-date fair value.
Future sources and use of cash
Our primary sources of liquidity have historically included, and we have funded our capital expenditures with, cash flows from operations, proceeds from public offerings of our common stock and borrowings under debt facilities. Our ability to generate future cash flows is subject to a number of variables, many of which are outside of our control, including the drilling, completion and production activity by our customers, which is highly dependent on oil and gas prices. See Part II, “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Overview” for additional discussion of certain factors that impact our results and the market challenges within our industry.
Our primary uses of cash are for operating costs, capital expenditures and debt service.
Capital expenditures for the first half of 2021 are projected to be primarily related to maintenance capital spend to support our existing active fleets, wireline trucks, coil units, and cementing units, with the remaining spend expected to be on our gas powered equipment and power solutions service.
Debt service for the year ended December 31, 2021 is projected to be $23.4 million, of which $0.8 million is related to finance leases. We anticipate our debt service will be funded by cash flows from operations.
Other factors affecting liquidity
Financial position in current market. As of December 31, 2020, we had $276.0 million of cash and a total of $73.5 million available under our revolving credit facility. We currently believe that our cash on hand, cash flow generated from operations and availability under our revolving credit facility will provide sufficient liquidity for at least the next 12 months, including for capital expenditures, debt service, and working capital investments.
Guarantee agreements. Under the 2019 ABL Facility $28.5 million of letters of credit were outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
Customer receivables. In line with industry practice, we bill our customers for our services in arrears and are, therefore, subject to our customers delaying or failing to pay our invoices. The majority of our trade receivables have payment terms of 30 days or less. In weak economic environments, such as during the continuance of the COVID-19 pandemic, we may experience increased delays and failures to pay our invoices due to, among other reasons, a reduction in our customers’ cash flow from operations and their access to the credit markets. If our customers delay paying or fail to pay us a significant amount of our outstanding receivables, it could have a material adverse effect on our liquidity, consolidated results of operations and consolidated financial condition.
Contractual Obligations
In the normal course of business, we enter into various contractual obligations that impact or could impact our liquidity. The table below contains our known contractual commitments as of December 31, 2020.
(1)Long-term debt represents our obligations under our 2018 Term Loan Facility, exclusive of interest payments. In addition, these amounts exclude $5.7 million of unamortized debt discount and debt issuance costs associated with our 2018 Term Loan Facility.
(2)Estimated interest payments are based on debt balances outstanding as of December 31, 2020 and include interest related to the 2018 Term Loan Facility. Interest rates used for variable rate debt are based on the prevailing current London Interbank Offer Rate (“LIBOR”).
(3)Finance lease obligations primarily consist of obligations on our finance leases of light weight vehicles with ARI Financial Services Inc. and Enterprise FM Trust and includes interest payments.
(4)Operating lease obligations are related to our real estate, rail cars, and light duty vehicles.
(5)Purchase commitments primarily relate to our agreements with vendors for sand purchases and deposits on equipment. The purchase commitments to sand suppliers represent our annual obligations to purchase a minimum amount of sand from vendors. If the minimum purchase requirement is not met, the shortfall at the end of the year is settled in cash or, in some cases, carried forward to the next year.
Principal Debt Agreements
While there were numerous governmental assistance programs in 2020 to provide loans to qualifying companies facing challenges due to COVID-19, the Company did not seek any loans under these programs. Thus, our principal debt arrangements continue to be the 2019 ABL Facility and the 2018 Term Loan Facility described below.
2019 ABL Facility
Origination. On October 31, 2019, we, and certain of our other subsidiaries as additional
borrowers and guarantors, entered into a Second Amended and Restated Asset-Based Revolving Credit Agreement (the “2019 ABL Facility”) to the original Asset-Based Revolving Credit Agreement, dated as of February 17, 2017, as amended December 22, 2017.
Structure. Our 2019 ABL Facility provides for a $450.0 million revolving credit facility (with a $100.0 million subfacility for letters of credit), subject to a borrowing base in accordance with the terms agreed between us and the lenders. In addition, subject to approval by the applicable lenders and other customary conditions, the 2019 ABL Facility allows for an additional increase in commitments of up to $200.0 million. The 2019 ABL Facility is subject to customary fees, guarantees of subsidiaries, restrictions and covenants, including certain restricted payments.
Maturity. The loans arising under the initial commitments under the 2019 ABL Facility mature on October 31, 2024. The loans arising under any tranche of extended loans or additional commitments mature as specified in the applicable extension amendment or increase joinder, respectively.
Interest. Pursuant to the terms of the 2019 ABL Facility, amounts outstanding under the 2019 ABL Facility bear interest at a rate per annum equal to, at Keane Group Holdings, LLC’s option, (a) the base rate, plus an applicable margin equal to (x) if the average excess availability is less than 33%, 1.00%, (y) if the average excess availability is greater than or equal to 33% but less than 66%, 0.75% or (z) if the average excess availability is greater than or equal to 66%, 0.50%, or (b) the adjusted LIBOR rate for such interest period, plus an applicable margin equal to (x) if the average excess availability is less than 33%, 2.00%, (y) if the average excess availability is greater than or equal to 33% but less than 66%, 1.75% or (z) if the average excess availability is greater than or equal to 66%, 1.50%, to a rate per annum equal to, at Keane Group Holdings, LLC’s option, (a) the base rate, plus an applicable margin equal to (x) if the average excess availability is less than 33%, 0.75%, (y) if the average excess availability is greater than or equal to 33% but less than 66%, 0.50% or (z) if the average excess availability is greater than or equal to 66%, 0.25%, or (b) the adjusted LIBOR rate for such interest period, plus an applicable margin equal to (x) if the average excess availability is less than 33%, 1.75%, (y) if the average excess availability is greater than or equal to 33% but less than 66%, 1.50% or (z) if the average excess availability is greater than or equal to 66%, 1.25%.
Financial Covenants. The 2019 ABL Facility requires that, under certain circumstances, the consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio not be lower than 1.0:1.0 as of the last day of the most recently completed four consecutive fiscal quarters for which financial statements were required to have been delivered, including if excess availability (or liquidity if no loan or letter of credit, other than any letter of credit that has been cash collateralized, is outstanding) is less than the greater of (i) 10% of the loan cap and (ii) $30.0 million at any time. As of December 31, 2020, the Company was in compliance with all covenants and the circumstances that would require testing of the consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio had not occurred.
2018 Term Loan Facility
On May 25, 2018, Keane Group and the 2018 Term Loan Guarantors (as defined below) entered into the 2018 Term Loan Facility with each lender from time to time party thereto and Barclays Bank PLC, as administrative agent and collateral agent. The proceeds of the 2018 Term Loan Facility were used to refinance Keane Group’s then-existing term loan facility and to repay related fees and expenses, with the excess proceeds to fund general corporate purposes.
Structure. The 2018 Term Loan Facility provides for a term loan facility in an initial aggregate principal amount of $350.0 million (the loans incurred under the 2018 Term Loan Facility, the “2018 Term Loans”). As of December 31, 2020, there was $341.3 million principal amount of 2018 Term Loans outstanding. In addition, subject to certain customary conditions, the 2018 Term Loan Facility allows for additional incremental term loans to be incurred thereunder in an amount equal to the sum of (a) $200.0 million plus the aggregate principal amount of voluntary prepayments of 2018 Term Loans made on or prior to the date of determination (less amounts incurred in reliance on the capacity described in this subclause (a)), plus (b) an unlimited amount, subject to, (x) in the case of debt secured on a pari passu basis with the 2018 Term Loans, immediately after giving effect to the incurrence
thereof, a first lien net leverage ratio being less than or equal to 2.00:1.00, (y) in the case of debt secured on a junior basis with the 2018 Term Loans, immediately after giving effect to the incurrence thereof, a secured net leverage ratio being less than or equal to 3.00:1.00 and (z) in the case of unsecured debt, immediately after giving effect to the incurrence thereof, a total net leverage ratio being less than or equal to 3.50:1.00.
Maturity. May 25, 2025 or, if earlier, the stated maturity date of any other term loans or term commitments.
Amortization. The 2018 Term Loans amortize in quarterly installments equal to 1.00% per annum of the aggregate principal amount of all initial term loans outstanding.
Interest. The 2018 Term Loans bear interest at a rate per annum equal to, at Keane Group’s option, (a) the base rate plus 2.75%, or (b) the adjusted LIBOR for such interest period (subject to a 1.00% floor) plus 3.75%, subject to, on and after the fiscal quarter ending September 30, 2018, a pricing grid with three 0.25% per annum step-ups and one 0.25% per annum step-down determined based on total net leverage for the relevant period. Following a payment event of default, the 2018 Term Loans bear interest at the rate otherwise applicable to such 2018 Term Loans at such time plus an additional 2.00% per annum during the continuance of such event of default. We currently expect our interest rate to be higher in 2021 than in past years due to our current qualification at the higher end of our applicable margin range.
Prepayments. The 2018 Term Loan Facility is required to be prepaid with: (a) 100% of the net cash proceeds of certain asset sales, casualty events and other dispositions, subject to the terms of an intercreditor agreement between the agent for the 2018 Term Loan Facility and the agent for the 2019 ABL Facility and certain exceptions; (b) 100% of the net cash proceeds of debt incurrences or issuances (other than debt incurrences permitted under the 2018 Term Loan Facility, which exclusion is not applicable to permitted refinancing debt) and (c) 50% (subject to step-downs to 25% and 0%, upon and during achievement of certain total net leverage ratios) of excess cash flow in excess of a certain amount, minus certain voluntary prepayments made under the 2018 Term Loan Facility or other debt secured on a pari passu basis with the 2018 Term Loans and voluntary prepayments of loans under the 2019 ABL Facility to the extent the commitments under the 2019 ABL Facility are permanently reduced by such prepayments.
Guarantees. Subject to certain exceptions as set forth in the definitive documentation for the 2018 Term Loan Facility, the amounts outstanding under the 2018 Term Loan Facility are guaranteed by the Company, Keane Frac, LP, KS Drilling, LLC, KGH Intermediate Holdco I, LLC, KGH Intermediate Holdco II, LLC, and Keane Frac GP, LLC, and each subsidiary of the Company that will be required to execute and deliver a facility guaranty in the future pursuant to the terms of the 2018 Term Loan Facility (collectively, the “2018 Term Loan Guarantors”).
Security. Subject to certain exceptions as set forth in the definitive documentation for the 2018 Term Loan Facility, the obligations under the 2018 Term Loan Facility are secured by (a) a first-priority security interest in and lien on substantially all of the assets of Keane Group and the 2018 Term Loan Guarantors to the extent not constituting ABL Facility Priority Collateral (as defined below) and (b) a second-priority security interest in and lien on substantially all of the accounts receivable, inventory, and frac iron equipment, and certain other assets and property related to the foregoing including certain chattel paper, investment property, documents, letter of credit rights, payment intangibles, general intangibles, commercial tort claims, books and records and supporting obligations of the borrowers and guarantors under the 2019 ABL Facility (the “ABL Facility Priority Collateral”).
Fees. Certain customary fees are payable to the lenders and the agents under the 2018 Term Loan Facility.
Restricted Payment Covenant. The 2018 Term Loan Facility includes a covenant restricting the ability of the Company and its restricted subsidiaries to pay dividends and make certain other restricted payments, subject to certain exceptions. The 2018 Term Loan Facility provides that the Company and its restricted subsidiaries may, among things, make cash dividends and other restricted payments in an aggregate amount during the life of the facility not to exceed (a) $100.0 million, plus (b) the amount of net proceeds received by Keane Group from the funding of the 2018 Term Loans in excess of the of such net proceeds required to finance the refinancing of the pre-existing term loan facility and pay fees and expenses related thereto and to the entry into the 2018 Term Loan
Facility, plus (c) an unlimited amount so long as, after giving effect to such restricted payment, the total net leverage ratio would not exceed 2.00:1.00. In addition, the Company and its restricted subsidiaries may make restricted payments utilizing the Cumulative Credit (as defined below), subject to certain conditions including, if any portion of the Cumulative Credit utilized is comprised of amounts under clause (b) of the definition thereof below, the pro forma total net leverage ratio being no greater than 2.50:1.00.
“Cumulative Credit”, generally, is defined as an amount equal to (a) $25.0 million, (b) 50% of consolidated net income of the Company and its restricted subsidiaries on a cumulative basis from April 1, 2018 (which cumulative amount shall not be less than zero), plus (c) other customary additions, and reduced by the amount of Cumulative Credit used prior to such time (whether for restricted payments, junior debt payments or investments).
Affirmative and Negative Covenants. The 2018 Term Loan Facility contains various affirmative and negative covenants (in each case, subject to customary exceptions as set forth in the definitive documentation for the 2018 Term Loan Facility). The 2018 Term Loan Facility does not contain any financial maintenance covenants. As of December 31, 2020, the Company was in compliance with all covenants.
Events of Default. The 2018 Term Loan Facility contains customary events of default (subject to exceptions, thresholds and grace periods as set forth in the definitive documentation for the 2018 Term Loan Facility).
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any material off-balance sheet financing arrangements, transactions or special purpose entities.
Related Party Transactions
Our board of directors has adopted a written policy and procedures (the “Related Party Policy”) for the review, approval and ratification of the related party transactions by the independent members of the audit and risk committee of our board of directors. For purposes of the Related Party Policy, a “Related Party Transaction” is any transaction, arrangement or relationship or series of similar transactions, arrangements or relationships (including the incurrence or issuance of any indebtedness or the guarantee of indebtedness) in which (1) the aggregate amount involved will or may be reasonably expected to exceed $120,000 in any fiscal year, (2) the company or any of its subsidiaries is a participant, and (3) any Related Party (as defined herein) has or will have a direct or indirect material interest. All Related Party Transactions will be reviewed in accordance with the standards set forth in the Related Party Policy after full disclosure of the Related Party’s interests in the transaction.
The Related Party Policy defines “Related Party” as any person who is, or, at any time since the beginning of the Company’s last fiscal year, was (1) an executive officer, director or nominee for election as a director of the Company or any of its subsidiaries, (2) a person with greater than five percent (5%) beneficial interest in the Company, (3) an immediate family member of any of the individuals or entities identified in (1) or (2) of this paragraph, and (4) any firm, corporation or other entity in which any of the foregoing individuals or entities is employed or is a general partner or principal or in a similar position or in which such person or entity has a five percent (5%) or greater beneficial interest. Immediate family members includes a person’s spouse, parents, stepparents, children, stepchildren, siblings, mothers- and fathers-in-law, sons- and daughters-in-law, brothers- and sisters-in-law and anyone residing in such person’s home, other than a tenant or employee.
Transaction prices with our related parties are commensurate with transaction prices in arms-length transactions. For further details about our transactions with Related Parties, see Note (19) Related Party Transactions of Part II, “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
For discussion on the impact of accounting standards issued but not yet adopted to our consolidated financial statements, see Note (23) New Accounting Pronouncements of Part II, “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related notes included within Part II, “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” requires us to make estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. We base these estimates on historical results and various other assumptions believed to be reasonable, all of which form the basis for making estimates concerning the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily available from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
A critical accounting estimate is one that requires a high level of subjective judgment by management and has a material impact to our financial condition or results of operations. We believe the following are the critical accounting policies used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements, as well as the significant estimates and judgments affecting the application of these policies. This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included within Part II, “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Business combinations
We allocate the purchase price of businesses we acquire to the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values. Any excess purchase price over the fair value of the net identifiable assets acquired is recorded as goodwill. We use all available information to estimate fair values, including quoted market prices, the carrying value of acquired assets and assumed liabilities and valuation techniques such as discounted cash flows, multi-period excess earning or income-based-relief-from-royalty methods. We engage third-party appraisal firms to assist in the fair value determination of inventories, identifiable long-lived assets, identifiable intangible assets, as well as any contingent consideration or earn-out provisions that provide for additional consideration to be paid to the seller if certain future conditions are met. These estimates are reviewed during the 12-month measurement period and adjusted based on actual results. The judgments made in determining the estimated fair value assigned to each class of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, as well as asset lives, can materially impact our financial condition or results of operations. See Note (3) Mergers and Acquisitions of Part II, “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for further discussion of our recently completed merger and acquisition during 2019.
Asset acquisitions
Asset acquisitions are measured based on their cost to us, including transaction costs incurred by us. An asset acquisition’s cost or the consideration transferred by us is assumed to be equal to the fair value of the net assets acquired. If the consideration transferred is cash, measurement is based on the amount of cash we paid to the seller, as well as transaction costs incurred by us. Consideration given in the form of nonmonetary assets, liabilities incurred or equity interests issued is measured based on either the cost to us or the fair value of the assets or net assets acquired, whichever is more clearly evident. The cost of an asset acquisition is allocated to the assets acquired based on their estimated relative fair values. We engage third-party appraisal firms to assist in the fair value determination of inventories, identifiable long-lived assets and identifiable intangible assets. Goodwill is not recognized in an asset acquisition. See Note (3) Mergers and Acquisitions of Part II, “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for our asset acquisition from RSI in 2018.
Legal and environmental contingencies
From time to time, we are subject to legal and administrative proceedings, settlements, investigations, claims and actions, as is typical of the industry. These claims include, but are not limited to, contract claims, environmental claims, employment related claims, claims alleging injury or claims related to operational issues. Our assessment of the likely outcome of litigation matters is based on our judgment of a number of factors, including experience with similar matters, past history, precedents, relevant financial information and other evidence and facts specific to the matter. We accrue for contingencies when the occurrence of a material loss is probable and can be reasonably estimated, based on our best estimate of the expected liability. The estimate of probable costs related to a contingency is developed in consultation with internal and outside legal counsel representing us. The accuracy of these estimates is impacted by, among other things, the complexity of the issues and the amount of due diligence we have been able to perform. Differences between the actual settlement costs, final judgments or fines from our estimates could have a material adverse effect on our financial position or results of operations. See Note (18) Commitments and Contingencies of Part II, “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for further discussion of our legal, environmental and other regulatory contingencies.
Valuation of long-lived assets, indefinite-lived assets and goodwill
We assess our long-lived assets, such as definite-lived intangible assets and property and equipment, for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. We assess our goodwill and indefinite-lived assets for impairment annually, as of October 31, or whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of goodwill or the indefinite-lived assets may not be recoverable. If the carrying value of an asset exceeds its fair value, we record an impairment charge that reduces our earnings.
We perform our qualitative assessments of the likelihood of impairment by considering qualitative factors relevant to each of our reporting units or asset groups, such as macroeconomic, industry, market or any other factors that have a significant bearing on fair value. The expected future cash flows used for impairment reviews and related fair value calculations are based on subjective, judgmental assessments of projected revenue growth, unit count, utilization, pricing, gross profit rates, SG&A rates, working capital fluctuations, capital expenditures, discount rates and terminal growth rates. Many of these judgments are driven by crude oil prices. If the crude oil market declines and remains at low levels for a sustained period of time, we would expect to perform our impairment assessments more frequently and could record impairment charges.
See Note (2)(f) Long-Lived Assets with Definite Lives and (2)(h) Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets of Part II, “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for further discussion on our impairment assessments of our long-lived assets, indefinite-lived assets and goodwill for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 740, “Income Taxes,” which requires an asset and liability approach for financial accounting and reporting of income taxes. Under ASC 740, income taxes are accounted for based upon the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax basis and operating loss carry-forwards using enacted tax rates in effect in the year the differences are expected to reverse. We estimate our annual effective tax rate at each interim period based on the facts and circumstances available at that time, while the actual effective tax rate is calculated at year-end. Our effective tax rates will vary due to changes in estimates of our future taxable income or losses, fluctuations in the tax jurisdictions in which we operate and favorable or unfavorable adjustments to our estimated tax liabilities related to proposed or probable assessments. As a result, our effective tax rate may fluctuate significantly on a quarterly or annual basis.
In evaluating our ability to recover our deferred tax assets, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, tax planning strategies and recent financial operations. In addition to our historical financial results, we consider forecasted
market growth, earnings and taxable income, the mix of earnings in the jurisdictions in which we operate and the implementation of prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. These assumptions require significant judgment about the forecasts of future taxable income and are consistent with the plans and estimates we use to manage our underlying businesses. We establish a valuation allowance against the carrying value of deferred tax assets when we determine that it is more likely than not that the asset will not be realized through future taxable income. Such amounts are charged to earnings in the period in which we make such determination. Likewise, if we later determine that it is more likely than not that the net deferred tax assets would be realized, we would reverse the applicable portion of the previously provided valuation allowance.
We calculate our income tax liability based on estimates and assumptions that could differ from the actual results reflected in income tax returns filed during the subsequent year. Significant judgment is required in assessing, among other things, the timing and amounts of deductible and taxable items. Due to the complexity of some of these uncertainties, the ultimate resolution may result in payment that is materially different from our current estimate of our tax liabilities. These differences are reflected as increases or decreases to income tax expense in the period in which they are determined.
The amount of income tax we pay is subject to ongoing audits by federal and state tax authorities, which may result in proposed assessments. Our estimate for the potential outcome for any uncertain tax issue is highly judgmental. We believe we have adequately provided for any reasonably foreseeable outcome related to these matters. However, our future results may include favorable or unfavorable adjustments to our estimated tax liabilities in the period the assessments are made or resolved or when statutes of limitation on potential assessments expire. Additionally, the jurisdictions in which our earnings or deductions are realized may differ from our current estimates. We recognize interest and penalties, if any, related to uncertain tax positions in income tax expense.
On December 22, 2017, the U.S. government enacted comprehensive tax legislation commonly referred to as the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “Tax Act”). The Tax Act makes broad and complex changes to the U.S. tax code, including but not limited to, (1) the requirement to pay a one-time transition tax on all undistributed earnings of foreign subsidiaries; (2) reducing the U.S. federal corporate income tax rate from 35% to 21%; (3) eliminating the alternative minimum tax; (4) creating a new limitation on deductible interest expense; and (5) changing rules related to use and limitations of net operating loss carryforwards created in tax years beginning after December 31, 2017. We evaluated the provisions of the Tax Act and determined only the reduced corporate tax rate from 35% to 21% would have an impact on our consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2017. Accordingly, we recorded a provision to income taxes for our assessment of the tax impact of the Tax Act on ending deferred tax assets and liabilities and the corresponding valuation allowance. The effects of other provisions of the Tax Act are not expected to have an adverse impact on our consolidated financial statements. We will continue to assess the impact of other aspects of U.S. tax reform on our tax positions and our consolidated financial statements.
See Note (17) Income Taxes of Part II, “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for further discussion on income taxes for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Leases
Per ASU 2016-02, "Leases (Topic 842)," lessees can classify leases as finance leases or operating leases, while lessors can classify leases as sales-type, direct financing or operating leases. All leases, with the exception of short-term leases, are capitalized on the balance sheet by recording a lease liability, which represents our obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease, along with a corresponding right-of-use asset, which represents our right to use the underlying asset being leased. For leases in which we are the lessee, we use a collateralized incremental borrowing rate to calculate the lease liability, as in most cases we do not know the lessor's implicit rate in the lease. Establishing our lease obligations on our consolidated balance sheets require judgmental assessments of the term lengths of each and the interest rate yield curve that best represents the collateralized incremental borrowing rate to apply to each lease. We engage third-party specialists to assist us in determining the collateralized incremental borrowing rate yield curve. Errors in determining the lease term lengths and/or selecting the best representative collateralized incremental borrowing rate can have a material adverse effect on our consolidated
financial statements. For further details about our leases, see Note (16) Leases of Part II, "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data".
New Accounting Pronouncements
For discussion on the potential impact of new accounting pronouncements issued but not yet adopted, see Note (23) New Accounting Pronouncements of Part II, “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”