Item 7.Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in Part II, Item 7 of the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
Results of Operations
The following represents our consolidated performance highlights:
Consolidated revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased 24% as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in our consolidated revenues was due to the 24% growth in average paying memberships and a 1% increase in average monthly revenue per paying membership. The increase in average monthly revenue per paying membership resulted from our price changes and plan mix, partially offset by unfavorable fluctuations in foreign exchange rates. Paid net membership additions for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased 31% as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, as a result of the long term trend toward streaming on demand entertainment and due to the COVID-19 pandemic and resulting social restrictions and local government mandates of home confinement in certain jurisdictions.
The increase in operating margin is due primarily to increased revenues and decreased marketing costs, coupled with cost of revenues, technology and development, and general and administrative costs growing at a slower rate as compared to the 24% increase in revenues.
The full extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, operations and financial results will depend on numerous evolving factors that we may not be able to accurately predict. See Item 1A: "Risk Factors" section set forth in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional details. In an effort to protect the health and safety of our employees, our workforce has had and continues in most instances to spend a significant amount of time working from home, international travel has been severely curtailed and many of our productions continue to experience disruption, as are the productions of our third-party content suppliers. Our other partners have similarly had their operations disrupted, including those partners that we use for our operations as well as development, production, and post-production of content. While we and our partners have resumed productions and related operations in many parts of the world, our ability to produce content remains affected by the pandemic. In an effort to contain COVID-19 or slow its spread, governments around the world have also enacted various measures, some of which have been subsequently rescinded, modified or reinstated, including orders to close all businesses not deemed “essential,” isolate residents to their homes or places of residence, and practice social distancing. We anticipate that these actions and the global health crisis caused by COVID-19, including any resurgences, will continue to negatively impact business activity across the globe. We will continue to actively monitor the situation and may take further actions that alter our business operations as may be required by federal, state, local or foreign authorities, or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers,
partners and stockholders. It is not clear what the potential effects any such alterations or modifications may have on our business, including the effects on our customers, suppliers or vendors, or on our financial results.
Streaming Revenues
We derive revenues from monthly membership fees for services related to streaming content to our members. We offer a variety of streaming membership plans, the price of which varies by country and the features of the plan. As of December 31, 2020, pricing on our plans ranged from the U.S. dollar equivalent of $2 to $24 per month. We expect that from time to time the prices of our membership plans in each country may change and we may test other plan and price variations.
The following tables summarize streaming revenue and other streaming membership information by region for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
United States and Canada (UCAN)
Europe, Middle East, and Africa (EMEA)
Latin America (LATAM)
Asia-Pacific (APAC)
(1) A paid membership (also referred to as a paid subscription) is defined as a membership that has the right to receive Netflix service following sign-up and a method of payment being provided, and that is not part of a free trial or certain other promotions that may be offered by the Company to new or rejoining members. A membership is canceled and ceases to be reflected in the above metrics as of the effective cancellation date. Voluntary cancellations generally become effective at the end of the prepaid membership period. Involuntary cancellations, as a result of a failed method of payment, become effective immediately. Memberships are assigned to territories based on the geographic location used at time of sign-up as determined by the Company’s internal systems, which utilize industry standard geo-location technology.
(2) We believe constant currency information is useful in analyzing the underlying trends in average monthly revenue per paying membership. In order to exclude the effect of foreign currency rate fluctuations on average monthly revenue per paying membership, we estimate current period revenue assuming foreign exchange rates had remained constant with foreign exchange rates from each of the corresponding months of the prior-year period. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our revenues would have been approximately $596 million higher had foreign currency exchange rates remained constant with those for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Cost of Revenues
Amortization of content assets makes up the majority of cost of revenues. Expenses associated with the acquisition, licensing and production of content (such as payroll and related personnel expenses, costs associated with obtaining rights to music included in our content, overall deals with talent, miscellaneous production related costs and participations and residuals), streaming delivery costs and other operations costs make up the remainder of cost of revenues. We have built our own global content delivery network (“Open Connect”) to help us efficiently stream a high volume of content to our members over the internet. Delivery expenses, therefore, include equipment costs related to Open Connect, payroll and related personnel expenses and all third-party costs, such as cloud computing costs, associated with delivering content over the internet. Other operations costs include customer service and payment processing fees, including those we pay to our integrated payment partners, as well as other costs incurred in making our content available to members.
The increase in cost of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to a $1,591 million increase in content amortization relating to our existing and new content, including more exclusive and original programming. Expenses associated with the acquisition, licensing and production of content increased $1,101 million, primarily due to expenses related to the COVID-19 pandemic and continued growth in our content production activities. Streaming delivery costs and other operations costs increased driven by our growing member base.
Marketing
Marketing expenses consist primarily of advertising expenses and certain payments made to our marketing partners, including consumer electronics ("CE") manufacturers, MVPDs, mobile operators and ISPs. Advertising expenses include
promotional activities such as digital and television advertising. Marketing expenses also include payroll and related expenses for personnel that support marketing activities.
The decrease in marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to a $432 million decrease in advertising expenses, partially offset by increased payments to our marketing partners.
Technology and Development
Technology and development expenses consist of payroll and related expenses for all technology personnel, as well as other costs incurred in making improvements to our service offerings, including testing, maintaining and modifying our user interface, our recommendations, merchandising and streaming delivery technology and infrastructure. Technology and development expenses also include costs associated with computer hardware and software.
The increase in technology and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to a $254 million increase in personnel-related costs, including increases in compensation for existing employees and growth in average headcount to support the increase in our production activity and continued improvements in our streaming service.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist of payroll and related expenses for corporate personnel. General and administrative expenses also include professional fees and other general corporate expenses.
The increase in general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to a $128 million increase in personnel-related costs, including increases in compensation for existing employees and growth in average headcount to support the increase in our production activity and continued improvements in our streaming service.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of the interest associated with our outstanding debt obligations, including the amortization of debt issuance costs. See Note 6 Debt in the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further detail on our debt obligations.
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of $749 million of interest on our Notes. The increase in interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 is due to the increase in debt.
Interest and Other Income (Expense)
Interest and other income (expense) consists primarily of foreign exchange gains and losses on foreign currency denominated balances and interest earned on cash and cash equivalents.
Interest and other income (expense) decreased primarily due to foreign exchange losses of $660 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to a gain of $7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The foreign exchange loss in the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by the non-cash $533 million loss from the remeasurement of our Senior Notes denominated in euros, coupled with the remeasurement of cash and content liability positions in currencies other than the functional currencies.
Provision for Income Taxes
As of December 31, 2020, we had a California research and development ("R&D") credit carryforward of $250 million, which can be carried forward indefinitely. On June 29, 2020, California enacted legislative changes that impose an annual cap of $5 million on the amount of business incentive tax credits we can utilize in California effective for tax years 2020 through 2022. As a result, we evaluated our ability to realize the California R&D credit, and considered all available positive and negative evidence, including operating results, ongoing tax planning, and forecasts of future taxable income and determined it is more likely than not that the pre-2020 credits and a portion of the current year R&D credit would not be realized. In the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 we recorded a valuation allowance of $250 million. We will monitor our business strategies, weighing positive and negative evidence in assessing the realization of this asset in the future and in the event there is a need to release the valuation allowance, a tax benefit will be recorded.
The increase in our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 is primarily due to the establishment of a valuation allowance on the California R&D credit, partially offset by the recognition of excess tax benefits of stock-based compensation.
In 2020, the difference between our 14% effective tax rate and the Federal statutory rate of 21% was primarily due to the recognition of excess tax benefits of stock-based compensation and Federal and California R&D credits, partially offset by the establishment of a valuation allowance on the California R&D credit.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash increased $3,195 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to cash provided by operations coupled with the issuance of debt.
Debt, net of debt issuance costs, increased $1,550 million primarily due to the issuance of debt in April 2020 coupled with the remeasurement of our euro-denominated notes. The amount of principal and interest due in the next twelve months is $1,264 million. As of December 31, 2020, no amounts had been borrowed under our $750 million Revolving Credit Agreement. See Note 6 Debt in the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements.
As our cash provided by operating activities improved in 2020, we anticipate that our future capital needs from the debt market will be more limited compared to prior years. Our ability to obtain this or any additional financing that we may choose to, or need to, obtain will depend on, among other things, our development efforts, business plans, operating performance and the condition of the capital markets at the time we seek financing. We may not be able to obtain such financing on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of equity or debt securities, those securities may have rights, preferences or privileges senior to the rights of our common stock, and our stockholders may experience dilution.
As our cash provided by operating activities grows and exceeds our minimum cash needs, our future capital allocation may include stock repurchase programs. The timing and magnitude of such programs will depend on, among other things, our development efforts, business plans and operating performance.
Our primary uses of cash include the acquisition, licensing and production of content, streaming delivery, marketing programs and personnel-related costs. Cash payment terms for non-original content have historically been in line with the amortization period. Investments in original content, and in particular content that we produce and own, require more cash upfront relative to licensed content. For example, production costs are paid as the content is created, well in advance of when the content is available on the service and amortized. We expect to continue to significantly increase our investments in global content, particularly in original content, which will impact our liquidity. We currently anticipate that cash flows from operations, available funds and access to financing sources, including our revolving credit facility, will continue to be sufficient to meet our cash needs for at least the next twelve months.
Free Cash Flow
We define free cash flow as cash provided by (used in) operating activities less purchases of property and equipment and change in other assets. We believe free cash flow is an important liquidity metric because it measures, during a given period, the amount of cash generated that is available to repay debt obligations, make strategic acquisitions and investments and for certain other activities like share repurchases. Free cash flow is considered a non-GAAP financial measure and should not be considered in isolation of, or as a substitute for, net income, operating income, cash flow provided by (used in) operating activities, or any other measure of financial performance or liquidity presented in accordance with GAAP.
In assessing liquidity in relation to our results of operations, we compare free cash flow to net income, noting that the major recurring differences are excess content payments over amortization, non-cash stock-based compensation expense, non-cash remeasurement gain/loss on our euro-denominated debt, and other working capital differences. Working capital differences include deferred revenue, excess property and equipment purchases over depreciation, taxes and semi-annual interest payments on our outstanding debt. Our receivables from members generally settle quickly.
While we and our partners have resumed productions and related operations in many parts of the world, our ability to produce content remains affected by the pandemic. As a result, the timing of certain production payments has been and will continue to be delayed until productions can resume and may be shifted to future years. Net cash provided by operating activities increased $5,314 million from the year ended December 31, 2019 to $2,427 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily driven by a $4,840 million or 24% increase in revenues coupled with a decrease in cash payments for content assets. The payments for content assets decreased $2,074 million, from $14,611 million to $12,537 million, or 14%, as compared to the increase in the amortization of content assets of $1,591 million, from $9,216 million to $10,807 million, or 17%. In addition, we had increased payments associated with higher operating expenses, primarily related to increased headcount to support our continued improvements in our streaming service and our international expansion.
Net cash used in investing activities increased $118 million, primarily due to an increase in purchases of property and equipment.
Net cash provided by financing activities decreased $3,268 million primarily due to a decrease in the proceeds from the issuance of debt of $3,431 million from $4,433 million in the year ended December 31, 2019 to $1,002 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, partially offset by an increase in the proceeds from the issuance of common stock of $163 million.
Free cash flow was $840 million lower than net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to $1,730 million of cash payments for content assets over amortization expense and $308 million in other non-favorable working capital differences, partially offset by $533 million of non-cash remeasurement loss on our euro-denominated debt, $415 million of non-cash stock-based compensation expenses, and a $250 million non-cash valuation allowance for deferred taxes due to recent legislation which imposed an annual cap on research and development credits.
Free cash flow was $5,141 million lower than net income for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to $5,394 million of cash payments for streaming content assets over streaming amortization expense, $46 million non-cash remeasurement gain on our euro-denominated debt, and $106 million in other non-favorable working capital differences, partially offset by $405 million of non-cash stock-based compensation expense.
Contractual Obligations
For the purpose of this table, contractual obligations for purchases of goods or services are defined as agreements that are enforceable and legally binding and that specify all significant terms, including: fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the transaction. The expected timing of the payment of the obligations discussed below is estimated based on information available to us as of December 31, 2020. Timing of payments and actual amounts paid may be different depending on the time of receipt of goods or services or changes to agreed-upon amounts for some obligations. The following table summarizes our contractual obligations at December 31, 2020:
(1)As of December 31, 2020, content obligations were comprised of $4.4 billion included in "Current content liabilities" and $2.6 billion of "Non-current content liabilities" on the Consolidated Balance Sheets and $12.2 billion of obligations that are not reflected on the Consolidated Balance Sheets as they did not then meet the criteria for recognition.
Content obligations include amounts related to the acquisition, licensing and production of content. An obligation for the production of content includes non-cancelable commitments under creative talent and employment agreements and other production related commitments. An obligation for the acquisition and licensing of content is incurred at the time we enter into an agreement to obtain future titles. Once a title becomes available, a content liability is recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Certain agreements include the obligation to license rights for unknown future titles, the ultimate quantity and/or fees for which are not yet determinable as of the reporting date. Traditional film output deals, or certain TV series license agreements where the number of seasons to be aired is unknown, are examples of these types of agreements. The contractual obligations table above does not include any estimated obligation for the unknown future titles, payment for which could range from less than one year to more than five years. However, these unknown obligations are expected to be significant and we believe could include approximately $1 billion to $4 billion over the next three years, with the payments for the vast majority of such amounts expected to occur after the next twelve months. The foregoing range is based on considerable management judgments and the actual amounts may differ. Once we know the title that we will receive and the license fees, we include the amount in the contractual obligations table above.
(2)Debt obligations include our Notes consisting of principal and interest payments. See Note 6 Debt in the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details.
(3)See Note 5 Balance Sheet Components in the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements for further details regarding leases. As of December 31, 2020, the Company has additional operating leases for real estate that have not yet commenced of $256 million which has been included above. Total lease obligations as of December 31, 2020 increased $82 million from $2,757 million as of December 31, 2019 to $2,839 million as of December 31, 2020 due to growth in facilities to support our growing headcount and growing number of original productions.
(4)Other purchase obligations include all other non-cancelable contractual obligations. These contracts are primarily related to streaming delivery and cloud computing costs, as well as other miscellaneous open purchase orders for which we have not received the related services or goods.
As of December 31, 2020, we had gross unrecognized tax benefits of $140 million, of which $38 million was classified in “Other non-current liabilities” and $54 million as a reduction to deferred tax assets which was classified as "Other non-current assets" in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. At this time, an estimate of the range of reasonably possible adjustments to the balance of unrecognized tax benefits cannot be made.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have transactions with unconsolidated entities, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, whereby we have financial guarantees, subordinated retained interests, derivative instruments, or other contingent arrangements that expose us to material continuing risks, contingent liabilities, or any other obligation under a variable interest in an unconsolidated entity that provides financing, liquidity, market risk, or credit risk support to us.
Indemnifications
The information set forth under Note 8 Guarantees - Indemnification Obligations in the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K is incorporated herein by reference.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reported periods. The Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") has defined a company’s critical accounting policies as the ones that are most important to the portrayal of a company’s financial condition and results of operations, and which require a company to make its most difficult and subjective judgments. Based on this definition, we have identified the critical accounting policies and judgments addressed below. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Content
We acquire, license and produce content, including original programming, in order to offer our members unlimited viewing of video entertainment. The content licenses are for a fixed fee and specific windows of availability. Payment terms for certain content licenses and the production of content require more upfront cash payments relative to the amortization expense. Payments for content, including additions to content assets and the changes in related liabilities, are classified within "Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities" on the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows.
We recognize content assets (licensed and produced) as "Content assets, net" on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. For licensed content, we capitalize the fee per title and record a corresponding liability at the gross amount of the liability when the license period begins, the cost of the title is known and the title is accepted and available for streaming. For produced content, we capitalize costs associated with the production, including development cost, direct costs and production overhead. Participations and residuals are expensed in line with the amortization of production costs.
Based on factors including historical and estimated viewing patterns, we amortize the content assets (licensed and produced) in “Cost of revenues” on the Consolidated Statements of Operations over the shorter of each title's contractual window of availability or estimated period of use or ten years, beginning with the month of first availability. The amortization is on an accelerated basis, as we typically expect more upfront viewing, for instance due to additional merchandising and marketing efforts, and film amortization is more accelerated than TV series amortization. On average, over 90% of a licensed or produced content asset is expected to be amortized within four years after its month of first availability. We review factors that impact the amortization of the content assets on a regular basis. Our estimates related to these factors require considerable management judgment.
Our business model is subscription based as opposed to a model generating revenues at a specific title level. Content assets (licensed and produced) are predominantly monetized as a group and therefore are reviewed at a group level when an event or change in circumstances indicates a change in the expected usefulness of the content or that the fair value may be less than unamortized cost. To date, we have not identified any such event or changes in circumstances. If such changes are identified in the future, these aggregated content assets will be stated at the lower of unamortized cost or fair value. In addition, unamortized costs for assets that have been, or are expected to be, abandoned are written off.
Income Taxes
We record a provision for income taxes for the anticipated tax consequences of our reported results of operations using the asset and liability method. Deferred income taxes are recognized by applying enacted statutory tax rates applicable to future years to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases as well as net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. The measurement of deferred tax assets is reduced, if necessary, by a valuation allowance for any tax benefits for which future realization is uncertain.
Although we believe our assumptions, judgments and estimates are reasonable, changes in tax laws or our interpretation of tax laws and the resolution of any tax audits could significantly impact the amounts provided for income taxes in our consolidated financial statements.
In evaluating our ability to recover our deferred tax assets, in full or in part, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including our past operating results, and our forecast of future earnings, future taxable income and prudent
and feasible tax planning strategies. The assumptions utilized in determining future taxable income require significant judgment and are consistent with the plans and estimates we are using to manage the underlying businesses. Actual operating results in future years could differ from our current assumptions, judgments and estimates. However, we believe that it is more likely than not that most of the deferred tax assets recorded on our Consolidated Balance Sheets will ultimately be realized. We record a valuation allowance to reduce our deferred tax assets to the net amount that we believe is more likely than not to be realized. As of December 31, 2020 the valuation allowance of $250 million was related to the California research and development credits that we do not expect to realize.
We did not recognize certain tax benefits from uncertain tax positions within the provision for income taxes. We may recognize a tax benefit only if it is more likely than not the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such positions are then measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon settlement. At December 31, 2020, our estimated gross unrecognized tax benefits were $140 million of which $86 million, if recognized, would favorably impact our future earnings. Due to uncertainties in any tax audit outcome, our estimates of the ultimate settlement of our unrecognized tax positions may change and the actual tax benefits may differ significantly from the estimates.
See Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements for further information regarding income taxes.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The information set forth under Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements under the caption “Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” is incorporated herein by reference.