ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATION
The following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based upon, and should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this report.
Forward Looking Statements
Certain information contained in this MD&A includes “forward-looking statements.” Statements which are not historical reflect our current expectations and projections about our future results, performance, liquidity, financial condition and results of operations, prospects and opportunities and are based upon information currently available to us and our management and their interpretation of what is believed to be significant factors affecting our existing and proposed business, including many assumptions regarding future events. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “will” “should,” “expect,” “intend,” “plan,” anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “predict,” “potential,” “continue,” or similar terms, variations of such terms or the negative of such terms. These statements are only predictions and involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties, and other factors. Although forward- looking statements, and any assumptions upon which they are based, are made in good faith, and reflect our current judgment, actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in such statements. Actual results, performance, liquidity, financial condition and results of operations, prospects and opportunities could differ materially and perhaps substantially from those expressed in, or implied by, these forward- looking statements as a result of various risks, uncertainties and other factors, including those risks described in detail in the section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K entitled “Risk Factors” as well as elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In light of these risks and uncertainties, and especially given the nature of our existing and proposed business, there can be no assurance that the forward-looking statements contained in this section and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K will in fact occur. Potential investors should not place undue reliance on any forward- looking statements. Except as expressly required by the federal securities laws, there is no undertaking to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events, changed circumstances or any other reason.
OVERVIEW
Nightfood solves the night snack problem. It is estimated that more than $50 billion is spent annually in the United States on snacks consumed between dinner and bedtime. Nightfood’s snacks are formulated with guidance from our team of sleep and nutrition experts to provide the nutritional foundation for better sleep.
Our snack products are manufactured under contract. We then wholesale those snacks to retailers and distributors. Primary points of retail distribution include supermarkets and hotel lobby shops.
DEVELOPMENT PLANS
With Nightfood ice cream currently available in divisions of some of the largest supermarket chains in the United States, Management is working to simultaneously secure additional distribution opportunities, while also nurturing revenue growth and consumer growth in our existing points of distribution.
Nightfood recently completed a successful pilot test with a leading global hotel brand. Subsequent to the completion of the test, Nightfood Management was informed that a timeline is now being established to introduce Nightfood into all the properties of one of the brands’ banners, as well as anticipated introduction into additional brand banners, representing several thousand hotel properties across the United States. The chain has requested Nightfood not make any public announcements identifying them until closer to launch.
Management believes this successful test and validation from the first major chain is the first step in a national hotel rollout across many brands and banners. The potential market of hotels selling ice cream and other snacks in their lobby shops is believed to exceed 20,000 properties, with four global brands accounting for approximately 17,000 of those properties. Now that Nightfood has established a relationship with one of those four global players, the Company has engaged iDEAL Hospitality Partners to help oversee and accelerate a national rollout of Nightfood ice cream and other snacks into additional major hotel brands across the United States.
Management believes widespread hotel distribution could result in significant increases in gross sales and net revenue, and accelerate the timeline for profitability. Doing business in the hotel vertical effectively eliminates three of the major line items that reduce and delay profitability for new food and beverage products in the supermarket vertical. These are slotting fees, advertising, and pricing promotions.
In addition to the revenue and contribution margin from the sales of the product in the hotel environment, Management believes hotel distribution would result in important secondary benefits. Consumers encountering and purchasing Nightfood in thousands of hotel outlets could be more likely to seek out the product in local supermarkets than consumers that have not had prior exposure to the brand. In addition, it is believed that securing widespread hotel distribution would serve as a validation of the importance of sleep-friendly nutrition and the entire night snack category. As the brand pioneering and leading the night snack category, anything that advances the overall adoption of the category by consumers is, by extension, beneficial to the Nightfood brand.
INFLATION
Inflation can be expected to have an impact on our operating costs. A prolonged period of inflation could cause a general economic downturn and negatively impact our results. However, the effect of inflation has been minimal over the past three years.
SEASONALITY
There is a significant amount of seasonality in the ice cream industry, with summer months historically delivering the highest consumption, and winter months delivering the lowest consumption.
As an early-stage and growing brand, the full impact of seasonality on our ice cream might not be fully understood for several additional annual cycles, but early indications point to the existence of a material seasonality impact across the ice cream industry through grocery channels. Over time, should the Company successfully expand into more distribution verticals and into additional snack formats, it is possible that the impacts of seasonality could lessen.
CORONAVIRUS (COVID-19)
The outbreak of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19), including the measures to reduce its spread, and the impact on the economy, cannot fully be predicted.
From both public statements, and recent exploratory meetings conducted between Nightfood Management and certain global food and beverage conglomerates, it has been affirmed to Management that there is increased strategic interest in the nighttime nutrition space as a potential high-growth opportunity due to recent declines in consumer sleep quality and increases in at-home nighttime snacking.
We have experienced no issues with supply chain or logistics. Order processing function has been normal to date, and our manufacturers have assured us that their operations are “business as usual” as of the time of this filing. Any cost increases incurred since prior to the COVID-19 outbreak have been generally in line with price increases experienced prior, with the exception of freight which is experiencing cost increases at an elevated rate.
It is possible that the impact of the pandemic could make it more difficult in the future for the Company to access required growth capital, possibly rendering us unable to meet certain debts and expenses.
It is impossible to know what the future holds with regard to the virus, both for our company and in the broader sense. There are many uncertainties regarding the current coronavirus pandemic, and the Company is closely monitoring the impact of the pandemic on all aspects of its business, including how it will impact its customers, vendors, and business partners. It is difficult to know if the pandemic has materially impacted the results of operations, and we are unable to predict the impact that COVID-19 will have on our financial position and operating results due to numerous uncertainties. The Company expects to continue to assess the evolving impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and intends to make adjustments accordingly, if necessary.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to uncollectible receivables, inventory valuation, deferred compensation, fair valve of derivative liabilities and contingencies. We base our estimates on historical performance and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates allow us to make judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources.
We believe the following accounting policies are our critical accounting policies because they are important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and they require critical management judgments and estimates about matters that may be uncertain. If actual results or events differ materially from those contemplated by us in making these estimates, our reported financial condition and results of operations for future periods could be materially affected.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Fiscal Year ended June 30, 2021 Compared to Fiscal Year ended June 30, 2020
Revenue
During the year ended June 30, 2021, we had Net Revenues of $701,246 on Gross Sales of $1,117,847 compared to the year ended June 30, 2020 when we had Net Revenues of $241,673 on Gross Sales of $878,849. Gross Sales increased by 27.2% and Net Revenue increased by 190% year over year. Net Revenues are reported as Gross Sales less Slotting Fees (a typically one-time fee charged by many supermarkets and distributors in order to carry a new product) and other contra-revenue accounts such as those related to manufacturers coupons, in-store specials (such as 2 pints for $8), consumer rebate programs, and more.
Slotting fees are fees customarily charged to brands by supermarkets and distributors to add a new product line into their product assortment. For the year ended June 30, 2021, $223,691 of Gross Sales were cancelled out due to slotting arrangements with retailers and distributors compared to $541,500 for the year ended June 30, 2020.
In situations where the Company agrees to pay slotting and promotional fees to accounts (such as to supermarkets and distributors), the Gross Sales to those customers are reduced on the income statement by these amounts (along with other items, such as early payment discounts), dollar for dollar, to arrive at a Net Revenue number. So, when these customers order product to put on their shelves and sell to consumers, that revenue does not get booked even though the product is moving through the supply chain.
These dollar for dollar reductions continue, on a customer-by-customer basis, for any and all sales to each slotting account until the Gross Sales to these accounts exceed the total of these commitments, at which time the remaining Gross Sales amounts are reported as Net Revenue.
These slotting fees and other promotional expenses do not appear on the income statement as an expense. Rather, they are applied against Gross Sales, resulting in Net Revenue, as shown below. The netting of Gross Sales against slotting and sales discounts, as described and shown below, results in the Net Revenue number at the top of the income statement. This is not a reflection of the amount of product sold by the Company and shipped to customers, but rather a function of the way certain sales are accounted for when those sales are made to customers who are charging slotting fees.
The following tables summarize Gross Sales and Net Revenue for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2021. Net Revenues are net of slotting fees (a one-time fee charged by supermarkets in order to have the product placed on their shelves) and other items mentioned above.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses for the year ended June 30, 2021 were $3,210,875 compared to $2,965,548 for the year ended June 30, 2020. Cost of product sold was $721,777, for the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to $472,131 for the year ended June 30, 2020. This increase in cost of product sold is due to a significant increase in pints sold combined with an increase in freight costs as a proportion of gross sales due to regular shipments going to over one dozen Walmart distribution centers.
Our income statement shows an increase in “Advertising and Promotional” expenses to $588,172 for the year ending June 30, 2021 from $403,639 for the year ending June 30, 2020. The Company booked approximately $194,800 in marketing and distribution partnerships it determined would benefit operations for 2020 and beyond. Due to circumstances, including the global coronavirus pandemic, the Company determined that certain assets and distribution partnerships the Company invested in would not be as beneficial to the Company as envisioned when entered. As a result, the Company reported amortization of intangible assets of $500,000 and a one-time impairment expense of $500,000 in March of 2020. In April, 2020, the Company successfully negotiated a Debt Incentive Agreement with a creditor to whom it owed $731,118. This Debt Incentive Agreement provided for the elimination of the entire debt should the Company make payments prior to December 1, 2020 totaling $166,224 in cash, and approximately 4,000 pints of ice cream. Because this reduction in debt was conditional, the full $731,118 was included in the liabilities section of our balance sheet as of June 30, 2020. Due to the circumstances surrounding the original payable, and the business environment at the time, in April of 2021, the creditor agreed to settle for $20,000 resulting in a gain of $715,075.
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased to $479,881 for the year ending June 30, 2021 compared to $406,072 for the year ending June 30, 2020. This includes items such as web hosting, web marketing services, freight, warehousing, shipping, product liability insurance, travel, research & development of new products. Professional fees increased from $683,706 for the year ending June 30, 2020 to $1,421,045 for the year ending June 30, 2021. This includes legal fees, marketing consulting, accounting and auditor fees, and other paid consultants. The increase is due to retainer warrants issued in conjunction with our Series B Preferred capital raise and debt elimination.
For the year ended June 30, 2021, total interest expense was $281,505 compared to the year ended June 30, 2020 when we reported total interest expense of $441,422. For the year ended June 30, 2021, we recorded a loss on debt extinguishment upon note conversion of $1,442,325 compared to the year ended June 30, 2020 when we recorded a loss on debt extinguishment upon note conversion of $395,781.
For the year ended June 30, 2021, we recorded a change in fair value of derivative liability of ($853,329) compared to the year ended June 30, 2020 when recorded a change in fair value of derivative liability of ($858,774). For the year ended June 30, 2021, we recorded an amortization of beneficial conversion feature of $814,769 compared to the year ended June 30, 2020 when recorded an amortization of beneficial conversion feature of $1,709,759. A significant portion of these amounts recorded in both years stems from the accounting treatment applied to financing activities.
Net Loss
For the year ended June 30, 2021, we had a net loss of $3,479,824 compared to the year ended June 30, 2020 when we had a net loss of $4,412,063. A significant portion of the losses recorded in both years stems from the accounting treatment applied to financing activities. Operating losses for the year ended June 30, 2021 were $2,509,629 and $2,723,875 for the year ended June 30, 2020.
Deemed Dividend
The Company has never declared dividends, however as set out below, during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, upon issuance of a total of 4,665 shares of Series B Preferred stock the Company recorded a deemed dividend as a result of the beneficial conversion feature associated with the transaction.
In connection with certain conversion terms provided for in the designation of the Series B Preferred Stock, pursuant to which each share of Series B Preferred Stock is convertible into 5,000 shares of common stock and 5,000 warrants, the Company recognized a beneficial conversion feature upon the conclusion of the transaction in the amount of $4,085,925. The beneficial conversion feature (BCF) was treated as a deemed dividend, and fully amortized on transaction date due to the fact that the issuance of the Series B preferred stock was classified as equity. In connection with certain clauses under sale of Series B Stock, the Company recognized a discount created by separating a BCF from this.
Customers
Our customers consist primarily of supermarkets and distributors of ice cream and snack products to supermarkets and other retail outlets. In FY 2021, we had one customer that accounted for over 30% of our Gross Sales. Three other customers each accounted for between 7.8% and 23%. In FY 2020, we had one customer that accounted for over 40% of our Gross Sales. Eight other customers each accounted for between 3.7% and 9.7% of our Gross Sales.
Vendors
During the year ended June 30, 2021 one vendor accounted for more than 10% of our operating expenses. During the year ended June 30, 2020, one vendor accounted for more than 10% of our operating expenses.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
As of June 30, 2021, we had cash on hand of $1,041,899, accounts receivable of $109,589, and inventory value of $387,736. As of June 30, 2020, we had cash on hand of $197,622, accounts receivable of $61,013, and inventory value of $275,605. The increase in cash is the result of our financing/refinancing involving sales of our Class B Preferred shares during the quarter ended June 30, 2021. The increase in accounts receivable is due to an increase in overall sales activity relating to the expanded sales and distribution of Nightfood ice cream. The increase in inventory is due to production scheduling and inventory management to satisfy increased demand and anticipated demand.
In the years ending June 30, 2021, and June 30, 2020, no shares of common stock were issued to any investor for cash. No underwriting discounts or commissions were paid, nor was any general solicitation or general advertising conducted.
As of June 30, 2021, we had accounts payable of $459,703 compared to $1,286,149 on June 30, 2020. This decrease is due primarily to paying down certain payables and the renegotiation and settlement of a Debt Incentive Agreement. In April, 2020, the Company successfully negotiated a Debt Incentive Agreement with a creditor to whom it owed $731,118. This Debt Incentive Agreement provided for the elimination of the entire debt should the Company make payments prior to December 1, 2020 totaling $166,224 in cash, and approximately 4,000 pints of ice cream. Because this reduction in debt was conditional, the full $731,118 was included in the liabilities section of our balance sheet as of June 30, 2020. Due to the circumstances surrounding the original payable, and the business environment at the time, in April of 2021, the creditor agreed to settle for $20,000.
Since our inception, we have sustained operating losses. During the year ended June 30, 2021, we incurred a net loss of $3,479,824 and had a total stockholders’ equity of $1,110,001.
The Company has limited available cash resources and we do not believe our cash on hand will be sufficient to fund our operations and growth throughout Fiscal 2022 or adequate to satisfy our ongoing working capital needs as we continue to expand distribution. The Company is continuing to raise capital through the sale of its securities, including common stock, preferred stock, and debt (including convertible debt) to finance the Company’s operations, of which it can give no assurance of success. In addition, we will receive the proceeds from our outstanding warrants as, if and when such warrants are exercised for cash. If we are unable to raise cash through the sale of our securities, we may be required to severely restrict our operations. However, we believe that our current capitalization structure, combined with the continued expansion of operations, will enable us to achieve successful financings to continue our growth.
Even if the Company is successful in raising additional funds, the Company cannot give any assurance that it will, in the future, be able to achieve a level of profitability from the sale of its products to sustain its operations. These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The accompanying financial statements do not include any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on recoverability and reclassification of assets or the amounts and classification of liabilities that may result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
From our inception in January 2010 through June 30, 2021, we have generated an accumulated deficit of approximately $25,196,871. This accumulated deficit is not debt, and there is no obligation or liability associated with it. An accumulated deficit reflects a negative balance of retained earnings and an accumulation of historical losses over time, related to both operations and financing activities. It is not unusual for growing companies to have significant accumulated deficit, even after turning profitable.
Assuming we raise additional funds and continue operations, it is expected we may incur additional operating losses during the course of fiscal 2022 and possibly thereafter. We plan to continue to pay or satisfy existing obligation and commitments and finance our operations, as we have in the past, primarily through the sale of our securities and other forms of external financing until such time that we are able to generate sufficient funds from the sale of our products to finance our operations, of which we can give no assurance.
We anticipate deriving additional revenue from product sales and new distribution arrangements in fiscal 2022, but we cannot at this time quantify the amount.
CASH FLOWS
During the year ended June 30, 2021, net cash used in operating activities totaled $1,439,828 compared to $1,531,084 for the year ended June 30, 2020
During the year ended June 30, 2021, there was net cash provided by investing activities of $0. During the year ended June 30, 2020 there was an outflow of $333,333 as part of investing activities.
During the year ended June 30, 2021, net cash aggregating $2,284,105 was provided by financing activities, which represents net proceeds of $720,000 from the issuance of common stock for convertible debt, $2,868,000 from the sale of newly designated Series B Preferred Shares, ($1,300,000) related to the repayment of convertible debt, and ($3,895) from repayment of short-term debt. During the year ended June 30, 2020, net cash aggregating $2,031,897 was provided by financing activities, which represents $2,028,000 from the issuance of convertible debt and $3,897 in new short-term debt related to a new line of credit the Company secured in March during the initial phases of the COVID lockdowns.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET TRANSACTIONS
We currently have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.