Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the related notes that appear elsewhere in this annual report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward- looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to those discussed below and elsewhere in this annual report.
Our audited financial statements are stated in United States Dollars and are prepared in accordance with United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles.
Plan of Operations and Liquidity Requirements
We have suffered recurring losses from operations. The continuation of our company is dependent upon our company attaining and maintaining profitable operations and raising additional capital as needed. The issuance of additional equity securities by us could result in a significant dilution in the equity interests of our current stockholders.
There are no assurances that we will be able to obtain further funds required for our continued operations. As noted herein, we are pursuing various financing alternatives to meet our immediate and long-term financial requirements. There can be no assurance that additional financing will be available to us when needed or, if available, that it can be obtained on commercially reasonable terms. If we are not able to obtain the additional financing on a timely basis, we will be unable to conduct our operations as planned, and we will not be able to meet our other obligations as they become due. In such event, we will be forced to scale down or perhaps even cease our operations.
Results of Operations - Years Ended May 31, 2021 and 2020
The following summary of our results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements for the years ended May 31, 2021 and 2020, which are included herein.
Our operating results for the years ended May 31, 2021 and 2020 and the changes between those periods for the respective items are summarized as follows:
Revenue
Our Company generated $1,758 in revenue with a gross profit of $1,302 or 74%, for the year ended May 31, 2021, as compared to $0 revenue with a gross profit of $0, for the year ended May 31, 2020.
Operating expenses
Our operating expenses for the year ended May 31, 2021, were $22,434 compared to $23,245 for the year ended May 31, 2020. The decrease in operating expenses was primarily as a result of a decrease in general and administrative expenses.
Other (income) expenses
During the year ended May 31, 2021, the Company recognized $1,184,178 gain on change in fair value of derivative liabilities, compared to $1,255,026 loss on fair value of derivative liabilities during the year ended May 31,2020. During the years ended May 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company recognized interest expenses of $20,152 and $31,580, respectively.
Liquidity and Financial Condition
Working Capital
Cash Flows
The current assets as of May 31, 2021 and 2020, were all from cash at bank account of $615 and $727, respectively.
Our total current liabilities as of May 31, 2021, were $1,344,749 as compared to total current liabilities of $2,487,755 as of May 31, 2020. The decrease in current liabilities was primarily due to a decrease in value of derivative liabilities of $1,184,178 offset by an increase in accrued interest of $7,259, accrued interest-related parties of $12,894 and notes payable -related party of $21,019.
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $4,112 for the year ended May 31, 2021, compared with net cash used in operating activities of $2,059 for the year ended May 31, 2020.
Investing Activities
During the years ended May 31, 2021, and 2020, our company did not have any investing activities.
Financing Activities
Net cash from financing activities was $4,000 for the year ended May 31, 2021, compared to $2,500 from financing activities for the year ended May 31, 2020, primarily due to a decrease in proceeds from notes payable - related parties.
Contractual Obligations
As a “smaller reporting company”, we are not required to provide tabular disclosure obligations.
Going Concern
Our financial statements are prepared using accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America applicable to a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and liquidation of liabilities in the normal course of business. However, our company has negative working capital, recurring losses, and does not have an established source of revenues sufficient to cover its operating costs. These factors raise substantial doubt about our company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
The ability of our company to continue as a going concern is dependent upon its ability to successfully accomplish the plan described in the preceding paragraph and eventually attain profitable operations. The accompanying financial statements do not include any adjustments that may be necessary if our company is unable to continue as a going concern.
In the coming year, our company’s foreseeable cash requirements will relate to continual development of the operations of our business, maintaining our good standing and making the requisite filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the payment of expenses associated with operations and business developments. Our company may experience a cash shortfall and be required to raise additional capital.
Historically, we have mostly relied upon internally generated funds such as shareholder loans and advances to finance our operations and growth. Management may raise additional capital by retaining net earnings or through future public or private offerings of our company’s stock or through loans from private investors, although there can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain such financing. Our company’s failure to do so could have a material and adverse effect upon us and our shareholders.
Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations section discusses our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. On an on-going basis, management evaluates its estimates and judgments, including those related to revenue recognition, accrued expenses, financing operations, and contingencies and litigation. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. The most significant accounting estimates inherent in the preparation of our financial statements include estimates as to the appropriate carrying value of certain assets and liabilities which are not readily apparent from other sources.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to stockholders.
Critical Accounting Policies
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with the accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Preparing financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, and expenses. These estimates and assumptions are affected by management’s application of accounting policies. We believe that understanding the basis and nature of the estimates and assumptions involved with the following aspects of our financial statements is critical to an understanding of our financial statements.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amount of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Our company has implemented all new accounting pronouncements that are in effect and that may impact its financial statements and does not believe that there are any other new accounting pronouncements that have been issued that might have a material impact on its financial position or results of operations.