Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited financial statements and notes thereto for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 found in this Annual Report. In addition to historical information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Where possible, we have tried to identify these forward-looking statements by using words such as “may,” “should,” “potential,” “continue,” “expects,” “anticipates,” “intends,” “plans,” “believes,” “estimates,” and similar expressions. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated by the forward-looking statements due to important factors and risks including, but not limited to, those set forth under “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report.
Company Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company primarily engaged in the development of immune therapies and vaccines. Our gp96 platform is designed to activate the immune system. This platform has broad applications in cancer and infectious disease. Our platform leverages gp96’s role as a natural molecular warning system that presents antigens to the immune system. HS-110 (viagenpumatucel-L) is our first allogeneic (“off-the-shelf”) cell line biologic product candidate in a series of proprietary immunotherapies designed to stimulate a patient’s T-cells to destroy cancer. HS-130 is an allogeneic cell line engineered to express the extracellular domain of OX40 ligand fusion protein (OX40L-Fc), a key costimulator of T-cells, with the potential to augment antigen-specific CD4+ T-cell and CD8+ T-cell responses. We have initiated development of a new COVID-19 vaccine program under our Zolovax, Inc. subsidiary that utilizes our gp96 platform to secrete SARS-CoV-2 antigens. Our subsidiary Pelican Therapeutics, Inc. (“Pelican”), is developing PTX-35, a novel T-cell co-stimulator agonist antibody targeting TNFRSF25 for systemic administration.
These programs are designed to harness the body's natural antigen specific immune activation and tolerance mechanisms to reprogram immunity and provide a long-term, durable clinical effect. We have completed recruiting patients in our Phase 2 HS-110 non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) trial, dosed twelve patients in our Phase 1 clinical trial of HS-130 and dosed five patients in our Phase 1 clinical trial of PTX-35. We are also providing pre-clinical, CMC development, and administrative support for these operations; while constantly focusing on protecting and expanding our intellectual property in areas of strategic interest. As we advance our clinical programs, we are in close contact with our CROs and clinical sites and are assessing the impact of COVID-19 on our studies and current timelines and costs.
Our gp96 Platform includes ImPACT® and ComPACT™ which are designed to activate and expand tumor antigen specific “killer” T-cells to destroy a patient’s cancer. By turning immunologically “COLD tumors HOT,” we believe our platform will become an essential component of the immuno-oncology regimen to enhance the effectiveness and durability of checkpoint inhibitors and other cancer therapies, thereby improving outcomes for those patients less likely to benefit from checkpoint inhibitors alone.
We believe this is a highly differentiated approach as our platform delivers a broad range of tumor antigens that are previously unrecognized by the patient’s immune system. Our platform combines these tumor antigens with a powerful, naturally occurring immune adjuvant, gp96, to actively chaperone these antigens. Our gp96 product candidates are non-replicating, “off-the-shelf”, allogenic cell-based therapies that are locally administered into the skin. The treatment is designed to prime local natural immune recognition to activate T-cells to seek and destroy the cancer cells throughout the body. These agents can be administered with a variety of immuno-modulators to enhance a patient’s immune response through T-cell activation.
Unlike many other “patient specific” or autologous immunotherapy approaches, our drugs are fully allogenic, “off-the-shelf” products which means that we can administer drug immediately without the extraction of blood or tumor tissue from each patient or the creation of an individualized treatment based on patient materials. Our gp96 product candidates are produced from allogeneic cell lines expressing tumor-specific proteins common among cancers. Because each patient is dosed with the same medication, we believe that our immunotherapy approach offers superior speed to initiation, logistical, manufacturing and importantly, cost benefits, compared to “personalized” precision medicine approaches.
Our ImPACT® platform is an allogenic cell-based, T-cell-stimulating platform that functions as an immune activator to stimulate and expand T-cells. The key component of this innovative immunotherapy platform is the dual functionality of the heat shock protein, gp96.
As a molecular chaperone, gp96 is typically found within the cell’s endoplasmic reticulum and facilitates the folding of newly synthesized proteins for functionalized tasks. When a cell abnormally dies through necrosis or infection, gp96 is naturally released into the surrounding microenvironment. At this moment, gp96 becomes a Danger Associated Molecular Protein, or “DAMP”, a molecular warning signal for localized innate activation of the immune system. In this context, gp96 serves as a potent adjuvant, or immune stimulator, via Toll-Like Receptor 4/2 (TLR4 and TLR2) signaling which serves to activate professional antigen presenting cells (APCs), such as dendritic cells that upregulate T-cell costimulatory ligands, major histocompatibility (MHC) molecules and immune activating cytokines. It is among the most powerful adjuvants found in the body and uniquely shows exclusive specificity to CD8+ “killer” T-cells through cross-presentation
of the gp96-chaperoned tumor associated peptide antigens directly to MHC class I molecules for direct activation and expansion of CD8+ T-cells. Thus, gp96 plays a critical role in the mechanism of action for our T-cell activating platform immuno-therapies; mimicking necrotic cell death and activating a powerful, tumor antigen-specific T-cell immune response to attack the patient’s cancer cells.
ComPACT™, our second gp96-based program, delivers antigen-driven T-cell activation and specific co-stimulation in a single product by providing specific co-stimulation to enhance T-cell activation and expansion. This approach has the potential to simplify combination immunotherapy development for oncology patients, as it is designed to deliver the gp96 heat shock protein and a T-cell co-stimulatory fusion protein (OX40L) as a single therapeutic, without the need for multiple, independent biologic products. This dual approach has several potential advantages including: (a) enhanced activation of antigen-specific CD8+ T-cells; (b) boosting the number of antigen-specific CD8+ and CD4+ T-cells compared to OX40L alone; (c) stimulation of T-cell memory function to remain effective after treatment, even if the cancer comes back; (d) demonstration of less toxicity, as the source of cancer associated antigens and co-stimulator are supplied at the same time locally in the draining lymph nodes, which drives targeted, cancer specific immunity towards the tumor rather than throughout the body; and (e) simplification of combination cancer immunotherapy versus systemic co-stimulation with conventional monoclonal antibodies (mAbs).
Pelican, our subsidiary, is a biotechnology company focused on developing an agonist mAb, PTX-35, against a T-cell costimulatory receptor, TNFRSF25. PTX-35 has completed IND-enabling activities in preparation for a first-in-human (FIH) trial for oncology. Pelican has initiated its first clinical trial site for PTX-35 and began dosing patients in the Phase 1 clinical trial. PTX-35 is designed to harness the body's natural antigen specific immune activation and tolerance mechanisms to reprogram immunity and provide a long-term, durable clinical effect. TNFRSF25 agonism has been shown to provide highly selective and potent stimulation of antigen experienced ‘memory’ CD8+ cytotoxic T-cells, which are the class of long-lived T-cells capable of eliminating tumor cells in patients. Due to the preferential specificity of PTX-35 to antigen experienced CD8+ T-cells, this agent represents a promising candidate as a T-cell co-stimulator in cancer patients.
When combined in preclinical studies with Heat’s gp96 platform immunotherapies and an inti-PD-1 checkpoint inhibitor, PTX-35 has been shown to enhance antigen specific T-cell activation to eliminate tumor cells. Pelican is also developing other biologics that target TNFRSF25 for various immunotherapy approaches.
We continue to enroll patients in our HS-110 combination immunotherapy trial, preparing for IND submission of HS-130 (ComPACT™), advancing pre-clinical development of Pelican assets in anticipation of an IND submission, providing general and administrative support for these operations and protecting our intellectual property. We currently do not have any products approved for sale and we have not generated any significant revenue since our inception and no revenue from product sales. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and to incur increasing operating losses for at least the next several years. We anticipate that our expenses will increase substantially as we:
● complete the ongoing clinical trials of our product candidates;
● maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
● seek to obtain regulatory approvals for our product candidates;
● continue our research and development efforts;
● add operational, financial and management information systems and personnel, including personnel to support our product development and commercialization efforts; and
● operate as a public company.
Recent Clinical Developments
On February 9, 2021, we announced positive interim data from Phase 2 trial. Substantial survival benefit was observed in a cohort of previously treated, checkpoint inhibitor naïve patients with advanced NSCLC (Cohort A, N = 47). A median progression free survival (PFS) of 1.8 months and a median overall survival (OS) of 24.6 months was observed with a median follow-up time of 19.4 months. The one-year survival rate of Cohort A is 61.7%. The median OS data was 12.2 months and the 1-year survival rate was 50.7% in previously treated, advanced NSCLC patients who received nivolumab as a single agent, according to published data of the BMS CheckMate 057 study.
For NSCLC patients who had previously been treated with a checkpoint inhibitor and whose disease had subsequently progressed (Cohort B, N = 68), a median PFS of 2.8 months and median OS of 11.9 months was observed with a median follow-up time of 11.9 months. Published data from other studies reported median OS of 6.8 to 9.0 months for NSCLC patients treated with chemotherapies after PD-(L)1 progression.
As of this data cut, 30% of the patients in Cohort A and 26% of the patients in Cohort B were still alive. HS-110 has a favorable safety profile and has been administered in approximately 200 patients to date. As of this data cut, there have been no treatment-related serious adverse reactions. A review of immune-related adverse events reported in the study raised no safety concerns. The data to date demonstrate that combination of HS-110 and nivolumab is well-tolerated.
2020 Financial Developments
● In November 2020, our CPRIT Grant, initially covering a period from June 1, 2016 through November 30, 2020, as amended, was extended to May 31, 2021.
● On December 10, 2020, we announced a reverse stock split of our shares of common stock at a ratio of 1-for-7.
Funding/Liquidity
We commenced active operations in June 2008. Our operations to date have been primarily limited to organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, acquiring and developing our technology, identifying potential product candidates and undertaking preclinical and clinical studies of our most advanced product candidates. To date, we have primarily financed our operations with net proceeds from the sale of our securities including, our July 2013 initial public offering in which we received net proceeds of $24.3 million, our March 2015 public offering in which we received net proceeds of $11.1 million, our March 2016 public offering in which we received net proceeds of $6.1 million, an additional $3.9 million from the exercise of warrants, our March 2017 public offering in which we received net proceeds of approximately $4.1 million, our November 2017 public offering in which we received net proceeds of approximately $2.4 million, our May 2018 public offering in which we received net proceeds of approximately $18.8 million and an additional $4.8 million from the exercise of warrants, our November 2018 public offering in which we received net proceeds of approximately $12.7 million and our January 21, 2020 public offering of shares of our common stock and warrants to purchase shares of our common stock in which we received net proceeds of approximately $6.4 million. As of December 31, 2020, we have received $13.7 million in grant funding from the CPRIT Grant through Pelican. We have also raised an aggregate of $114.4 million through at-the-market offerings for the year ended December 31, 2020. Subsequent to the year ended December 31, 2020, we have issued an additional 2,106,027 shares of common stock in “at-the-market” offerings and received $25.6 million of net proceeds. Cash and cash equivalents at March 22, 2021 were approximately $132.0 million. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $130.6 million. We had net losses of $26.4 million and $20.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and continued losses from operations for the foreseeable future. We expect our expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we continue the research and development and advance our clinical trials of, and seek marketing approval for, our product candidates and as we add to our product candidate pipeline. In addition, if we expand our operations we will incur additional expenses which could be significant. Furthermore, if we obtain marketing approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product sales, marketing, manufacturing, and distribution. As currently planned, we expect to have sufficient funds to fund our operations into 2024. We will need to obtain substantial additional future funding in connection with our future planned clinical trials and any new opportunities we may pursue. While we are currently funding vaccine development and preclinical studies, we do not expect to use significant corporate resources to advance our COVID-19 program. We are applying for several large grants to support clinical development of this program and are engaged in collaboration discussions, which we believe may provide attractive and non-dilutive pathways to help accelerate development of our COVID-19 program; however, there can be no assurance that we will receive such grant funding or if received, the amount of such grant funding. Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. To meet our capital needs, we are considering multiple alternatives, including, but not limited to, additional equity financings, which include sales of our common stock under at-the-market offerings, if available, debt
financings, partnerships, collaborations and other funding transactions. This is based on our current estimates, and we could use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. We will need to generate significant revenues to achieve profitability, and we may never do so.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND SIGNIFICANT JUDGMENTS AND ESTIMATES
We believe that several accounting policies are important to understanding our historical and future performance. We refer to these policies as "critical" because these specific areas generally require us to make judgments and estimates about matters that are uncertain at the time we make the estimate, and different estimates-which also would have been reasonable-could have been used, which would have resulted in different financial results.
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates based on historical experience and make various assumptions, which management believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, which form the basis for judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
The notes to our audited consolidated financial statements contain a summary of our significant accounting policies. We consider the following accounting policies critical to the understanding of the results of our operations:
● Revenue;
● Deferred revenue;
● In-process R&D;
● Goodwill impairment;
● Income tax;
● Contingent consideration;
● Stock-based compensation;
● Derivative financial instruments;
● Research and development costs, including clinical and regulatory cost; and
● Recent accounting pronouncements.
Revenue
Our 2020 and 2019 revenue primarily consisted of research funding from our CPRIT Grant. Grant revenue is recognized when qualifying costs are incurred and there is reasonable assurance that the conditions of the award have been met for collection. Proceeds received prior to the costs being incurred or the conditions of the award being met are recognized as deferred revenue until the services are performed and the conditions of the award are met.
Deferred Revenue
Deferred revenue is comprised of proceeds of $0.6 million received from CPRIT for which the costs have not been incurred or the conditions of the award have not been met and grant funds received from an economic development grant agreement with the City of San Antonio (“Economic Development Grant”) that we entered into on November 1, 2017. Under the Economic Development Grant, we received $0.2 million in state enterprise fund grants for the purpose of defraying costs toward the purchase of laboratory equipment. As part of the agreement, we will provide the city of San Antonio with a purchase money security interest in the equipment to secure the repayment of grant funds should we fail to perform under the terms and conditions of the agreement. Our obligations under the agreement include meeting certain employment levels for a period of not less than seven years commencing on or before December 31, 2017 and establishing Pelican’s corporate headquarters in San Antonio. The Economic Development Grant funds will be recognized as income upon the achievement of the performance criteria and determination that the cash is no longer refundable to the State of Texas.
In-process R&D
In-process research and development (“IPR&D”) assets represent the fair value assigned to technologies that were acquired, which at the time of acquisition have not reached technological feasibility and have no alternative future use. IPR&D assets are considered to be indefinite-lived until the completion or abandonment of the associated research and development projects. During the period that the IPR&D assets are considered indefinite-lived, they are tested for impairment on an annual basis, or more frequently if the Company becomes aware of any events occurring or changes in circumstances that indicate that the fair value of the IPR&D assets are less than their carrying amounts. If and when development is complete, which generally occurs upon regulatory approval, and the Company is able to commercialize products associated with the IPR&D assets, these assets are then deemed definite-lived and are amortized based on their estimated useful lives at that point in time. If development is terminated or abandoned, the Company may have a full or partial impairment charge related to the IPR&D assets, calculated as the excess of carrying value of the IPR&D assets over fair value. The IPR&D assets were acquired on April 28, 2017 when we acquired Pelican.
Goodwill and Impairment
Goodwill is tested for impairment annually or more frequently if changes in circumstances or the occurrence of events suggest that impairment may exist. We use widely accepted valuation techniques to determine the fair value of its reporting units used in its annual goodwill impairment analysis. Our valuation is primarily based on qualitative and quantitative assessments regarding the fair value of the reporting unit relative to its carrying value. See Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements regarding impairment at December 31, 2019.
Income Tax
Income taxes are accounted for using the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, operating loss carryforwards, and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
In accordance with FASB ASC 740, Accounting for Income Taxes, we reflect in the financial statements the benefit of positions taken in a previously filed tax return or expected to be taken in a future tax return only when it is considered ‘more-likely-than-not’ that the position taken will be sustained by a taxing authority. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had no unrecognized income tax benefits and correspondingly there is no impact on our effective income tax rate associated with these items. Our policy for recording interest and penalties relating to uncertain income tax positions is to record them as a component of income tax expense in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had no such accruals.
Contingent Consideration
Contingent consideration is recorded as a liability and is the estimate of the fair value of potential milestone payments related to business acquisitions. Contingent consideration is measured at fair value using a discounted cash flow model utilizing significant unobservable inputs including the probability of achieving each of the potential milestones and an estimated discount rate associated with the risks of the expected cash flows attributable to the various milestones. Significant increases or decreases in any of the probabilities of success or changes in expected timelines for achievement of any of these milestones would result in a significantly higher or lower fair value of these milestones, respectively, and commensurate changes to the associated liability. The contingent consideration is revalued at each reporting period and changes in fair value are recognized in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
Stock-Based Compensation
Calculating stock-based compensation expense requires the input of highly subjective assumptions. The fair value of restricted stock units is estimated based on the closing price of our stock on the date of grant, and for the purposes of
expense recognition, the total new number of shares expected to vest is adjusted for estimated forfeitures. We apply the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model to determine the fair value of our stock options awards. Inherent in this model are assumptions related to expected stock-price volatility, expected option life, risk-free interest rate and dividend yield. We use an average historical stock price volatility of our own data plus an analysis of reported data for a peer group of comparable companies that have issued stock options with substantially similar terms. We estimate the expected life of our options using the simplified method. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury zero-coupon yield curve on the grant date for a maturity similar to the expected life of the options. The dividend rate is based on our historical rate, which we anticipate to remain at zero. We account for forfeitures as they occur. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of stock options represent our best estimates, however these estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. As a result, if factors change and different assumptions are used, the stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
Derivative Financial Instruments
We issued common stock warrants in connection with the execution of certain equity financings. The fair value of the warrants, which were deemed to be derivative instruments, was recorded as a derivative liability under the provisions of ASC Topic 815 Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”) because they are not considered indexed to the Company’s own stock. Subsequently, the liability is adjusted to fair value as of the end of each reporting period and the changes in fair value of derivative liabilities are recorded in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss under the caption “Change in fair value of warrant liability.” See Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Research and Development Costs
We expense research and development costs associated with developmental products not yet approved by the FDA as well as costs associated with bringing our developmental products into advanced phase clinical trials as incurred. These costs consist primarily of pre-manufacturing and manufacturing drug costs, clinical trial execution, investigator payments, license fees, salaries, stock-based compensation and related personnel costs. Other costs include fees paid to consultants and outside service providers related to the development of our product candidates, and other expenses relating to the design, development, and testing and enhancement of our product candidates.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses which requires financial assets measured at amortized cost basis to be presented at the net amount expected to be collected. This standard is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022 and the Company is currently evaluating the expected impact of this standard but does not expect it to have a material impact on its consolidated financial statements upon adoption.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes (ASU 2019-12), which simplifies the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions to the general principles of Topic 740, Income Taxes, and also improves consistency of application by clarifying and amending existing guidance. ASU 2019-12 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, with early adoption permitted. The Company is currently evaluating the expected impact of this standard but does not expect it to have a material impact on its consolidated financial statements upon adoption.
In January 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-01, Investments-Equity Securities (Topic 321), Investments-Equity Method and Joint Ventures (Topic 323), and Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815)-Clarifying the Interactions between Topic 321, Topic 323, and Topic 815 (a consensus of the Emerging Issues Task Force), which addresses the accounting for the transition into and out of the equity method and measuring certain purchased options and forward contracts to acquire investments. ASU 2020-01 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, with early adoption permitted. The Company is currently evaluating the expected impact of this standard but does not expect it to have a material impact on its consolidated financial statements upon adoption.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity. This ASU simplifies the accounting for convertible instruments. This ASU also requires entities to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments in calculating diluted earnings-per-share. The ASU is effective for annual periods beginning after December 15, 2021 with early adoption permitted. We are currently evaluating the impact this standard will have on our consolidated financial statements.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Year Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues
The CPRIT Grant is subject to customary CPRIT funding conditions including a matching funds requirement where Pelican will match $0.50 for every $1.00 from CPRIT. Consequently, Pelican is required to raise $7.6 million in matching funds over the life of the project.
As of December 31, 2020, CPRIT has provided $13.7 million of the total $15.2 million grant. The remaining $1.5 million will become available on a reimbursement basis, rather than in advance of expending the funds as in prior grant years. As of December 31, 2020, we have provided approximately $6.6 million which was used to satisfy Pelican’s matching fund obligation under the first four years of the CPRIT Grant and we have approximately $1.0 million remaining to provide for the fifth CPRIT fiscal year.
Upon commercialization of the product, the terms of the Grant Contract require Pelican to pay tiered royalties in the low to mid-single digit percentages. Such royalties reduce to less than one percent after a mid-single-digit multiple of the grant funds have been paid to CPRIT in royalties.
We recognized grant revenue of approximately $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 for qualified expenditures under the grant. We recognized $3.0 million grant revenue related to CPRIT during the year ended December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, we had short-term deferred revenue of $0.6 million for proceeds received but for which the costs had not been incurred or the conditions of the award had not been met.
Operating Expenses
Total operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, were $29.1 million and $23.8 million, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2020 operating expenses are primarily comprised of research and development, general and administrative expenses, and a change in the fair value of contingent consideration due to our initial acquisition of a controlling interest in Pelican in 2017. Research and development expenses were $12.9 million, general and administrative expenses were $14.9 million and the change in fair value of contingent consideration was $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to research and development expenses of $13.0 million, general and administrative expenses of $9.4 million, goodwill impairment loss of $0.7 million and the change in fair value of contingent consideration of $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, research and development expenses represented approximately 45% of operating expenses, general and administrative expenses represented approximately 51% and change in fair value of contingent consideration 4% of operating expenses. For the year ended December 31, 2019, research and development expenses represented approximately 55% of operating expenses, general and administrative expenses represented approximately 39%, goodwill impairment represented approximately 3% and change in fair value of contingent consideration 3% of operating expenses.
Research and development expense
Research and development expenses stayed consistent at $12.9 million and $13.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019. The components of R&D expense are as follows, in millions:
● HS-110 increased by $1.2 million, reflecting the current period mix of development activities, primarily due to increased costs associated with manufacturing and testing.
● HS -130 expense increased by $0.4 million due to dosing of patients during the year ended 2020 and third-party regulatory consulting and investigator site payments for the ongoing Phase 1 clinical trial.
● PTX-35 expense decreased by $1.0 primarily due to the transition from pre-clinical development to manufacturing development and patient dosing.
● COVID-19 program was initiated in Q1 2020 and primarily represents sponsored research agreement costs.
● Other programs include preclinical costs associated with our Zika program, T-cell costimulatory programs, and laboratory supplies.
● Unallocated research expenses primarily reflects personnel costs, including stock-based compensation from stock awards.
General and administrative expense
General and administrative expense increased approximately 59% to $14.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $9.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $5.5 million is primarily due to the increase in personnel and the CEO’s stock compensation expense on awards with an immediate vest date.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration
We reassess the actual consideration earned and the probability-weighted future earn-out payments at each balance sheet date. The change in the fair value of contingent consideration was $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the change in fair value of contingent consideration of $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The change was primarily due to the effect of the change in discount rate, the payment of the first milestone, probability of achieving milestones, and passage of time on the fair value measurement.
Goodwill impairment loss
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company experienced a sustained decline in the quoted market price of the Company’s common stock and as a result the Company determined that it was more likely than not that the carrying value of these acquired intangibles exceeded their estimated fair value. Accordingly, the Company performed an impairment analysis using the income approach. This analysis required significant judgments, including primarily the estimation of future development costs, the probability of success in various phases of its development programs, potential post-launch cash flows and a risk-adjusted weighted average cost of capital. As a result, the Company recorded an impairment loss of $0.7 million on the goodwill during the year ended December 31, 2019. No impairment was recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Change in fair value of warrant liability
During the year ended December 31, 2020 the Company issued common stock warrants in connection with the execution of certain equity financings. The fair value of the warrants, which were deemed to be derivative instruments, were recorded as a derivative liability and was adjusted to fair value at the end of the reporting period resulting in $1.0 million of warrant expense. There were no derivative liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Interest Income
Interest income was $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is due to the investment in various short-term financial instruments that generated interest income during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income tax expense
There was no income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $0.04 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net loss attributable to Heat Biologics, Inc.
We had a net loss attributable to Heat Biologics, Inc. of $26.0 million, or ($1.63) per basic and diluted share for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a net loss attributable to Heat Biologics, Inc. of $20.0 million, or ($4.21) per basic and diluted share for the year ended December 31, 2019.
BALANCE SHEET AS OF DECEMBER 31, 2020 AND 2019
Short-term Investments. Short-term investments were $100.8 million as of December 31, 2020 compared to $5.7 million as of December 31, 2019. The increase is primarily due to the Company using the proceeds from the sale of common stock through an at-the-market Common Stock Sales Agreement with B. Riley FBR, Inc. and Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. in purchasing short-term investments.
Prepaid Expenses and Other Current Assets. Prepaid expenses and other current assets was approximately $1.8 million as of December 31, 2020 and $0.4 million as of December 31, 2019. The $1.4 million increase was primarily attributable to our upfront D&O and liability insurance and manufacturing deposits.
In-Process R&D. As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, we had in-process R&D of $5.9 million from our acquisition of Pelican. The carrying value of this asset did not change during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Goodwill. As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, we had goodwill of $1.5 million, respectively, from our acquisition of Pelican. The carrying value of this asset did not change during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Accounts Payable. Accounts payable was approximately $1.1 million and $1.5 million as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019. The $0.4 million decrease was primarily due to lower payables for investigator site payments for our clinical trials.
Deferred Revenue. We had short term deferred revenue of $0.6 million and $3.4 million as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. This short term deferred revenue represents proceeds received for the CPRIT grant but for which the costs had not been incurred or the conditions of the award had not been met. We had long term deferred revenue of $0.2 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, related to an economic development grant received from San Antonio for the purchase of lab equipment.
Accrued Expenses and Other Liabilities. Accrued expenses were approximately $1.6 million at December 31, 2020 compared to $1.7 million at December 31, 2020. The decrease is primarily due to lower clinical accruals.
Operating and financing lease liabilities. Current and long term liabilities related to operating and finance leases was $1.8 million as of December 31, 2020 and $1.9 million as of December 31, 2019. These balances are related to our office lease and equipment leases.
Deferred Tax Liability. Deferred tax liability was approximately $0.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
Contingent Consideration. As of December 31, 2020, we had contingent consideration of $2.9 million compared to $3.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 related to our acquisition of Pelican which is recorded on our consolidated balance sheets. This amount represents the fair value of future milestone payments to Pelican shareholders which were discounted in accordance with ASC 805. We perform an analysis on a quarterly basis and for the year ended December 31, 2020, we determined the change in the estimated fair value of the contingent consideration to be approximately $1.2 million due to the effect of the change in discount rate, the payment of the first milestone, probability of achieving milestones, and passage of time on the fair value measurement.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Sources of Liquidity
Since our inception in June 2008, we have incurred significant losses and we have financed our operations with net proceeds from the private placement of our preferred stock, common stock and debt. Since our initial public offering, we have primarily financed our operations with net proceeds from the public offering of our securities and to a lesser extent, the proceeds from the exercise of warrants. During May 2018, we closed a public offering of shares of our common stock and warrants to purchase shares of our common stock in which we received net proceeds of approximately $18.8 million and after the closing of the offering, an additional $4.8 million from the exercise of 436,381 warrants issued in this offering. During November 2018, we closed a public offering of shares of our common stock and warrants to purchase shares of our common stock in which we received net proceeds of approximately $12.7 million. For the year ended December 31, 2018 and 2019, we received net proceeds of approximately $3.8 million from sales of our common stock in at-the-market offerings. On January 21, 2020, we closed an underwritten public offering of shares of our common stock and warrants to purchase shares of our common stock pursuant to which we received net proceeds of approximately $6.4 million. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we received net proceeds of $114.4 million from the sale of 13,175,677 shares of our common stock in at-the-market offerings. Subsequent to the year ended December 31, 2020, we have issued an additional 2,106,027 shares of common stock in “at-the-market” offerings and received $25.6 million of net proceeds. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $130.6 million. We had net losses of $26.4 million and $20.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
We expect to incur significant expenses and continued losses from operations for the foreseeable future. We expect our expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we continue the research and development and advance our clinical trials of, and seek marketing approval for, our product candidates and as we add to our product candidate pipeline. In addition, if we obtain marketing approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product sales, marketing, manufacturing, and distribution. Although we currently have sufficient funds to complete our Phase 2 clinical trials, as currently planned, and expect that we will have sufficient funds to fund our operations into 2024, we will need to obtain substantial additional future funding in connection with our future planned clinical trials. While we are currently funding vaccine development and preclinical studies, we do not expect to use significant corporate resources to advance our COVID-19 program. We are applying for several large grants to support clinical development of this program and are engaged in collaboration discussions, which we believe may provide attractive and non-dilutive pathways to help accelerate development of our COVID-19 program; however, there can be no assurance that we will receive such grant funding or if received, the amount of such grant funding. Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. If we are unable to raise capital when needed or on attractive terms, we would be forced to delay, reduce or eliminate our research and development programs or any future commercialization efforts. To meet our capital needs, we are considering multiple alternatives, including, but not limited to, additional equity financings, which include sales of our common stock under at-the-market offerings, if available, debt financings, partnerships, collaborations and other funding transactions. This is based on our current estimates, and we could use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. We will need to generate
significant revenues to achieve profitability, and we may never do so. As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $111.8 million in cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments.
Cash Flows
Operating activities. The use of cash in both periods resulted primarily from our net losses adjusted for non-cash charges and changes in components of working capital. Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31 2020 was $22.0 million compared to $12.8 million during the same period in 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increase in net loss of $6.0 million, prepaid expense and other current assets of $1.4 million, and changes in deferred revenue and accounts payable of $3.2 million, offset by an increase in non-cash stock-based compensation of $3.1 million and increase in the fair value of warrants and contingent consideration of $1.6 million.
Investing activities. Net cash used in investing activities was $95.4 million during year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $0.3 million during the same period in 2019. The increase is from the net purchase of short-term investments of $95.1 million.
Financing activities. Net cash provided by financing activities was $119.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $0.02 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to a public offering of common stock and warrants of $6.6 million, sale of our common stock through an at-the-market Common Stock Sales Agreement with B. Riley FBR, Inc. and Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. for $117.4 million, proceeds from the exercise of warrants of $0.7 million, partially offset by stock issuance costs of $3.1 million, , payment of contingent consideration of $2.0 million, and principal payments on finance lease of $0.1 million.
On April 23, 2020, Heat and Pelican received loan proceeds of $0.7 million from Regions Bank, N.A, pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program, or the PPP Loan, under the CARES Act, administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration. On April 28, 2020, we returned all $0.7 million in proceeds from the PPP Loan in order to make those funds available to other borrowers that may be in greater need.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under SEC rules.
Current and Future Financing Needs
We have incurred an accumulated deficit of $130.6 million through December 31, 2020. We have incurred negative cash flows from operations since we started our business. We have spent, and expect to continue to spend, substantial amounts in connection with implementing our business strategy, including our planned product development efforts, our clinical trials, and our research and discovery efforts.
We intend to meet our financing needs through multiple alternatives, including, but not limited to, cash on hand, additional equity financings, debt financings and/or funding from partnerships or collaborations.
However, the actual amount of funds we will need to operate is subject to many factors, some of which are beyond our control. These factors include the following:
● the progress of our research activities;
● the number and scope of our research programs;
● the progress of our preclinical and clinical development activities;
● the progress of the development efforts of parties with whom we have entered into research and development agreements;
● our expansion plans and cash needs of any new projects;
● our ability to maintain current research and development licensing arrangements and to establish new research and development and licensing arrangements;
● our ability to achieve our milestones under licensing arrangements;
● the costs involved in prosecuting and enforcing patent claims and other intellectual property rights;
● the costs and timing of regulatory approvals;
● the receipt of grant funding if any; and
● clinical laboratory development and testing
We have based our estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong. We may need to obtain additional funds sooner or in greater amounts than we currently anticipate. Potential sources of financing include strategic relationships, public or private sales of our equity or debt and other sources. We may seek to access the public or private equity markets when conditions are favorable due to our long-term capital requirements. We do not have any committed sources of financing at this time, and it is uncertain whether additional funding will be available when we need it on terms that will be acceptable to us, or at all. If we raise funds by selling additional shares of common stock, such as through the Amended and Restated Common Stock Sales Agreement with B. Riley FBR, Inc. and Cantor Fitzgerald & Co., or other securities convertible into common stock, the ownership interest of our existing stockholders will be diluted. If we are not able to obtain financing when needed, we may be unable to carry out our business plan. As a result, we may have to significantly limit our operations and our business, financial condition and results of operations would be materially harmed. While we are experiencing limited financial impacts at this time, given the global economic slowdown, the overall disruption of global healthcare systems and the other risks and uncertainties associated with the pandemic, our business, financial condition, results of operations and growth prospects could be materially adversely affected.
License and Contractual Obligations
Our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 are as follows (in thousands):
(1) License agreements for each year are associated with the University of Miami.
(2) See Note 13 to our consolidated financial statements in for additional information regarding leases.
Additional In-Licensed Programs
We may enter into additional license agreements relating to new product candidates.