Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report.
This discussion contains forward-looking statements based on our current expectations, estimates, and projections about our operations and the industry in which we operate. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of a variety of risks and uncertainties, including those described under “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of Part I of this Annual Report. We assume no obligation to update any of these forward-looking statements.
Overview
Company Description
We are a leading North American onshore completion services provider that targets unconventional oil and gas resource development. We partner with our E&P customers across all major onshore basins in both the U.S. and Canada as well as abroad to design and deploy downhole solutions and technology to prepare horizontal, multistage wells for production. We focus on providing our customers with cost-effective and comprehensive completion solutions designed to maximize their production levels and operating efficiencies. We believe our success is a product of our culture, which is driven by our intense focus on performance and wellsite execution as well as our commitment to forward-leaning technologies that aid us in the development of smarter, customized applications that drive efficiencies. We provide (i) cementing services, which consist of blending high-grade cement and water with various solid and liquid additives to create a cement slurry that is pumped between the casing and the wellbore of the well, (ii) an innovative portfolio of completion tools, including those that provide pinpoint frac sleeve system technologies as well as a portfolio of completion technologies used for completing the toe stage of a horizontal well and fully-composite, dissolvable, and extended range frac plugs to isolate stages during plug-and-perf operations, (iii) wireline services, the majority of which consist of plug-and-perf completions, which is a multistage well completion technique for cased-hole wells that consists of deploying perforating guns and isolation tools to a specified depth, and (iv) coiled tubing services, which perform wellbore intervention operations utilizing a continuous steel pipe that is transported to the wellsite wound on a large spool in lengths of up to 30,000 feet and which provides a cost-effective solution for well work due to the ability to deploy efficiently and safely into a live well.
How We Generate Revenue and the Costs of Conducting Our Business
We generate our revenues by providing completion services to E&P customers across all major onshore basins in both the U.S. and Canada as well as abroad. We primarily earn our revenues pursuant to work orders entered into with our customers on a job-by-job basis. We typically will enter into an MSA with each customer that provides a framework of general terms and conditions of our services that will govern any future transactions or jobs awarded to us. Each specific job is obtained through competitive bidding or as a result of negotiations with customers. The rate we charge is determined by location, complexity of the job, operating conditions, duration of the contract, and market conditions. In addition to MSAs, we have entered into a select number of longer-term contracts with certain customers relating to our wireline and cementing services, and we may enter into similar contracts from time to time to the extent beneficial to the operation of our business. These longer-term contracts address pricing and other details concerning our services, but each job is performed on a standalone basis.
The principal expenses involved in conducting our business include labor costs, materials and freight, the costs of maintaining our equipment, and fuel costs. Our direct labor costs vary with the amount of equipment deployed and the utilization of that equipment. Another key component of labor costs relates to the ongoing training of our field service employees, which improves safety rates and reduces employee attrition.
How We Evaluate Our Operations
We evaluate our performance based on a number of financial and non-financial measures, including the following:
•Revenue: We compare actual revenue achieved each month to the most recent projection for that month and to the annual plan for the month established at the beginning of the year. We monitor our revenue to analyze trends in the performance of our operations compared to historical revenue drivers or market metrics. We are particularly interested in identifying positive or negative trends and investigating to understand the root causes.
•Adjusted Gross Profit (Loss): Adjusted gross profit (loss) is a key metric that we use to evaluate operating performance. We define adjusted gross profit (loss) as revenues less direct and indirect costs of revenues
(excluding depreciation and amortization). Costs of revenues include direct and indirect labor costs, costs of materials, maintenance of equipment, fuel and transportation freight costs, contract services, crew cost, and other miscellaneous expenses. For additional information, see “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below.
•Adjusted EBITDA: We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) before interest, taxes, and depreciation and amortization, further adjusted for (i) goodwill, intangible asset, and/or property and equipment impairment charges, (ii) transaction and integration costs related to acquisitions, (iii) loss or gain on revaluation of contingent liabilities, (iv) gain on the extinguishment of debt, (v) loss or gain on the sale of subsidiaries, (vi) restructuring charges, (vii) stock-based compensation expense, (viii) loss or gain on sale of property and equipment, and (ix) other expenses or charges to exclude certain items which we believe are not reflective of ongoing performance of our business, such as legal expenses and settlement costs related to litigation outside the ordinary course of business. For additional information, see “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below.
•Return on Invested Capital (“ROIC”): We define ROIC as after-tax net operating profit (loss), divided by average total capital. We define after-tax net operating profit (loss) as net income (loss) plus (i) goodwill, intangible asset, and/or property and equipment impairment charges, (ii) transaction and integration costs related to acquisitions, (iii) interest expense (income), (iv) restructuring charges, (v) loss or gain on the sale of subsidiaries, (vi) gain on the extinguishment of debt, and (vii) the provision or benefit for deferred income taxes. We define total capital as book value of equity plus the book value of debt less balance sheet cash and cash equivalents. We compute the average of the current and prior period-end total capital for use in this analysis. For additional information, see “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below.
•Safety: We measure safety by tracking the total recordable incident rate (“TRIR”), which is reviewed on a monthly basis. TRIR is a measure of the rate of recordable workplace injuries, defined below, normalized and stated on the basis of 100 workers for an annual period. The factor is derived by multiplying the number of recordable injuries in a calendar year by 200,000 (i.e., the total hours for 100 employees working 2,000 hours per year) and dividing this value by the total hours actually worked in the year. A recordable injury includes occupational death, nonfatal occupational illness, and other occupational injuries that involve loss of consciousness, restriction of work or motion, transfer to another job, or medical treatment other than first aid.
Factors Affecting the Comparability of Our Results of Operations
Our future results of operations may not be comparable to our historical results of operations for the periods presented, and our historical results of operations among the periods presented may not be comparable to each other.
Our historical results of operations included in this Annual Report include the impact of the divestiture of the Production Solutions segment on August 30, 2019. Future results of operations will not include activity related to the Production Solutions segment. For additional information on the divestiture of the Production Solutions segment, see Note 16 - Segment Information included in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report.
Impact of the Coronavirus Pandemic; Industry Trends and Outlook
Our business depends, to a significant extent, on the level of unconventional resource development activity and corresponding capital spending of oil and natural gas companies. These activity and spending levels are strongly influenced by the current and expected oil and natural gas prices. The worldwide coronavirus outbreak in early 2020, which was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization in March 2020, the uncertainty regarding its impact, and various governmental actions taken to mitigate its impact resulted in an unprecedented decline in demand for oil. In the midst of the ongoing pandemic, OPEC+ was initially unable to reach an agreement on production levels for crude oil, at which point Saudi Arabia and Russia initiated efforts to aggressively increase production. The convergence of these events created the unprecedented dual impact of a massive decline in the demand for oil coupled with the risk of a substantial increase in supply. While OPEC+ agreed in April 2020 to cut production, downward pressure on commodity prices persisted throughout 2020, and the imbalance between the supply of and demand for oil, as well as the uncertainty around the extent and timing of an economic recovery, caused extreme market volatility and a substantial adverse effect on oil prices. In 2020, the WTI price averaged approximately $39 per barrel as compared to $57 per barrel in 2019.
In response to lower oil prices, our customers have generally revised their capital budgets downward and adjusted their operations accordingly, which has caused a significant decline in demand for our products and services. These reductions were most evident in the Permian Basin where total completions declined approximately 53% in 2020 versus 2019 per the Energy Information Administration (the “EIA”). Additionally, the EIA reported total U.S. completions declined approximately 49%
year over year, and new wells drilled declined approximately 56%. This overall decline in activity, coupled with downward pricing pressure, has led to a significant reduction in our revenue and profitability for 2020.
Thus far in 2021, despite oil prices having improved, demand for our products and services and our near-term prospects remain depressed, and we expect our customer’s capital spend and drilling and completion activity will be down in 2021 versus 2020. Because of sustained lower activity into 2021, we expect pricing will remain depressed for the near-term, offsetting much or possibly all of the anticipated revenue increases. In particular, our cementing and coiled tubing services have experienced improved profitability and pricing; however, we expect such improvements to be outweighed by the challenges faced by our completion tools and wireline services with respect to both utilization and pricing. Even with further improvements in oil prices, our business in 2021 may not improve materially or at all if downward pricing pressures remain.
While we cannot predict the length of time that market disruptions resulting from the coronavirus pandemic and efforts to mitigate its effects will continue, the ultimate impact on our business, or the pace or extent of any subsequent recovery, we expect the coronavirus pandemic and related effects will continue to have a material adverse impact on demand for oil, commodity prices, and our business generally. We have experienced inefficiencies and logistical challenges surrounding stay-at-home orders and remote work arrangements, travel restrictions, and an inability to commute to certain facilities and job sites, as we provide services and products to our customers.
During the pandemic, we have maintained our commitment to the safety of our employees, customers, vendors, and community at large, and we have taken, and are continuing to take, a proactive approach to navigating the pandemic. To mitigate exposure and risk, we have implemented processes and procedures across our entire organization based on federal, regional, and local guidelines and mandates, and our Health, Safety & Environment and management teams are in frequent communication with our entire employee base to ensure they are receiving updated guidelines, processes, and procedures. In response to the pandemic, we have implemented the following changes, for example: at the field level, we are working closely with our customers and vendors to update standard operating procedures, based on social distancing, hand washing, and other recommended best practices set forth by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; electronic assessments have been employed to check the health of employees prior to reporting to work, to ensure facilities are being properly cleaned and sanitized, and to check visitor health before arrival to our locations; internal case managers have been identified to handle all coronavirus-related cases, and all confirmed and potential cases are tracked through closure; many of our corporate and office employees are working virtually to avoid unnecessary risk and exposure; and we have significantly limited any work-related travel. We are actively monitoring updates from regulatory and government bodies and evolving our strategy accordingly in an effort to keep our workforce and communities healthy.
Other significant factors that are likely to affect commodity prices moving forward include the extent to which members of OPEC+ and other oil exporting nations continue to reduce oil export prices and increase production; the effect of energy, monetary, and trade policies of the U.S.; the pace of economic growth in the U.S. and throughout the world, including the potential for macro weakness; geopolitical and economic developments in the U.S. and globally; new energy policies put in place by the new administration and EPA; and overall North American oil and natural gas supply and demand fundamentals, including the pace at which export capacity grows. Even with price improvements in oil and natural gas, operator activity may not materially increase, as operators remain focused on operating within their capital plans, and uncertainty remains around supply and demand fundamentals.
In this challenging environment, we will nevertheless continue to focus on generating returns and cash flow. Due to our high level of variable costs and the asset-light make-up of our business, we were able to quickly implement cost-cutting measures and will continue our efforts to adapt as the market dictates.
Generally, operators have continued to improve operational efficiencies in completions design, increasing the complexity and difficulty, making oilfield service selection more important. This increase in high-intensity, high-efficiency completions of oil and gas wells further enhances the demand for our services. We compete for the most complex and technically demanding wells in which we specialize, which are characterized by extended laterals, increased stage spacing, multi-well pads, cluster spacing, and high proppant loads. These well characteristics lead to increased operating leverage and returns for us, as we are able to complete more jobs and stages with the same number of units and crews. Service providers for these projects are selected based on their technical expertise and ability to execute safely and efficiently, rather than only price. Nonetheless, we have experienced increased pricing pressures, and an increase in customer focus on price over performance, with respect to certain of our products and services, including our dissolvable frac plugs. As a result, although we expect our sales of dissolvable frac plugs to increase, due to significant pricing pressures from customers, increased competition, and our inability to proportionately reduce our materials costs, our ability to profit from such sales may be limited.
Other Significant Events
Production Solutions Divestiture
On August 30, 2019, we sold our Production Solutions segment for approximately $17.1 million in cash. In connection with this divestiture, we recorded a loss of $15.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. For additional information on this divestiture, see Note 16 - Segment Information included in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report.
Magnum Acquisition
On October 25, 2018, pursuant to the terms of a Securities Purchase Agreement, dated October 15, 2018, we acquired all of the equity interests of Magnum Oil Tools International, LTD, Magnum Oil Tools GP, LLC, and Magnum Oil Tools Canada Ltd. (such entities collectively, “Magnum” and such acquisition, the “Magnum Acquisition”) for approximately $334.5 million in upfront cash consideration, subject to customary adjustments, and 5.0 million shares of our common stock, which were issued to the sellers of Magnum in a private placement.
Results of Operations
(1) We sold the Production Solutions segment to Brigade Energy Service LLC on August 30, 2019. For additional information on the divestiture of the Production Solutions segment, see Note 16 - Segment Information.
Revenues
Revenues decreased $522.1 million, or 63%, to $310.9 million in 2020 which was primarily related to reduced activity and pricing pressure caused by poor market conditions, including an economic recession associated with the coronavirus pandemic, as well as international pricing and production disputes, in comparison to 2019. We depend, to a significant extent, on the level of unconventional resource development activity and corresponding capital spending of oil and natural gas companies onshore in North America. In turn, activity and capital spending are strongly influenced by current and expected oil and natural gas prices. During 2020, the average closing price was $39.16 per barrel of WTI, and the average closing price of natural gas was $2.03 per MMBtu. During 2019, the average closing price was $56.98 per barrel of WTI, and the average closing price of natural gas was $2.56 per MMBtu.
Additional information with respect to revenues by historical reportable segment is discussed below.
Completion Solutions: Revenues decreased $463.8 million, or 60%, to $310.9 million in 2020. The decrease was
prevalent across all lines of service and was a direct reflection of pricing pressures caused by reasons described above. More specifically, wireline revenues decreased $154.1 million, or 65%, as total completed wireline stages decreased by 59% in comparison to 2019. In addition, cementing revenues (including pump downs) decreased by $115.3 million, or 53%, as total cement job count decreased 46% in comparison to 2019, tools revenues decreased $107.3 million, or 58%, as completion tools stages decreased by 44% in comparison to 2019, and coiled tubing revenues decreased by $87.1 million, or 65%, as total days worked decreased by 53% in comparison to 2019.
Production Solutions: Revenues decreased $58.3 million, or 100%, for 2020 as the Production Solutions segment was sold on August 30, 2019.
Cost of Revenues (Exclusive of Depreciation and Amortization)
Cost of revenues decreased $367.8 million, or 55%, to $302.2 million in 2020, which is primarily related to reduced activity and pricing pressure caused by poor market conditions, including an economic recession associated with the coronavirus pandemic, in comparison to 2019.
Additional information with respect to cost of revenues by historical reportable segment is discussed below.
Completion Solutions: Cost of revenue decreased $317.9 million, or 51%, to $302.2 million in 2020. The decrease in comparison to 2019 was prevalent across all lines of service and was a direct reflection of reasons described above. More specifically, the decrease was primarily related to a $180.8 million decrease in materials installed and consumed while performing services, a $103.3 million decrease in employee costs, a $30.9 million decrease in other costs such as repair and maintenance, vehicle, travel, and meals and entertainment, and a $6.1 million decrease in transaction and integration costs association with the Magnum Acquisition. The overall decrease in cost of revenues was partially offset by a $2.1 million increase in bad debt expense and a $1.1 million increase in non-cash facility lease costs between periods.
Production Solutions: Cost of revenue decreased $49.9 million, or 100%, for 2020 as the Production Solutions segment was sold on August 30, 2019.
Adjusted Gross Profit (Loss)
Completion Solutions: Adjusted gross profit decreased $145.9 million to $8.7 million in 2020 as a result of the factors described above under “Revenues” and “Cost of Revenues.”
Production Solutions: Adjusted gross profit decreased $8.4 million to $0.0 million in 2020 as a result of the factors described above under “Revenues” and “Cost of Revenues.”
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses decreased $32.0 million to $49.3 million in 2020. The decrease in comparison to 2019 was primarily related to a $22.1 million decrease in employee costs due mainly to headcount and salary reductions, including the suspension of matching contributions under the Nine Energy Service 401(k) Plan, across the organization. The overall decrease was also partly attributed to a $6.8 million reduction in transaction and integration costs associated with the Magnum Acquisition and a $4.0 million decrease in other general and administrative expenses such as professional fees, marketing, travel expense, as well as expenses associated with the recently sold Production Solutions segment. The overall decrease in general and administrative expenses was partially offset by a $1.0 million increase in severance and other general administrative type restructuring costs between periods.
Depreciation
Depreciation expense decreased $18.1 million to $32.4 million in 2020. The decrease in comparison to 2019 was related to a $9.9 million reduction in depreciation expense associated with our coiled tubing business mainly due to the property and equipment charge recorded in the fourth quarter of 2019, coupled with a $5.0 million reduction in depreciation expense in the Production Solutions segment, which was sold on August 30, 2019, and a $3.2 million reduction in depreciation expense in other lines of service within our Completion Solutions segment due to a decrease in capital expenditures between periods.
Amortization of Intangibles
Amortization of intangibles decreased $1.9 million to $16.5 million in 2020, primarily due to a $0.9 million decrease in amortization associated with certain non-compete agreements that were fully amortized in 2019, coupled with a $0.8 million decrease in amortization associated with our coiled tubing business due to the intangible asset impairment charge recorded in
the fourth quarter of 2019 as well as a $0.2 million decrease in amortization associated with a customer relationship intangible that was fully amortized in 2020.
Impairment of Goodwill
In 2020, we recorded goodwill impairment charges of $296.2 million in our tools, cementing, and wireline reporting units within our Completion Solutions segment due to sharp declines in global crude oil demand, an economic recession associated with the coronavirus pandemic, sharp declines in oil and natural gas prices, and an increased weighted average cost of capital driven by a reduction in our stock price and the Level 2 fair value of our Senior Notes.
In comparison, in 2019, we recorded a goodwill impairment charge of $20.3 million in our Completion Solutions segment due to a reduction of the need for coiled tubing during the drill-out phase of the overall completions process due to a decline in exploration and production capital budgets and activity, an over-supply of new coiled tubing units, and the introduction of dissolvable plug technology.
Impairment of Intangibles
In 2019, we recorded intangible asset impairment charges of $107.7 million associated with indefinite-lived trade names and an intangible asset impairment charge of $7.1 million associated with definite-lived customer relationship intangible assets, all within our Completion Solutions segment. These intangible asset impairment charges were primarily due to the transitioning of certain Magnum trade names to our trade names. These intangible asset impairment charges were also partly attributed to a reduction of the need for coiled tubing during the drill-out phase of the overall completions process due to a decline in exploration and production capital budgets and activity, an over-supply of new coiled tubing units, and the introduction of dissolvable plug technology. These intangible asset impairment charges did not recur in 2020.
Impairment of Property and Equipment
In 2019, we recorded a property and equipment impairment charge of $66.2 million in our Completion Solutions segment due to a reduction of the need for coiled tubing during the drill-out phase of the overall completions process due to a recent decline in exploration and production capital budgets and activity, an over-supply of new coiled tubing units, and the introduction of dissolvable plug technology. These property and equipment impairment charges did not recur in 2020.
(Gain) Loss on Revaluation of Contingent Liabilities
We recorded a $0.3 million loss on the revaluation of contingent liabilities in 2020 compared to a $21.2 million gain on the revaluation of contingent liabilities recorded in 2019. The $21.5 million change was primarily related to a $0.8 million loss on the revaluation of the Magnum Earnout (as defined in Note 9 - Debt Obligations included in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report) in 2020 compared to a $21.9 million gain on the revaluation of the Magnum Earnout in 2019. The Magnum Earnout was terminated in the second quarter of 2020. The change was partially offset by a $0.5 million gain on the revaluation of the earnout associated with our acquisition of Frac Technology AS (the “Frac Tech Earnout”) in 2020 compared to a $0.7 million loss on the revaluation of the Frac Tech Earnout.
(Gain) Loss on Sale of Subsidiaries
We recorded a $15.9 million loss on the sale of subsidiaries in 2019 associated with the sale of the historical Production Solutions segment. This loss on the sale of subsidiaries did not recur in 2020.
Non-Operating (Income) Expenses
We recorded $1.8 million in non-operating income for 2020 compared to $38.9 million in non-operating expenses for 2019. The $40.7 million change was primarily related to a $37.8 million gain on the extinguishment of debt related to the repurchase of Senior Notes in 2020 that did not occur in 2019. The change is also partly attributable to a $3.0 million reduction in interest expense and a $0.1 million decrease in interest income between periods.
Provision (Benefit) for Income Taxes
Our effective tax rate was 0.6% for 2020 and 1.8% for 2019. Our tax benefit for 2020 primarily comprised of changes to our valuation allowance position due to impairment recorded during the year, as well as the benefit from the five-year net operating loss carryback provided by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act signed into law during 2020.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA decreased $138.8 million to a $25.8 million loss for 2020. The Adjusted EBITDA decrease is primarily due to the changes in revenue and expenses discussed above. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below for further explanation.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are supplemental non-GAAP financial measures that are used by management and external users of our financial statements, such as industry analysts, investors, lenders, and rating agencies.
We define EBITDA as net income (loss) before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as EBITDA further adjusted for (i) goodwill, intangible asset, and/or property and equipment impairment charges, (ii) transaction and integration costs related to acquisitions, (iii) loss or gain on revaluation of contingent liabilities, (iv) gain on the extinguishment of debt, (v) loss or gain on the sale of subsidiaries, (vi) restructuring charges, (vii) stock-based compensation expense, (viii) loss or gain on sale of property and equipment, and (ix) other expenses or charges to exclude certain items which we believe are not reflective of ongoing performance of our business, such as legal expenses and settlement costs related to litigation outside the ordinary course of business.
Management believes EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are useful because they allow us to more effectively evaluate our operating performance and compare the results of our operations from period to period without regard to our financing methods or capital structure. We exclude the items listed above from net income (loss) in arriving at these measures because these amounts can vary substantially from company to company within our industry depending upon accounting methods and book values of assets, capital structures, and the method by which the assets were acquired. These measures should not be considered as an alternative to, or more meaningful than, net income (loss) as determined in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) or as an indicator of our operating performance. Certain items excluded from these measures are significant components in understanding and assessing a company’s financial performance, such as a company’s cost of capital and tax structure, as well as the historic costs of depreciable assets, none of which are components of these measures. Our computations of these measures may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures of other companies. We believe that these are widely followed measures of operating performance.
The following table presents a reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measures of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to the GAAP financial measure of net income (loss):
(1) Amounts relate to the revaluation of contingent liabilities associated with our 2018 acquisitions. The impact is included in our Consolidated Statements of Income and Comprehensive Income (Loss). For additional information on contingent liabilities, see Note 12 - Commitments and Contingencies included Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report.
(2) Amounts represent fees and legal settlements associated with legal proceedings brought pursuant to the FLSA and/or similar state laws.
Return on Invested Capital
ROIC is a supplemental non-GAAP financial measure. We define ROIC as after-tax net operating profit (loss), divided by average total capital. We define after-tax net operating profit (loss) as net income (loss) plus (i) goodwill, intangible asset, and/or property and equipment impairment charges, (ii) transaction and integration costs related to acquisitions, (iii) interest expense (income), (iv) restructuring charges, (v) loss or gain on the sale of subsidiaries, (vi) gain on the extinguishment of debt, and (vii) the provision or benefit for deferred income taxes. We define total capital as book value of equity plus the book value of debt less balance sheet cash and cash equivalents. We compute the average of the current and prior period-end total capital for use in this analysis.
Management believes ROIC is a meaningful measure because it quantifies how well we generate operating income relative to the capital we have invested in our business and illustrates the profitability of a business or project taking into account the capital invested. Management uses ROIC to assist them in capital resource allocation decisions and in evaluating business performance. Although ROIC is commonly used as a measure of capital efficiency, definitions of ROIC differ, and our computation of ROIC may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures of other companies.
The following table provides an explanation of our calculation of ROIC for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Adjusted Gross Profit (Loss)
GAAP defines gross profit (loss) as revenues less cost of revenues and includes depreciation and amortization in costs of revenues. We define adjusted gross profit (loss) as revenues less direct and indirect costs of revenues (excluding depreciation and amortization). This measure differs from the GAAP definition of gross profit (loss) because we do not include the impact of depreciation and amortization, which represent non-cash expenses.
Management uses adjusted gross profit (loss) to evaluate operating performance. We prepare adjusted gross profit (loss) to eliminate the impact of depreciation and amortization because we do not consider depreciation and amortization indicative of our core operating performance. Adjusted gross profit (loss) should not be considered as an alternative to gross profit (loss), operating income (loss), or any other measure of financial performance calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP. Adjusted gross profit (loss) may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies because other companies may not calculate adjusted gross profit (loss) or similarly titled measures in the same manner as we do.
The following table presents a reconciliation of adjusted gross profit (loss) to GAAP gross profit (loss).
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources and Uses of Liquidity
Historically, we have met our liquidity needs principally from cash on hand, cash flows from operating activities and, if needed, external borrowings. Our principal uses of cash are to fund capital expenditures and acquisitions, to service our outstanding debt, and to fund our working capital requirements. We may also, from time to time, make open market debt repurchases (including our Senior Notes) when it is opportunistic to do to manage our debt maturity profile. In 2018, we issued $400.0 million of Senior Notes, together with cash on hand and borrowings under the 2018 ABL Credit Facility (as defined below), to fund the Magnum Acquisition as well as fully repay and terminate the term loan borrowings and the outstanding revolving credit commitments under our prior credit facility. For additional information regarding the Senior Notes, see Note 9 - Debt Obligations included in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report. In the third quarter of 2019, we divested the Production Solutions segment for approximately $17.1 million in cash. We used such proceeds to support working capital requirements and fund a portion of our 2020 capital expenditures.
We continually monitor potential capital sources, including equity and debt financing, to meet our investment and target liquidity requirements. Our future success and growth will be highly dependent on our ability to continue to access outside sources of capital. In addition, our ability to satisfy our liquidity requirements depends on our future operating performance, which is affected by prevailing economic conditions, the level of drilling, completion and production activity for North American onshore oil and natural gas resources, and financial and business and other factors, many of which are beyond our control. In 2020, in response to rapidly deteriorating market conditions driven in large part by the coronavirus pandemic, we implemented certain cost-cutting measures across the organization. We expect to continue to maintain many of these measures, including those relating to employee compensation, and may implement additional cost-cutting measures, as necessary. We can make no assurance regarding our ability to successfully implement such measures, or whether such measures would be sufficient to mitigate a decline in our financial performance.
Our total 2020 capital expenditure budget, excluding possible acquisitions, was between $10.0 million and $15.0 million, and the actual amount of capital expenditures incurred in 2020 was $10.2 million. Our capital expenditure budget for 2021, excluding possible acquisitions, is expected to be between $15.0 million and $20.0 million. The nature of our capital expenditures is comprised of a base level of investment required to support our current operations and amounts related to growth and company initiatives. Capital expenditures for growth and company initiatives are discretionary. We continually evaluate our capital expenditures and the amount we ultimately spend will depend on a number of factors including expected industry activity levels and company initiatives.
Although we do not budget for acquisitions, pursuing growth through acquisitions may continue to be a significant part of our business strategy. Our ability to make significant additional acquisitions for cash will require us to obtain additional equity or debt financing, which we may not be able to obtain on terms acceptable to us or at all.
At December 31, 2020, we had $68.9 million of cash and cash equivalents and $37.9 million of availability under the 2018 ABL Credit Facility (as defined below), which resulted in a total liquidity position of $106.8 million. As of February 28, 2021, we had approximately $62 million of cash and cash equivalents, which has decreased our total liquidity position. Although we believe our total liquidity position will continue to materially erode, due in large part to interest payments due on the Senior Notes, we believe that, based on our current forecasts, our cash on hand, together with cash flow from operations, and borrowings under the 2018 ABL Credit Facility, should be sufficient to fund our capital requirements for at least the next twelve months from the issuance date of our consolidated financial statements. However, we can make no assurance regarding our ability to achieve our forecasts, which are materially dependent on our financial performance and the ever-changing market.
Senior Notes
On October 25, 2018, we issued the Senior Notes due 2023 under an indenture, dated as of October 25, 2018 (the “Indenture”), by and among us, including certain of our subsidiaries, and Wells Fargo, National Association, as Trustee. The Senior Notes bear interest at an annual rate of 8.750% payable on May 1 and November 1 of each year, and the first interest payment was due on May 1, 2019. Based on current amounts outstanding as of February 28, 2021, the semi-annual interest payments are $15.2 million each. The Senior Notes are senior unsecured obligations and are fully and unconditionally guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by each of our current domestic subsidiaries and by certain future subsidiaries.
The Indenture contains covenants that limit our ability and the ability of our restricted subsidiaries to engage in certain activities. We were in compliance with the provisions of the Indenture at December 31, 2020.
Upon an event of default, the trustee or the holders of at least 25% in aggregate principal amount of then outstanding Senior Notes may declare the Senior Notes immediately due and payable, except that a default resulting from certain events of bankruptcy or insolvency with respect to us, any of our restricted subsidiaries that are a significant subsidiary or any group of restricted subsidiaries that, taken together, would constitute a significant subsidiary, will automatically cause all outstanding Senior Notes to become due and payable.
We repurchased approximately $53.3 million of Senior Notes at a repurchase price of approximately $14.6 million in cash for the year ended December 31, 2020. Deferred financing costs associated with these transactions were $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. As a result, for the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a $37.8 million gain on the extinguishment of debt, which was calculated as the difference between the repurchase price and the carrying amount of the Senior Notes partially offset by the deferred financing costs. The gain on extinguishment of debt is included as a separate line item in our Consolidated Statement of Income and Comprehensive Income (Loss) for the year ended December 31, 2020. In
addition to repurchases, from time to time, we have explored, and may continue to further consider, transactions to restructure
or refinance a portion of the Senior Notes. Any such transactions may involve the issuance of additional equity or convertible
debt securities that could result in material dilution to our stockholders, and these securities could have rights superior to
holders of our common stock and could contain covenants that will restrict our operations.
For additional information on the Senior Notes, see Note 9 - Debt Obligations included in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report.
2018 ABL Credit Facility
On October 25, 2018, we entered into a credit agreement dated as of October 25, 2018 (the “2018 ABL Credit Agreement”), that permits aggregate borrowings of up to $200.0 million, subject to a borrowing base, including a Canadian tranche with a sub-limit of up to $25.0 million and a sub-limit of $50.0 million for letters of credit (the “2018 ABL Credit Facility”). The 2018 ABL Credit Facility will mature on October 25, 2023 or, if earlier, on the date that is 180 days before the scheduled maturity date of the Senior Notes if they have not been redeemed or repurchased by such date.
Loans to us and our domestic related subsidiaries (the “U.S. Credit Parties”) under the 2018 ABL Credit Facility may be base rate loans or LIBOR loans; and loans to Nine Energy Canada Inc., a corporation organized under the laws of Alberta, Canada, and its restricted subsidiaries (the “Canadian Credit Parties”) under the Canadian tranche may be Canadian Dollar Offered Rate (“CDOR”) loans or Canadian prime rate loans. The applicable margin for base rate loans and Canadian prime rate loans vary from 0.75% to 1.25% and the applicable margin for LIBOR loans or CDOR loans vary from 1.75% to 2.25% in each depending on our leverage ratio. In addition, a commitment fee of 0.50% per annum will be charged on the average daily unused portion of the revolving commitments.
The 2018 ABL Credit Agreement contains various affirmative and negative covenants, including financial reporting requirements and limitations on indebtedness, liens, mergers, consolidations, liquidations and dissolutions, sales of assets, dividends and other restricted payments, investments (including acquisitions) and transactions with affiliates. In addition, the 2018 ABL Credit Agreement contains a minimum fixed charge ratio covenant of 1.00 to 1.00 that is tested quarterly when the availability under the 2018 ABL Credit Facility drops below $18.75 million or a default has occurred until the availability exceeds such threshold for 30 consecutive days and such default is no longer outstanding. We were in compliance with all covenants under the 2018 ABL Credit Agreement as of December 31, 2020.
All of the obligations under the 2018 ABL Credit Facility are secured by first priority perfected security interests (subject to permitted liens) in substantially all of the personal property of U.S. Credit Parties, excluding certain assets. The obligations under the Canadian tranche are further secured by first priority perfected security interests (subject to permitted liens) in substantially all of the personal property of Canadian Credit Parties excluding certain assets. The 2018 ABL Credit Facility is guaranteed by the U.S. Credit Parties, and the Canadian tranche is further guaranteed by the Canadian Credit Parties and the U.S. Credit Parties.
At December 31, 2020, our availability under the 2018 ABL Credit Facility was approximately $37.9 million, net of outstanding letters of credit of $0.5 million.
Cash Flows
Our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019 are presented below:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $4.9 million in 2020 compared to $101.3 million in net cash provided by operating activities in 2019. The $106.2 million decrease in net cash provided by operating activities was primarily a result of a $107.5 million decrease in cash flow provided by operations, adjusted for any non-cash items, primarily due to an increase in net loss in 2020 compared to 2019. The overall decrease in net cash provided by operating activities was partially offset by an increase of $1.3 million in cash collections and other changes in working capital which provided an increased source of cash in 2020 in comparison to 2019.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $1.8 million in 2020 compared to $34.1 million in net cash used in investing activities in 2019. The $32.3 million decrease in net cash used in investing activities was primarily related to a decrease of $55.5 million in cash purchases of property and equipment in 2020 in comparison to 2019. The overall decrease was also partly due to an increase in proceeds from sales of property and equipment (including insurance) of $2.3 million in 2020 compared to 2019. The overall decrease in net cash used in investing activities was partially offset by $16.9 million in proceeds from the sale of subsidiaries, $7.6 million in proceeds from notes receivable payments, and $1.0 million proceeds of acquisitions, which we received in 2019 that did not recur in 2020.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities was $17.4 million in 2020 compared to $37.9 million in net cash used in financing activities in 2019. The $20.5 million decrease in net cash used in financing activities was primarily related to $45.0 million in payments on the 2018 ABL Credit Facility in 2019 that did not recur in 2020. The overall decrease was also partly due to a decrease of $1.5 million in cash used for the vesting of restricted stock in 2020 in comparison to 2019. The overall decrease in net cash used in financing activities was partially offset by $14.6 million of purchases of the Senior Notes and $0.3 million of payments on the Magnum Promissory Notes (as defined in Note 9 - Debt Obligations included in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report) in 2020 that did not occur in 2019, coupled with $10.0 million in proceeds from the 2018 ABL Credit Facility in 2019 that did not recur in 2020 as well as an additional $1.0 million in payments of contingent liabilities and $0.1 million in payments on finance leases in comparison to 2019.
Contractual Obligations
As a “smaller reporting company,” as defined under the Exchange Act, we are not required to provide this information.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
At December 31, 2020, we had letters of credit of $0.5 million, which represented off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K. As of December 31, 2020, no liability has been recognized in our Consolidated Balance Sheet for the letters of credit.
Operating leases were excluded from our Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2019 but are included in our Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2020 following the January 1, 2020 effective date of Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842) and its related ASUs (“ASC 842”). For additional information, see “Critical Accounting Policies” below as well as Note 2 - Significant Accounting Policies and Note 6 - Leases in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report.
Critical Accounting Policies
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Certain accounting policies involve judgments and uncertainties to such an extent that there is a reasonable likelihood that materially different amounts could have been reported under different conditions, or if different assumptions had been used. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on a regular basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates and assumptions used in preparation of our financial statements. We provide expanded discussion of our more significant accounting policies, estimates, and judgments below. We believe that most of these accounting policies reflect our more significant estimates and assumptions used in preparation of our financial statements.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company” as defined in the JOBS Act. Under Section 107 of the JOBS Act, as an emerging growth company, we are taking advantage of an extended transition period for the adoption of new or revised financial accounting standards, including the reduced reporting requirements and exemptions, and the longer phase-in periods for the adoption of new or revised financial accounting standards, until we are no longer an emerging growth company. Our election to use the longer phase-in periods permitted by this election may make it difficult to compare our financial statements to those of non-emerging growth companies and other emerging growth companies that have opted out of the longer phase-in periods under Section 107 of the JOBS Act and who will comply with new or revised financial accounting standards. If we were to subsequently elect instead to comply with these public company effective dates, such election would be irrevocable pursuant to Section 107 of the JOBS Act.
Smaller Reporting Company Status
We are a “smaller reporting company” as defined by the SEC. As such, we are eligible to comply with the scaled disclosure requirements in several Regulation S-K and Regulation S-X items. Our disclosures in this Annual Report reflect these scaled requirements.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue under Accounting Standards Codification Topic 606 (“ASC 606”) when products are received by a customer’s domestic common carrier at our facility or when the product is received by the customer’s international carrier. We believe this recognition policy reflects the point at which the customer has control of the product as required by ASC 606.
Performance Obligations
A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer and is the unit of account in ASC 606. A contract’s transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance obligation and recognized as revenue when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied. We exclude sales taxes, value added taxes, and other taxes we collect concurrent with revenue-producing activities from revenue.
Our revenue is derived from the sale of products and services which are sold directly to customers or are consumed by customers on their well sites. For domestic product sales, we typically recognize revenue when we meet our performance obligation upon the shipment of the products from our facilities to our customer. For international product sales, we typically recognize revenue when we meet our performance obligation upon receipt of the products by the customer’s international carrier. We recognize service revenue over the time the service is performed as the customer consumes and benefits from the use of our products and services for well service. Service revenues represent revenue recognized over time, as our customer arrangements typically provide agreed upon hourly or daily fixed-rates, and we recognize service revenue based upon the number of hours or days services have been performed.
Contracts for our products and services are negotiated on a per-job basis at a regional level. Contracts vary in nature but typically have a duration of less than a month and have a single performance obligation either for a job, a series of distinct jobs, or a period we stand ready to provide our services to our client as needed. Our payment terms vary by the type and location of our customers and type of product and service offered. We receive cash equal to the invoice amount for most services and product sales, and payment terms typically range from 30 to 60 days from the date we invoice a customer. Since
the period between the delivery of our products and services and our receipt of customer payment for these products and services is not expected to exceed one year, we have elected not to calculate or disclose a financing component for our customer contracts.
Contract Estimates
We receive reimbursements from our customers for the purchase of supplies, equipment, personnel services, and other services provided at a customer’s request. Reimbursable revenues are subject to uncertainty as the timing of the receipt of these amounts is dependent on factors outside of our influence. Accordingly, these revenues are not recognized until the uncertainty is resolved, which typically occurs when the related costs are incurred on behalf of the customer. We are considered a principal in these transactions and record the associated revenues at the gross amount billed to the customer.
Changes and modifications to contracts are routine in the performance of our contracts due to the dynamic nature of well operations and the services we provide for our customers. We consider contract modifications to exist when the modification either creates a new contract or changes the existing enforceable rights and obligations of a contract. Most of our contract modifications are for services or goods that are not distinct from existing contracts due to the significant integration provided or significant interdependencies in the context of the contract and are accounted for as if they were part of the original contract.
Contract Balances
Contract assets arise when recorded revenues for a contract exceed the amounts billed under the terms of the contracts. We classify contract liabilities as unearned income. Such deferred revenue typically results from advance payments received on well service orders prior to performance of the service.
For additional information, see Note 2 - Significant Accounting Policies and Note 3 - Revenues in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report.
Leases
On December 31, 2020, we adopted ASC 842 effective January 1, 2020. Under ASC 842, we determine if an arrangement is a lease at inception. To the extent that we determine an arrangement represents a lease, we classify that lease as an operating lease or a finance lease.
We capitalize operating leases on our Consolidated Balance Sheets through a Right of Use (“ROU”) asset and a corresponding lease liability. ROU assets represent our right to use an underlying asset for the lease term, and lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments arising from the operating lease. Operating lease ROU assets and obligations are recognized at the commencement date of an arrangement based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term utilizing an interest rate that would have been incurred to borrow over a similar term the funds necessary to purchase the leased asset. Lease expense for operating leases is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term for 2020 and 2019.
Accounting for finance leases under ASC 842 remained unchanged from previous accounting guidance.
For additional information, see Note 2 - Significant Accounting Policies and Note 6 - Leases in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment is stated at cost and depreciated under the straight-line method over the estimated useful life of the asset. Equipment held under capital leases is stated at the present value of its future minimum lease payments and is depreciated under the straight-line method over the shorter of the lease term or the estimated useful life of the asset. When assets are retired or otherwise disposed of, the cost and related accumulated depreciation are removed from the accounts and any resulting gain or loss is recognized within operating expenses. Normal repair and maintenance costs are charged to operating expense as incurred. Significant renewals and betterments are capitalized.
Valuation of Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. In performing the review for impairment, future cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset and its eventual disposal are estimated. If the undiscounted future cash flows are less than the carrying amount of the assets, there is an indication that the asset may be impaired. The amount of the impairment is measured as the difference between the carrying value and the Level 3 fair value of the asset. The Level 3 fair value is determined either through
the use of an external valuation, or by means of an analysis of discounted future cash flows based on expected utilization. Determining fair value requires the use of estimates and assumptions. Such estimates and assumptions include revenue growth rates, operating profit margins, weighted average costs of capital, terminal growth rates, future market share, the impact of new product development, and future market conditions, among others. We believe that the estimates and assumptions used in impairment assessments are reasonable and appropriate. Impairment losses are reflected in “Income (loss) from operations” in our Consolidated Statements of Income and Comprehensive Income (Loss).
With a significant reduction in exploration and production capital budgets and activity, primarily driven by sharp declines in global crude oil demand and an economic recession associated with the coronavirus pandemic, as well as sharp declines in oil and natural gas prices, the carrying amount of long-lived assets (inclusive of definite-lived intangible assets and property and equipment) associated with our asset groups may not be recoverable. As such, we performed an impairment assessment of long-lived assets in our asset groups under Accounting Standards Codification 360, Property, Plant and Equipment (“ASC 360”) at March 31, 2020, based on our best internal projections and the likelihood of various outcomes. Based on our assessment, we determined that the estimated future undiscounted cash flows derived from long-lived assets associated with our asset groups exceeded the carrying amount of long-lived assets associated with our asset groups, and no impairment to long-lived assets was required. No events triggered additional impairment tests under ASC 360 through December 31, 2020. However, the occurrence of future events or deteriorating market conditions could result in additional impairment assessments under ASC 360 subsequent to December 31, 2020.
In the fourth quarter of 2019, we recorded a property and equipment impairment charge of $66.2 million and a definite-lived customer relationship intangible asset impairment charge of $7.1 million. These impairment charges represent the difference between the carrying value and the estimated fair value of the long-lived assets in our coiled tubing asset group within our Completion Solutions segment and were due to a reduction of the need for coiled tubing during the drill-out phase of the overall completions process due to a recent decline in exploration and production capital budgets and activity, an over-supply of new coiled tubing units, and the introduction of dissolvable plug technology.
For additional information on these impairment charges, see Note 5 - Property and Equipment included in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report.
Valuation of Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill has an indefinite useful life and is not subject to amortization. Intangible assets with indefinite useful lives (specifically trademarks and trade names) are also not subject to amortization. For goodwill and intangible assets with indefinite useful lives, an assessment for impairment is performed annually on December 31 or when there is an indication an impairment may have occurred. Goodwill is reviewed for impairment by comparing the carrying value of each of our reporting unit’s net assets (including allocated goodwill) to the Level 3 fair value of our reporting unit. The Level 3 fair value of our reporting unit is determined by using the income approach (discounted cash flows of forecasted income). Intangible assets with indefinite useful lives are reviewed for impairment by comparing the carrying value of the intangible asset to the Level 3 fair value of the intangible asset. The Level 3 fair value of intangible assets with indefinite useful lives (specifically trademarks and trade names) is estimated using the relief-from-royalty method of the income approach. This approach is based on the assumption that in lieu of ownership, a company would be willing to pay a royalty in order to exploit the related benefits of this intangible asset. Determining fair value requires the use of estimates and assumptions. Such estimates and assumptions include revenue growth rates, operating profit margins, royalty rates, weighted average costs of capital, terminal growth rates, future market share, the impact of new product development, and future market conditions, among others. We believe that the estimates and assumptions used in impairment assessments are reasonable and appropriate. We recognize a goodwill impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying value of goodwill exceeds our reporting unit’s Level 3 fair value. We recognize an indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment charge of the amount by which the carrying value of the intangible asset exceeds the Level 3 fair value of the intangible asset. Any impairment losses are reflected in “Income (loss) from operations” in our Consolidated Statements of Income and Comprehensive Income (Loss).
Intangible assets with definite lives include technology, customer relationships, and non-compete agreements. The Level 3 fair value of technology and the Level 3 fair value of customer relationships are estimated using the income approach, specifically the multi-period excess earnings method. The multi-period excess earnings method consists of isolating the cash flows attributed to the intangible asset, which are then discounted to present value to calculate the Level 3 fair value of the intangible asset. The Level 3 fair value of non-compete agreements is estimated using a with and without scenario where cash flows are projected through the term of the non-compete agreement assuming the non-compete agreement is in place and compared to cash flows assuming the non-compete agreement is not in place.
Intangible assets with definite lives are amortized based on the estimated consumption of the economic benefit over their estimated useful lives. Intangible assets with definite lives are tested for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that their carrying amount may not be recoverable.
In the first quarter of 2020, in connection with an interim goodwill impairment test, we recorded goodwill impairment charges of $296.2 million in our tools, cementing, and wireline reporting units within our Completions Solutions segment due to sharp declines in global crude oil demand, an economic recession associated with the coronavirus pandemic, sharp declines in oil and natural gas prices, and an increased weighted average cost of capital driven by a reduction in our stock price and the Level 2 fair value of our Senior Notes.
In the fourth quarter of 2019, in connection with our annual goodwill impairment test, we recorded a goodwill impairment charge of $20.3 million, in our coiled tubing reporting unit within our Completion Solutions segment. In addition, in the fourth quarter of 2019, in connection with our annual indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment test, we recorded an intangible asset impairment charge of $12.7 million associated with the indefinite-lived trade names in our coiled tubing reporting unit and an intangible asset impairment charge of $95.0 million associated with the indefinite-lived trade names in our completion tools reporting unit, both within our Completion Solutions segment. As described above in “Critical Accounting Policies - Valuation of Long-Lived Assets” and also in the fourth quarter of 2019, we recorded an intangible asset impairment charge of $7.1 million associated with the definite-lived customer relationship intangible assets in our coiled tubing asset group within our Completion Solutions segment.
For additional information on goodwill and both indefinite-lived and definite-lived intangible asset impairment charges, see Note 7 - Goodwill and Intangible Assets included in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report.
Recognition of Provisions for Contingencies
In the ordinary course of business, we are subject to various claims, suits, and complaints. We, in consultation with internal and external advisors, will provide for a contingent loss in the financial statements if it is probable that a liability has been incurred at the date of the financial statements and the amount can be reasonably estimated. If it is determined that the reasonable estimate of the loss is a range and that there is no best estimate within the range, provision will be made for the lower amount of the range. Legal costs are expensed as incurred.
Stock-based Compensation
We account for awards of stock-based compensation at fair value on the date granted to employees and recognize the compensation expense in the financial statements over the requisite service period. Forfeitures are recorded as they occur. All stock-based compensation expense is recorded using the straight-line method and is included in “General and administrative expenses” in our Consolidated Statements of Income and Comprehensive Income (Loss).
Determining Fair Market Value
Fair value of all the options outstanding was measured using the Black-Scholes model. Determining the appropriate fair value model and calculating the fair value of options requires the input of highly subjective assumptions, including the expected volatility of the price of our stock, the risk-free rate, the expected term of the options, and the expected dividend yield of our common stock. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. If factors change and different assumptions are used, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future. The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires estimates of key assumptions based on both historical information and management judgment regarding market factors and trends.
Expected Life - The expected term of stock options represents the period the stock options are expected to remain outstanding and is based on the simplified method, which is the weighted average vesting term plus the original contractual term, divided by two.
Expected Volatility - We develop our expected volatility based upon a weighted average volatility of our peer group.
Risk-free Interest Rate - The risk-free interest rates for options granted are based on the average of five year and seven year constant maturity Treasury bond rates whose term is consistent with the expected term of an option from the date of grant.
Expected Term - The expected term is based on the midpoint between the vesting date and contractual term of an option. The expected term represents the period that our stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding.
Expected Dividend Yield - We do not anticipate paying cash dividends on our shares of common stock; therefore, the expected dividend yield is assumed to be zero.
Fair value of the stock-based compensation for all of the performance share units outstanding was measured using a Monte Carlo simulation model.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For additional information on recent accounting pronouncements, see Note 2 - Significant Accounting Policies included in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report.