Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The financial data discussed below is derived from our audited consolidated financial statements for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, which are found elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our consolidated financial statements are prepared and presented in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The financial data discussed below is only a summary and investors should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of our operations in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes to those statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results and the timing of events may differ materially from those contained in these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed in the section entitled “Risk Factors,” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Accomplishments during 2019 & Subsequent Accomplishments
Our branded products include NutraHemp CBD products including oral sprays, tinctures, pet drops, pain balms, and face creams and NutraSpray oral spray products for sleep support and an appetite suppressant.
In November of 2018, our wholly owned subsidiary PAT began providing bulk material analytical, identity, potency and purity testing of raw industrial hemp.
In February of 2019, our wholly owned subsidiary, NutraDerma acquired the patent for a natural dermal skin patch that is designed to prevent mosquito and other insect bites.
In March of 2019, we licensed our technology for a unique system for pharmaceutical grade delivery of testosterone into the human body to licensed pharmacist, Orlando Pharmacy.
Results of Operations
NutraLife BioSciences, Inc. (“us”, “we” or the “Company”) was founded in 2010 by Edgar Ward, the Company’s Chief Executive Officer, President & Director to engage in the development, manufacturing and distribution of nutritional and dietary oral spray products. Since then, the Company has evolved into a branded and private label developer, manufacturer and distributor of a wide range of nutraceutical, wellness, and CBD products. The Company’s revenues decreased from approximately $3,711,327 in 2018 to $2,133,624 in 2019.
The Company’s manufacturing facility has been registered with the Food and Drug Administration and its manufacturing facility has operated in accordance with the Good Manufacturing Processes Standard (GMP) for more than five years. Our products adhere to high manufacturing standards throughout every step of the manufacturing and extraction process. Our products are formulated, developed, manufactured and produced under the supervision of Edgar Ward, our Chief Executive Officer, President and Director. Once produced our products are tested our in-house laboratory chemists. Our nutraceutical and industrial CBD products are of the highest-quality and laboratory tested for strength, purity and contaminants such as heavy metals, pesticides, and solvents.
We offer 13 different core formulations which we modify to meet the specifications of our private label customers. We provide approximately 50 different variations of our core formulations. Our private label products include CBD-infused oral sprays, tinctures, pet drops, pain balms, and face creams, and nutraceutical oral spray products for sleep support and weight loss packaged under the customer’s brand names.
Our spray products and tinctures are available in various formulations and strengths and are available for purchase online directly from the Company through its website at www.nutralifebiosciences.com, as well as through numerous other private label distributors, online retailers and retail outlets.
We are a manufacturer and distributor of nutraceutical, dietary, wellness and other products. Our products are sold to private label distributors who sell the products we manufacture under their own brand names as well as under our own brand names.
For the years ended on December 31, of 2019 and 2018, we generated revenues of approximately $2,133,624 and $3,711,327, respectively from the sale of our products.
In March of 2017, we began selling CBD products. Since that time, revenues from sales of our CBD products increased from $1,380,000 for the year ended December 31, 2017 to $2,400,000 for the year ended December 31, 2018 representing 77% and 78% of our revenues for such periods. During the year ended December 31, 2019, CBD products did not represent a significant portion of the Company’s revenue.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
We had sales of $2,133,624 and $3,711,327 for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, or a forty-two-point five percent -42.50% decrease which was a direct impact from the temporary closures caused by the business disruptions from the coronavirus.
Cost of sales was $1,535,490 compared to $2,211,039 for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, or a twenty-eight-point three percent -28.30% decrease. This decrease is directly related to our decrease in sales and the temporary closures of our business.
Gross margin was $598,134 and $1,500,288 for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, or a sixty three-point five percent -63.50% decrease.
General and administrative expenses were $3,109,887 compared to $2,070,714 for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, or a fifty-point two percent 50.20% increase. The increase was caused by the constant disruptions in the business and inefficiencies encountered.
Stock based compensation was $610,987 and $1,070,050 for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, or a forty-two-point nine percent -42.9% decrease.
Our interest expense was $7,925 and $2,987 for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, or a eight hundred-thirty-six point two percent 165.3% increase.
We recorded a net loss of approximately $4,000,000 and $2,000,000 for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flow Activities
Our cash flow resulted in a decrease of our cash balance to $14,828 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Operating Activities
We used $2,934,441 of cash in operating activities during the year. For the year ended December 31, 2018, we used $234,673 of cash in operating activities during the year.
Investing Activities
The Company acquired intellectual property totaling $130,000 and property and equipment totaling $1,464,494 in 2019 and placed security deposits totaling $35,000 and acquired property and equipment totaling $581,632 in 2018.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31,2019 and 2018, we funded $2,781,659 and $618,322 of our working capital requirements through the proceeds from the sale of our equity securities. Additionally, we raised $1,455,000 and $480,000 from proceeds from convertible debt primarily from related parties in 2019 and 2018, respectively.
We have sustained a net loss of approximately $4.0 and $2.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. We have an accumulated deficit of approximately $38.8 million at December 31, 2019. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Our financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and the settlement of liabilities and commitments in the normal course of business.
The independent auditors’ reports on our financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 contain explanatory paragraphs expressing substantial doubt as to our ability to continue as a going concern.
Failure to successfully continue to grow operational revenues could harm our profitability and adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations. We face risks inherent in a new business, including the need for significant additional capital, management’s potential underestimation of initial and ongoing costs, and potential delays and other problems in connection with establishing sales channels.
We are continuing our plan to further grow and expand operations and seek sources of capital to pay our contractual obligations as they come due. Management believes that its current operating strategy will provide the opportunity for us to continue as a going concern as long as we are able to obtain additional financing; however, there is no assurance this will occur. The accompanying consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary if we are unable to continue as a going concern.
Uncertainties and Trends
Our operations and possible revenues are dependent now and in the future upon the following factors:
● Whether we successfully develop and commercialize products from our research and development activities.
● If we fail to compete effectively in the intensely competitive biotechnology area, our operations and market position will be negatively impacted.
● If we fail to successfully execute our planned partnering and out-licensing of products or technologies, our future performance will be adversely affected.
● The recent economic downturn and related credit and financial market crisis may adversely affect our ability to obtain financing, conduct our operations and realize opportunities to successfully bring our technologies to market.
● Biotechnology industry related litigation is substantial and may continue to rise, leading to greater costs and unpredictable litigation.
● If we fail to comply with extensive legal/regulatory requirements affecting the healthcare industry, we will face increased costs, and possibly penalties and business losses.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
In preparing the financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (U.S. GAAP), we have adopted various accounting policies. Our most significant accounting policies are disclosed in Note 2 to the financial statements.
The preparation of the financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Our estimates and assumptions, including those related to the ability to continue as going concern, legal proceedings, the recoverability of inventory, long-lived assets, the fair value of stock-based compensation and the fair value of warrant liabilities are updated as appropriate, which in most cases is at least quarterly. We base our estimates on historical experience, or various assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances and the results form the basis for making judgments about the reported values of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. Actual results may materially differ from these estimates.
Estimates are considered to be critical if they meet both of the following criteria: (1) the estimate requires assumptions about material matters that are uncertain at the time the accounting estimates are made, and (2) other materially different estimates could have been reasonably made or material changes in the estimates are reasonably likely to occur from period to period. Our critical accounting estimates include the following:
Revenue Recognition: In general, we record revenue when persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, services have been rendered or product delivery has occurred, the sales price to the customer is fixed or determinable, and collectability is reasonably assured. Provision for sales returns will be estimated based on the Company’s historical return experience. The Company adopted ASU 2014-09, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers” (Topic 606) and other associated standards on January 1, 2018, using the modified retrospective method, which did not have a material impact on the timing and amount of product revenues.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts: Our accounts receivable are stated at estimated net realizable value. Accounts receivable are comprised of balances due from customers net of estimated allowances for uncollectible accounts. In determining collectability, historical trends are evaluated and specific customer issues are reviewed to arrive at appropriate allowances.
Long-Lived Assets: The carrying value of long-lived assets is reviewed annually and on a regular basis for the existence of facts and circumstances that may suggest impairment. If indicators of impairment are present, we determine whether the sum of the estimated undiscounted future cash flows attributable to the long-lived asset in question is less than its carrying amount. If less, we measure the amount of the impairment based on the amount that the carrying value of the impaired asset exceeds the discounted cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposal of the impaired assets.
Share-Based Compensation: We record share-based compensation in accordance with FASB ASC 718, Stock Compensation. FASB ASC 718 requires that the cost resulting from all share-based transactions are recorded in the financial statements over the respective service periods. It establishes fair value as the measurement objective in accounting for share-based payment arrangements and requires all entities to apply a fair-value-based measurement in accounting for share-based payment transactions with employees. FASB ASC 718 also establishes fair value as the measurement objective for transactions in which an entity acquires goods or services from non-employees in share-based payment transactions.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not entered into any transaction, agreement or other contractual arrangement with an entity unconsolidated with us under whom we have:
● An obligation under a guarantee contract.
● A retained or contingent interest in assets transferred to the unconsolidated entity or similar arrangement that serves as credit, liquidity or market risk support to such entity for such assets.
● Any obligation, including a contingent obligation, under a contract that would be accounted for as a derivative instrument.
● Any obligation, including a contingent obligation, arising out of a variable interest in an unconsolidated entity that is held by us and material to us where such entity provides financing, liquidity, market risk or credit risk support to, or engages in leasing, hedging or research and development services with us.
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements or commitments that have a current or future effect on its financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources that is material, other than those which may be disclosed in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and the audited Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes.