Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
Certain statements contained in this annual report, and certain statements contained in our future filings with the SEC, in our press releases or in our other public or stockholder communications contain or incorporate by reference certain forward-looking statements which are based on various assumptions (some of which are beyond our control) and may be identified by reference to a future period or periods or by the use of forward-looking terminology, such as “may,” “will,” “believe,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “continue,” or similar terms or variations on those terms or the negative of those terms. Actual results could differ materially from those set forth in forward-looking statements due to a variety of factors, including, but not limited to, changes in interest rates; changes in the yield curve; changes in prepayment rates; the availability of mortgage-backed securities and other securities for purchase; the availability of financing and, if available, the terms of any financing; changes in the market value of our assets; changes in business conditions and the general economy; our ability to grow our commercial, residential credit and middle market businesses; credit risks related to our investments in credit risk transfer securities, residential mortgage-backed securities and related residential mortgage credit assets, commercial real estate assets and corporate debt; risks related to investments in MSRs; our ability to consummate any contemplated investment opportunities; changes in government regulations or policy affecting our business; our ability to maintain our qualification as a REIT for U.S. federal income tax purposes; our ability to maintain our exemption from registration under the Investment Company Act; and risks and uncertainties related to Coronavirus Disease 2019 (“COVID-19”), including as related to adverse economic conditions on real-estate related assets and financing conditions. For a discussion of the risks and uncertainties which could cause actual results to differ from those contained in the forward-looking statements, see “Risk Factors” in this annual report on Form 10-K and any subsequent quarterly reports on Form 10-Q or current reports on Form 8-K. We do not undertake, and specifically disclaim any obligation, to publicly release the result of any revisions which may be made to any forward-looking statements to reflect the occurrence of anticipated or unanticipated events or circumstances after the date of such statements.
All references to “Annaly,” “we,” “us,” or “our” mean Annaly Capital Management, Inc. and all entities owned by us, except where it is made clear that the term means only the parent company. Refer to the section titled “Glossary of Terms” located at the end of this Item 7 for definitions of commonly used terms in this annual report on Form 10-K.
This section of our Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in Part II, Item 7. “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Overview
We are a leading diversified capital manager that invests in and finances residential and commercial assets. Our principal business objective is to generate net income for distribution to our stockholders and optimize our returns through prudent management of our diversified investment strategies. We are an internally-managed Maryland corporation founded in 1997 that has elected to be taxed as a REIT. Prior to the closing of the Internalization (as defined in Item 1 under “Closing of the Internalization and Termination of the Management Agreement”) on June 30, 2020, we were externally managed by Annaly Management Company LLC (our “Former Manager”). Our common stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol “NLY.”
We use our capital coupled with borrowed funds to invest primarily in real estate related investments, earning the spread between the yield on our assets and the cost of our borrowings and hedging activities.
For a full discussion of our business, refer to the section titled “Business Overview” of Part I, Item 1. “Business.”
Business Environment and COVID-19
The themes that have dominated financial markets since the elevated volatility seen in March and April 2020 remain unchanged. Fiscal stimulus has supported businesses and consumers most negatively impacted by COVID-19 while the Federal Reserve’s (“Fed”) unprecedented monetary policy actions eased financial conditions and contained interest rate volatility. These factors drove our strong performance to close out the year, delivering an economic return of 5.1% for the fourth quarter and 1.8% for 2020. Throughout the year, we returned $1.4 billion aggregate in common and preferred dividends to our shareholders, signaling meaningful resilience following the historic disruption seen in March and April.
Interest rates ended 2020 near their highest levels since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic reflecting optimism about the post-COVID recovery in spite of negative developments of record U.S. virus cases, tighter restrictions and resulting lackluster economic growth particularly in the U.S. service sector. The rapid COVID-19 vaccine development and plans for deployment, combined with the relatively healthy consumer balance sheets, suggest that the U.S. economy may rebound at a faster pace than during traditional economic downturns once a majority of the population reaches immunity, though meaningful uncertainties remain about both the timing of immunity and the subsequent recovery pace.
At the end of 2020, our capital allocation remained tilted towards Agency mortgage-backed securities (“MBS”), representing 78% of the aggregate portfolio, compared to 74% one year ago. However, this year-over-year snapshot masks more recent increases in activity in our residential credit and middle market lending businesses, which saw strong investor sponsorship and improving fundamentals as markets signal a cyclical recovery. As Agency MBS spreads have continued to tighten given Fed and bank sector demand for the product, select credit sectors have allowed for targeted, attractive opportunities. While opportunistic, Annaly continues with its disciplined and defensive-minded credit focus, which is necessary given overall tight asset spreads.
Somewhat offsetting the effect from tight asset spreads, current financing conditions are among the most favorable seen in Annaly’s history. The liquidity created through the Fed’s monetary policy actions have led to absolute low level of rates and a flat term structure of the repo curve. Favorable financing conditions have allowed us to increase our net interest margin (excluding PAA) from 1.41% at the end of 2019 to 1.98% at the end of 2020, as cheaper financing more than offset the decline in asset yields driven by the aforementioned spread compression. Additionally, securitization markets have rebounded substantially, resulting in better execution levels than one year ago, and provide attractive non-recourse term financing to bolster our residential credit asset investment strategy and diversify financing for our whole loan business.
Business Continuity
Our well-established Business Continuity Planning (“BCP”) was designed to ensure continued, effective operations through a variety of scenarios including natural disasters and disease pandemics. It identifies critical systems, processes, roles and third parties, and can be adjusted on a real-time basis to address situations as they arise.
The BCP is regularly updated and tested. Annual testing includes extensive, remote Disaster Recovery testing and tabletop exercise scenarios with management. Key tenets of the planning include active communication between our Crisis Response Team, which is comprised of senior leaders across a number of functions, and our internal and external stakeholders to afford efficient, thoughtful, effective responses to evolving emergency situations.
Historical tabletop exercises have included use of CDC Influenza Pandemic exercise materials. That exercise documented our response and possible impacts to a variety of scenarios, including those in which “shelter in place orders” were required and response/ impact assessments to those scenarios. Regular meetings were commenced to implement and review active internal and external communications planning. These exercises, along with regulatory and industry guidance, informed our staged response to the conditions created by COVID-19. We took proactive actions, which included canceling non-essential travel and instituting 100% remote working, ahead of New York State-mandated requirements. To protect the health and well-being of our employees, their families and communities remote work requirements began in phases in early March, culminating with a
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
company-wide exercise on March 13, 2020 to test connectivity and functionality. All employees were able to successfully perform their duties in this testing and we have operated largely remotely since that time.
A majority of our business activities continues to be performed remotely, though we have seen a limited number of employees return to the office on a voluntary and periodic basis. We continue to monitor guidance from federal, state and local authorities to gauge how to further proceed in any efforts to return to the office.
Economic Environment
The pace of economic growth in 2020 slowed sharply, not only in the United States but worldwide, as the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic affected nearly all ways of life and disrupted many aspects of the economy. The far-reaching consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic led U.S. gross domestic product (“GDP”) to decline by 3.5% year-over-year in 2020, in turn marking the largest decline in economic activity during a calendar year in more than 70 years. The disruptions caused by the pandemic were unique in that they primarily impacted the service sector of the economy, a sector that has been a source of relative stability during prior economic downturns. Other parts of the economy, including goods consumption and housing, have recovered from the initial pandemic-driven downturn and these sectors are now above 2019 output levels. All of this suggests that the economy is currently relatively bifurcated, requiring U.S. health officials to work to defeat the virus before economic activity can return to pre-pandemic levels in aggregate.
The sharp economic contraction led the unemployment rate to rise to 6.7% in December 2020, nearly twice as high as the unemployment rate seen in December 2019 according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The rise in the unemployment rate likely understates the number of jobs lost in 2020 as the employment-to-population ratio fell to 57.4%, suggesting that 3.5% of the population, or roughly 9 million people, no longer held a job at the end of 2020 compared to one year ago. Wage growth, as measured by the year-over-year change in private sector average hourly earnings rose sharply, reading 5.1% in the month of December 2020 compared to 3.0% in December 2019. The sharp increase in wages, however, appears to be driven by changes in the underlying composition of employees by industry, as sectors with generally lower wages, such as leisure and hospitality services, have seen outsized job losses relative to sectors with higher wages. Alternative measures of wage growth, such as the Employment Cost Index or the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta’s Wage Tracker show meaningfully less wage growth.
Inflation remained muted into the economic downturn as measured by the year-over-year changes in the Personal Consumption Expenditure Chain Price Index (“PCE”). The headline PCE measure increased by 1.3% year-over-year in December 2020. The more stable core PCE measure, which excludes volatile food and energy prices, registered a similar 1.5% year-over-year increase. Although both inflation measures remain somewhat below the Fed’s 2.0% inflation target, the Fed expects inflation to recover towards its target in coming years as the economy begins to recover from the economic downturn.
The Fed conducts monetary policy with a dual mandate: full employment and price stability. Given the contraction in economic activity witnessed following the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Fed increased its monetary policy support at unprecedented speed and size. The target range for the Federal Funds rate was cut from 1.50% - 1.75% in December 2019 to 0.0% - 0.25% in March 2020. Following the interest rate cuts, the Fed provided guidance that short-term interest rates will remain near current levels “until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Fed assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time” as stated in the December 2020 Federal Open Market Committee meeting statement. In addition to the zero-interest rate policy, the Fed restarted its asset purchase programs, increasing its holdings of Treasury securities and Agency MBS by a total of $2.0 trillion and $631 billion, respectively. Asset purchases continued at the end of 2020 at a pace of $80 billion per month in Treasury securities and $40 billion per month in MBS. Beyond rate policy and asset purchases, the Fed also announced several lending programs to various other market sectors, such as corporate bonds, municipals, and small businesses, among others. These lending programs largely concluded their activities at the end of December 2020 but could be revived should the economic situation deteriorate.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, yields on the 10-year U.S. Treasury note declined by 101 bps primarily in the first half of the year as a sharp slowdown in global economic growth and heightened uncertainties around the economic recovery led to strong demand for interest rate products and the aforementioned unprecedented fiscal and monetary stimulus. The mortgage basis, or the spread between the 30-year Agency MBS coupon and 10-year U.S. Treasury rate, had a volatile year, rising meaningfully in the first quarter before retracing given strong demand for MBS in the second half of the year.
The following table below presents interest rates and spreads at each date presented:
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) Transition Working Group
We have established a cross-functional LIBOR transition committee to determine our transition plan and facilitate an orderly transition to alternative reference rates. Our plan includes steps to evaluate exposure, review contracts, assess impact to our business, process and technology and define a communication strategy with shareholders, regulators and other stakeholders. The committee also continues to engage with industry working groups and other market participants regarding the transition. In October 2020, as part of the transition from LIBOR, we participated in the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (“CME”) Group’s transitioning for price alignment and discounting for USD OTC cleared swaps from the daily effective federal funds rate to the secured overnight financing rate (“SOFR”). As a result of this activity, our existing swap and swaption positions have been updated with the new SOFR discounting curve and basis swaps entered into during this transition were sold in the CME Group’s auction on October 19, 2020. We continue to remain on track with our LIBOR transition plan, which requires different solutions depending on the underlying asset or liability. Most U.S. LIBOR tenors have been extended from December 31, 2021 to June 2023. Similar to the rest of the market, the bulk of our exposure is in derivatives contracts. Certain contracts, such as interest rate swaps, have an orderly market transition already in process, whereas other contracts, such as loan agreements require bilateral amendments with transition currently in process and adequate time left to resolve. See “Risks Related to Our Investing, Portfolio Management and Financing Activities-Changes in the method pursuant to which LIBOR is determined and potential discontinuation of LIBOR may affect our results.”
Results of Operations
The results of our operations are affected by various factors, many of which are beyond our control. Certain of such risks and uncertainties are described herein (see “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” above) and in Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors”.
This Management Discussion and Analysis section contains analysis and discussion of financial results computed in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) and non-GAAP measurements. To supplement our consolidated financial statements, which are prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP, we provide non-GAAP financial measures to enhance investor understanding of our period-over-period operating performance and business trends, as well as for assessing our performance versus that of industry peers.
Refer to the “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” section for additional information.
Net Income (Loss) Summary
The following table presents financial information related to our results of operations as of and for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
GAAP
Net income (loss) was ($889.8) million, which includes $1.4 million attributable to noncontrolling interests, or ($0.73) per average basic common share, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to ($2.2) billion, which includes ($0.2) million attributable to noncontrolling interests, or ($1.60) per average basic common share, for the same period in 2019. We attribute the majority of the change in net income (loss) to favorable changes in net gains (losses) on other derivatives, net gains (losses) on disposal of investments and other and net interest income, partially offset by unfavorable changes in the net interest component of interest rate swaps and net unrealized gains (losses) on instruments measured at fair value through earnings and realized gains (losses) on termination or maturity of interest rate swaps. Net gains (losses) on other derivatives was $756.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to ($680.8) million for the same period in 2019. Net gains (losses) on disposal of investments and other was $661.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to ($47.9) million for the same period in 2019. Net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.3 billion compared to $1.0 billion for the same period in 2019. The net interest component of interest rate swaps was ($207.9) million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $351.4 million for the same period in 2019. Realized gains (losses) on termination or maturity of interest rate swaps was ($1.9) billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to ($1.4) billion for the same period in 2019. Refer to the section titled “Realized and Unrealized Gains (Losses)” located within this Item 7 for additional information related to these changes.
Non-GAAP
Core earnings (excluding premium amortization adjustment (“PAA”)) were $1.7 billion, or $1.10 per average common share, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $1.6 billion, or $1.00 per average common share, for the same period in 2019. The changes in core earnings (excluding PAA) for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019 were primarily due to lower interest expense from lower borrowing rates and average interest bearing liabilities, and higher TBA dollar roll income, partially offset by lower coupon income resulting from a decrease in the average yield on interest earnings assets and lower average interest earning assets, and unfavorable changes in the net interest component of interest rate swaps.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
To supplement our consolidated financial statements, which are prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP, we provide the following non-GAAP financial measures:
•core earnings (excluding PAA);
•core earnings (excluding PAA) attributable to common stockholders;
•core earnings (excluding PAA) per average common share;
•annualized core return on average equity (excluding PAA);
•interest income (excluding PAA);
•economic interest expense;
•economic net interest income (excluding PAA);
•average yield on interest earning assets (excluding PAA);
•average economic cost of interest bearing liabilities;
•net interest margin (excluding PAA); and
•net interest spread (excluding PAA).
These measures should not be considered a substitute for, or superior to, financial measures computed in accordance with GAAP. While intended to offer a fuller understanding of our results and operations, non-GAAP financial measures also have limitations. For example, we may calculate our non-GAAP metrics, such as core earnings (excluding PAA), or the PAA, differently than our peers making comparative analysis difficult. Additionally, in the case of non-GAAP measures that exclude the PAA, the amount of amortization expense excluding the PAA is not necessarily representative of the amount of future periodic amortization nor is it indicative of the term over which we will amortize the remaining unamortized premium. Changes to actual and estimated prepayments will impact the timing and amount of premium amortization and, as such, both GAAP and non-GAAP results.
These non-GAAP measures provide additional detail to enhance investor understanding of our period-over-period operating performance and business trends, as well as for assessing our performance versus that of industry peers. Additional information pertaining to our use of these non-GAAP financial measures, including discussion of how each such measure may be useful to investors, and reconciliations to their most directly comparable GAAP results are provided below.
Core earnings (excluding PAA), core earnings (excluding PAA) attributable to common stockholders, core earnings (excluding PAA) per average common share and annualized core return on average equity (excluding PAA)
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Our principal business objective is to generate net income for distribution to our stockholders and optimize our returns through prudent management of our diversified investment strategies. We generate net income by earning a net interest spread on our investment portfolio, which is a function of interest income from our investment portfolio less financing, hedging and operating costs. Core earnings (excluding PAA), which is defined as the sum of (a) economic net interest income, (b) TBA dollar roll income and CMBX coupon income, (c) realized amortization of MSRs, (d) other income (loss) (excluding depreciation and amortization expense on real estate and related intangibles, non-core income allocated to equity method investments and other non-core components of other income (loss)), (e) general and administrative expenses (excluding transaction expenses and non-recurring items), and (f) income taxes (excluding the income tax effect of non-core income (loss) items), and excludes (g) the premium amortization adjustment (“PAA”) representing the cumulative impact on prior periods, but not the current period, of quarter-over-quarter changes in estimated long-term prepayment speeds related to our Agency mortgage-backed securities, is used by management and, we believe, used by analysts and investors to measure our progress in achieving our principal business objective.
We seek to fulfill our principal business objective through a variety of factors including portfolio construction, the degree of market risk exposure and related hedge profile, and the use and forms of leverage, all while operating within the parameters of our capital allocation policy and risk governance framework.
We believe these non-GAAP measures provide management and investors with additional details regarding our underlying operating results and investment portfolio trends by (i) making adjustments to account for the disparate reporting of changes in fair value where certain instruments are reflected in GAAP net income (loss) while others are reflected in other comprehensive income (loss), and (ii) by excluding certain unrealized, non-cash or episodic components of GAAP net income (loss) in order to provide additional transparency into the operating performance of our portfolio. Annualized core return on average equity (excluding PAA), which is calculated by dividing core earnings (excluding PAA) over average stockholders’ equity, provides investors with additional detail on the core earnings generated by our invested equity capital.
The following table presents a reconciliation of GAAP financial results to non-GAAP core earnings for the periods presented:
(1) Includes $3.6 million of loss provision on the Company’s unfunded loan commitments for the year ended December 31, 2020, which is reported in Other income (loss) in the Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss).
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
(2) Includes depreciation and amortization expense related to equity method investments.
(3) Represents unrealized (gains) losses allocated to equity interests in a portfolio of MSR which is a component of Other income (loss).
(4) Represents the amount of consideration paid for the acquisition of MTGE in excess of the fair value of net assets acquired. This amount is primarily attributable to a decline in portfolio valuation between the pricing and closing dates of the transaction and is consistent with changes in market values observed for similar instruments over the same period.
(5) Includes costs incurred in connection with securitizations of residential whole loans. The year ended December 31, 2020 also includes costs incurred in connection with the Internalization, the CEO search process and a securitization of Agency mortgage-backed securities. The year ended December 31, 2019 also includes costs incurred in connection with the securitization of commercial loans and Agency mortgage-backed securities. The year ended December 31, 2018 also includes costs incurred in connection with the acquisition of MTGE Investment Corp.
(6) TBA dollar roll income and CMBX coupon income each represent a component of Net gains (losses) on other derivatives. CMBX coupon income totaled $5.8 million, $4.6 million and $2.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
(7) MSR amortization represents the portion of changes in fair value that is attributable to the realization of estimated cash flows on the Company’s MSR portfolio and is reported as a component of Net unrealized gains (losses) on instruments measured at fair value.
(8) Represents a non-GAAP financial measure. Refer to disclosures within this section above for additional information on non-GAAP financial measures.
From time to time, we enter into TBA forward contracts as an alternate means of investing in and financing Agency mortgage-backed securities. A TBA contract is an agreement to purchase or sell, for future delivery, an Agency mortgage-backed security with a specified issuer, term and coupon. A TBA dollar roll represents a transaction where TBA contracts with the same terms but different settlement dates are simultaneously bought and sold. The TBA contract settling in the later month typically prices at a discount to the earlier month contract with the difference in price commonly referred to as the “drop”. The drop is a reflection of the expected net interest income from an investment in similar Agency mortgage-backed securities, net of an implied financing cost, that would be foregone as a result of settling the contract in the later month rather than in the earlier month. The drop between the current settlement month price and the forward settlement month price occurs because in the TBA dollar roll market, the party providing the financing is the party that would retain all principal and interest payments accrued during the financing period. Accordingly, TBA dollar roll income generally represents the economic equivalent of the net interest income earned on the underlying Agency mortgage-backed security less an implied financing cost.
TBA dollar roll transactions are accounted for under GAAP as a series of derivatives transactions. The fair value of TBA derivatives is based on methods similar to those used to value Agency mortgage-backed securities. We record TBA derivatives at fair value on our Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition and recognize periodic changes in fair value in Net gains (losses) on other derivatives in our Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss), which includes both unrealized and realized gains and losses on derivatives (excluding interest rate swaps).
TBA dollar roll income is calculated as the difference in price between two TBA contracts with the same terms but different settlement dates multiplied by the notional amount of the TBA contract. Although accounted for as derivatives, TBA dollar rolls capture the economic equivalent of net interest income, or carry, on the underlying Agency mortgage-backed security (interest income less an implied cost of financing). TBA dollar roll income is reported as a component of Net gains (losses) on other derivatives in the Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss).
The CMBX index is a synthetic tradable index referencing a basket of 25 commercial mortgage-backed securities of a particular rating and vintage. The CMBX index allows investors to take a long position (referred to as selling protection) or short position (referred to as purchasing protection) on the respective basket of commercial mortgage-backed securities and is structured as a “pay-as-you-go” contract whereby the protection seller receives and the protection buyer pays a standardized running coupon on the contracted notional amount. Additionally, the protection seller is obligated to pay to the protection buyer the amount of principal losses and/or coupon shortfalls on the underlying commercial mortgage-backed securities as they occur. We report income (expense) on CMBX positions in Net gains (losses) on other derivatives in the Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss). The coupon payments received or paid on CMBX positions is equivalent to interest income (expense) and therefore included in core earnings (excluding PAA).
Premium Amortization Expense
In accordance with GAAP, we amortize or accrete premiums or discounts into interest income for our Agency mortgage-backed securities, excluding interest-only securities, multifamily and reverse mortgages, taking into account estimates of future principal prepayments in the calculation of the effective yield. We recalculate the effective yield as differences between anticipated and actual prepayments occur. Using third-party model and market information to project future cash flows and expected remaining lives of securities, the effective interest rate determined for each security is applied as if it had been in place from the date of the security’s acquisition. The amortized cost of the security is then adjusted to the amount that would have existed had the new effective yield been applied since the acquisition date. The adjustment to amortized cost is offset with a charge or credit to interest income. Changes in interest rates and other market factors will impact prepayment speed projections and the amount of premium amortization recognized in any given period.
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Our GAAP metrics include the unadjusted impact of amortization and accretion associated with this method. Certain of our non-GAAP metrics exclude the effect of the PAA, which quantifies the component of premium amortization representing the cumulative impact on prior periods, but not the current period, of quarter-over-quarter changes in estimated long-term Constant Prepayment Rate (“CPR”).
The following table illustrates the impact of the PAA on premium amortization expense for our Residential Securities portfolio and residential securities transferred or pledged to securitization vehicles, for the periods presented:
Interest income (excluding PAA), economic interest expense and economic net interest income (excluding PAA)
Interest income (excluding PAA) represents interest income excluding the effect of the premium amortization adjustment, and serves as the basis for deriving average yield on interest earning assets (excluding PAA), net interest spread (excluding PAA) and net interest margin (excluding PAA), which are discussed below. We believe this measure provides management and investors with additional detail to enhance their understanding of our operating results and trends by excluding the component of premium amortization expense representing the cumulative effect of quarter-over-quarter changes in estimated long-term prepayment speeds related to our Agency mortgage-backed securities (other than interest-only securities, multifamily and reverse mortgages), which can obscure underlying trends in the performance of the portfolio.
Economic interest expense is comprised of GAAP interest expense and the net interest component of interest rate swaps. We use interest rate swaps to manage our exposure to changing interest rates on repurchase agreements by economically hedging cash flows associated with these borrowings. Accordingly, adding the net interest component of interest rate swaps to interest expense, as computed in accordance with GAAP, reflects the total contractual interest expense and thus, provides investors with additional information about the cost of our financing strategy. We may use market agreed coupon (“MAC”) interest rate swaps in which we may receive or make a payment at the time of entering into such interest rate swap to compensate for the off-market nature of such interest rate swap. In accordance with GAAP, upfront payments associated with MAC interest rate swaps are not reflected in the net interest component of interest rate swaps in the Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss). We did not enter into any MAC interest rate swaps during the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
Similarly, economic net interest income (excluding PAA), as computed below, provides investors with additional information to enhance their understanding of the net economics of our primary business operations.
The following tables provide GAAP measures of interest expense and net interest income and details with respect to reconciling the aforementioned line items on a non-GAAP basis for each respective period:
Interest Income (excluding PAA)
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Economic Interest Expense and Economic Net Interest Income (excluding PAA)
Experienced and Projected Long-Term CPR
Prepayment speeds, as reflected by the CPR and interest rates vary according to the type of investment, conditions in financial markets, competition and other factors, none of which can be predicted with any certainty. In general, as prepayment speeds and expectations of prepayment speeds on our Agency mortgage-backed securities portfolio increase, related purchase premium amortization increases, thereby reducing the yield on such assets. The following table presents the weighted average experienced CPR and weighted average projected long-term CPR on our Agency mortgage-backed securities portfolio as of and for the periods presented.
(1) For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
(2) At December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Average Yield on Interest Earning Assets (excluding PAA), Net Interest Spread (excluding PAA), Net Interest Margin (excluding PAA) and Average Economic Cost of Interest Bearing Liabilities
Net interest spread (excluding PAA), which is the difference between the average yield on interest earning assets (excluding PAA) and the average economic cost of interest bearing liabilities, which represents annualized economic interest expense divided by average interest bearing liabilities, and net interest margin (excluding PAA), which is calculated as the sum of interest income (excluding PAA) plus TBA dollar roll income and CMBX coupon income less interest expense and the net interest component of interest rate swaps divided by the sum of average interest earning assets plus average TBA contract and CMBX balances, provide management with additional measures of our profitability that management relies upon in monitoring the performance of the business.
Disclosure of these measures, which are presented below, provides investors with additional detail regarding how management evaluates our performance.
Net Interest Spread (excluding PAA)
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Net Interest Margin (excluding PAA)
(1)Represents a non-GAAP financial measure. Refer to the “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” section for additional information.
(2)TBA dollar roll income and CMBX coupon income each represent a component of Net gains (losses) on other derivatives. CMBX coupon income totaled $5.8 million, $4.6 million and $2.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018, respectively.
Economic Interest Expense and Average Economic Cost of Interest Bearing Liabilities
Typically, our largest expense is the cost of interest bearing liabilities and the net interest component of interest rate swaps. The table below shows our average interest bearing liabilities and average economic cost of interest bearing liabilities as compared to average one-month and average six-month LIBOR for the periods presented.
Economic Cost of Funds on Average Interest Bearing Liabilities
2020 Compared with 2019
Economic interest expense decreased by $1.3 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. The change was due to lower borrowing rates and decreases in average interest bearing liabilities, partially offset by the change in the net interest component of interest rate swaps, which was ($207.9) million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $351.4 million for the same period in 2019.
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
We do not manage our portfolio to have a pre-designated amount of borrowings at quarter or year end. Our borrowings at period end are a snapshot of our borrowings as of a date, and this number may differ from average borrowings over the period for a number of reasons. The mortgage-backed securities we own pay principal and interest towards the end of each month and the mortgage-backed securities we purchase are typically settled during the beginning of the month. As a result, depending on the amount of mortgage-backed securities we have committed to purchase, we may retain the principal and interest we receive in the prior month, or we may use it to pay down our borrowings. Moreover, we generally use interest rate swaps, swaptions and other derivative instruments to hedge our portfolio, and as we pledge or receive collateral under these agreements, our borrowings on any given day may be increased or decreased. Our average borrowings during a quarter may differ from period end borrowings as we implement our portfolio management strategies and risk management strategies over changing market conditions by increasing or decreasing leverage. Additionally, these numbers may differ during periods when we conduct equity capital raises, as in certain instances we may purchase additional assets and increase leverage in anticipation of an equity capital raise. Since our average borrowings and period end borrowings can be expected to differ, we believe our average borrowings during a period provide a more accurate representation of our exposure to the risks associated with leverage than our period end borrowings.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the majority of our debt represented repurchase agreements and other secured financing arrangements collateralized by a pledge of our Residential Securities, residential mortgage loans, commercial real estate investments and corporate loans. All of our Residential Securities are currently accepted as collateral for these borrowings. However, we limit our borrowings, and thus our potential asset growth, in order to maintain unused borrowing capacity and maintain the liquidity and strength of our balance sheet.
Realized and Unrealized Gains (Losses)
Realized and unrealized gains (losses) is comprised of net gains (losses) on interest rate swaps, net gains (losses) on disposal of investments and other, net gains (losses) on other derivatives and net unrealized gains (losses) on instruments measured at fair value through earnings. These components of realized and unrealized gains (losses) for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 were as follows:
2020 Compared with 2019
Net gains (losses) on interest rate swaps for the year ended December 31, 2020 was ($3.0) billion compared to ($2.3) billion for the same period in 2019, attributable to an unfavorable change in the net interest component of interest rate swaps and higher realized losses on termination or maturity of interest rate swaps, partially offset by lower unrealized losses on interest rate swaps. The net interest component of interest rate swaps was ($207.9) million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $351.4 million for the same period in 2019, reflecting a decrease in rates combined with the timing of rate resets during the period and changes in notional balance. Realized gains (losses) on termination or maturity of interest rate swaps was ($1.9) billion resulting from interest rate swaps with a notional amount of $104.1 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to ($1.4) billion resulting from the termination or maturity of interest rate swaps with a notional amount of $88.6 billion for the same period in 2019. Unrealized gains (losses) on interest rate swaps was ($0.9) billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to ($1.2) billion for the same period in 2019, which reflected a steeper decline in forward interest rates during the earlier period.
Net gains (losses) on disposal of investments and other was $661.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with ($47.9) million for the same period in 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we disposed of Residential Securities with a carrying value of $51.8 billion for an aggregate net gain of $637.0 million. For the same period in 2019, we disposed of Residential Securities with a carrying value of $25.5 billion for an aggregate net loss of ($37.8) million.
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Net gains (losses) on other derivatives was $756.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to ($680.8) million for the same period in 2019. The change in net gains (losses) on other derivatives was primarily comprised of changes in net gains (losses) on futures contracts, which was ($280.1) million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to ($962.7) million for the same period in 2019 and higher net gains on TBA derivatives, which was $985.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $326.8 million for the same period in 2019.
Net unrealized gains (losses) on instruments measured at fair value through earnings was ($303.0) million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $36.0 million for the same period in 2019, primarily due to unfavorable changes in unrealized gains (losses) on Agency interest-only securities, non-Agency mortgage-backed securities, commercial securitized loans of consolidated VIEs and residential credit risk transfer securities, partially offset by favorable changes in unrealized gains (losses) on commercial debt issued by securitization vehicles for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, a loan loss provision of ($147.6) million was recorded on commercial mortgage and corporate loans compared to ($16.6) million for the same period in 2019. Refer to the “Loans” Note located within Item 15 for additional information related to these loan loss provisions.
Other Income (Loss)
Other income (loss) includes certain revenues and costs associated with our investments in commercial real estate, including rental income and recoveries, net servicing income on MSRs, operating costs as well as depreciation and amortization expense. We report in Other income (loss) items whose amounts, either individually or in the aggregate, would not, in the opinion of management, be meaningful to readers of the financial statements. Given the nature of certain components of this line item, balances may fluctuate from period to period.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative (“G&A”) expenses consist of compensation and management fee (until closing of the Internalization on June 30, 2020) and other expenses. The following table shows our total G&A expenses as compared to average total assets and average equity for the periods presented.
G&A Expenses and Operating Expense Ratios
(1) Includes $11.3 million of transaction costs incurred in connection with securitizations of residential whole loans and Agency mortgage-backed securities as well as costs incurred in connection with the Internalization and costs incurred in connection with the CEO search process for the year ended December 31, 2020. Includes $19.3 million of transaction costs incurred in connection with securitizations of residential whole loans, commercial loans and Agency mortgage-backed securities for the year ended December 31, 2019. Excluding these transaction costs, G&A expenses as a percentage of average total assets and as a percentage of average equity were 0.23% and 1.62%, respectively, and 0.23% and 1.84%, respectively, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
2020 Compared with 2019
G&A expenses decreased $62.4 million to $239.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. The change was primarily due to lower compensation costs, reflecting cost savings related to the Internalization and lower management fees and expense reimbursements to our Former Manager in the first half of 2020 reflecting lower adjusted stockholders’ equity balances compared to the same period in 2019, and lower transaction costs during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019.
Return on Average Equity
The following table shows the components of our annualized return on average equity for the periods presented.
Components of Annualized Return on Average Equity
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Unrealized Gains and Losses - Available-for-Sale Investments
With our available-for-sale accounting treatment on our Agency mortgage-backed securities, which represent the largest portion of assets on balance sheet, as well as certain commercial mortgage-backed securities, unrealized fluctuations in market values of assets do not impact our GAAP net income (loss) but rather are reflected on our balance sheet by changing the carrying value of the asset and stockholders’ equity under accumulated other comprehensive income (loss). As a result of this fair value accounting treatment, our book value and book value per share are likely to fluctuate far more than if we used amortized cost accounting. As a result, comparisons with companies that use amortized cost accounting for some or all of their balance sheet may not be meaningful.
The table below shows cumulative unrealized gains and losses on our available-for-sale investments reflected in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition.
Unrealized changes in the estimated fair value of available-for-sale investments may have a direct effect on our potential earnings and dividends: positive changes will increase our equity base and allow us to increase our borrowing capacity while negative changes tend to reduce borrowing capacity. A very large negative change in the net fair value of our available-for-sale Residential Securities might impair our liquidity position, requiring us to sell assets with the potential result of realized losses upon sale.
The fair value of these securities being less than amortized cost at December 31, 2020 is solely due to market conditions and not the quality of the assets. Substantially all of the Agency mortgage-backed securities are “AAA” rated or carry an implied “AAA” rating. The investments are not considered to be other-than-temporarily impaired because we currently have the ability and intent to hold the investments to maturity or for a period of time sufficient for a forecasted market price recovery up to or beyond the cost of the investments, and it is not more likely than not that we will be required to sell the investments before recovery of the amortized cost bases, which may be maturity. Also, we are guaranteed payment of the principal and interest amounts of the securities by the respective issuing Agency.
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Financial Condition
Total assets were $88.5 billion and $130.3 billion at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The change, consistent with our portfolio repositioning to strengthen our balance sheet in the first quarter of 2020, was primarily due to a decrease in Agency mortgage-backed securities of $39.3 billion, including assets transferred or pledged to securitization vehicles, residential mortgage loans of $0.7 billion and commercial real estate debt investments of $0.4 billion. Our portfolio composition, net equity allocation and debt-to-net equity ratio by asset class were as follows at December 31, 2020:
Residential Securities
Substantially all of our Agency mortgage-backed securities at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 were backed by single-family residential mortgage loans and were secured with a first lien position on the underlying single-family properties. Our mortgage-backed securities were largely Freddie Mac, Fannie Mae or Ginnie Mae pass through certificates or CMOs, which carry an actual or implied “AAA” rating. We carry all of our Agency mortgage-backed securities at fair value on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition.
We accrete discount balances as an increase to interest income over the expected life of the related interest earning assets and we amortize premium balances as a decrease to interest income over the expected life of the related interest earning assets. At December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 we had on our Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition a total of $88.3 million and $156.9 million, respectively, of unamortized discount (which is the difference between the remaining principal value and current amortized cost of our Residential Securities, excluding securities transferred or pledged to securitization vehicles, acquired at a price below principal value) and a total of $4.0 billion and $5.3 billion, respectively, of unamortized premium (which is the difference between the remaining principal value and the current amortized cost of our Residential Securities, excluding securities transferred or pledged to securitization vehicles, acquired at a price above principal value).
The weighted average experienced prepayment speed on our Agency mortgage-backed securities portfolio for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was 20.2% and 12.7%, respectively. The weighted average projected long-term prepayment speed on our Agency mortgage-backed securities portfolio as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 was 16.4% and 13.9%, respectively.
Given our current portfolio composition, if mortgage principal prepayment rates were to increase over the life of our mortgage-backed securities, all other factors being equal, our net interest income would decrease during the life of these mortgage-backed securities as we would be required to amortize our net premium balance into income over a shorter time period. Similarly, if mortgage principal prepayment rates were to decrease over the life of our mortgage-backed securities, all other factors being equal, our net interest income would increase during the life of these mortgage-backed securities as we would amortize our net premium balance over a longer time period.
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
The following tables present our Residential Securities, excluding securities transferred or pledged to securitization vehicles, that were carried at fair value at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
The following table summarizes certain characteristics of our Residential Securities (excluding interest-only mortgage-backed securities) and interest-only mortgage-backed securities, excluding securities transferred or pledged to securitization vehicles, at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
The following tables summarize certain characteristics of our Residential Credit portfolio at December 31, 2020.
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes the effect on our liquidity and cash flows from contractual obligations at December 31, 2020. The table does not include the effect of net interest rate payments on our interest rate swap agreements. The net swap payments will fluctuate based on monthly changes in the receive rate. At December 31, 2020, the interest rate swaps had a net fair value of ($1.0) billion.
In the coming periods, we expect to continue to finance our Residential Securities in a manner that is largely consistent with our current operations via repurchase agreements. We may use securitization structures, credit facilities, mortgages payable or other term financing structures to finance certain of our assets. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received $19.6 billion from principal repayments and $52.6 billion in cash from disposal of Residential Securities. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we received $17.2 billion from principal repayments and $25.5 billion in cash from disposal of Residential Securities.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships which would have been established for the sole purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
We have limited future funding commitments related to certain of our unconsolidated joint ventures. In addition, we have provided customary non-recourse carve-out and environmental guarantees (or underlying indemnities with respect thereto) with respect to mortgage loans held by subsidiaries of these unconsolidated joint ventures. We believe that the likelihood of making any payments under these guarantees is remote, and have not accrued a related liability at December 31, 2020.
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Capital Management
Maintaining a strong balance sheet that can support the business even in times of economic stress and market volatility is of critical importance to our business strategy. A strong and robust capital position is essential to executing our investment strategy. Our capital strategy is predicated on a strong capital position, which enables us to execute our investment strategy regardless of the market environment. Our capital policy defines the parameters and principles supporting a comprehensive capital management practice.
The major risks impacting capital are capital, liquidity and funding risk, investment/market risk, credit risk, counterparty risk, operational risk and compliance, regulatory and legal risk. For further discussion of the risks we are subject to, please see Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” of this annual report on Form 10-K.
Capital requirements are based on maintaining levels above approved thresholds, ensuring the quality of our capital appropriately reflects our asset mix, market and funding structure. In the event we fall short of our internal thresholds, we will consider appropriate actions which may include asset sales, changes in asset mix, reductions in asset purchases or originations, issuance of capital or other capital enhancing or risk reduction strategies.
Stockholders’ Equity
The following table provides a summary of total stockholders’ equity at December 31, 2020 and 2019:
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Capital Stock
Common Stock
The following table provides activity related to our Direct Purchase and Dividend Reinvestment Program for the periods presented:
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we closed the public offering of an original issuance of 75.0 million shares of common stock for proceeds of $730.5 million before deducting offering expenses. In connection with the offering, we granted the underwriters a thirty-day option to purchase up to an additional 11.3 million shares of common stock, which the underwriters exercised in full resulting in an additional $109.6 million in proceeds before deducting offering expenses.
In June 2019, we announced that our Board authorized the repurchase of up to $1.5 billion of our outstanding shares of common stock, which expired on December 31, 2020 (“the Prior Share Repurchase Program”). In December 2020, we announced that our Board authorized the repurchase of up to $1.5 billion of our outstanding common shares through December 31, 2021 (the “New Share Repurchase Program”). The New Share Repurchase Program replaced the Prior Share Repurchase Program. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we repurchased 32.4 million and 26.2 million shares of our common stock for an aggregate amount of $208.9 million and $223.2 million, excluding commission costs, respectively. All common shares purchased were part of a publicly announced plans in open-market transactions.
No shares were issued under the at-the-market sales program during the year ended December 31, 2020. During the years ended December 31, 2019, we issued 56.0 million shares of common stock for proceeds of $569.1 million, net of commissions and fees, under the at-the-market sales program.
No options were exercised during the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019.
Preferred Stock
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company redeemed all 18.4 million of its issued and outstanding shares of 7.50% Series D Cumulative Redeemable Preferred Stock (“Series D Preferred Stock”) for $460.0 million. The cash redemption amount for each share of Series D Preferred Stock was $25.00.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we redeemed all 7.0 million of our issued and outstanding shares of 7.625% Series C Cumulative Redeemable Preferred Stock (“Series C Preferred Stock”) for $175.0 million. The cash redemption amount for each share of Series C Preferred Stock was $25.00 plus accrued and unpaid dividends to, but not including, the redemption date of July 21, 2019.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we redeemed all 2.2 million of our issued and outstanding shares of 8.125% Series H Cumulative Redeemable Preferred Stock (“Series H Preferred Stock”) for $55.0 million. The cash redemption amount for each share of Series H Preferred Stock was $25.00 plus accrued and unpaid dividends to, but not including, the redemption date of May 31, 2019.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we issued 17.7 million shares of our 6.750% Series I Fixed-to-Floating Rate Cumulative Redeemable Preferred Stock for gross proceeds of $442.5 million before deducting the underwriting discount and other estimated offering costs.
Leverage and Capital
We believe that it is prudent to maintain conservative debt-to-equity and economic leverage ratios as there may be continued volatility in the mortgage and credit markets. Our capital policy governs our capital and leverage position including setting limits. Based on the guidelines, we generally expect to maintain an economic leverage ratio of less than 10:1. Our actual economic leverage ratio varies from time to time based upon various factors, including our management’s opinion of the level of risk of our assets and liabilities, our liquidity position, our level of unused borrowing capacity, the availability of credit, over-collateralization levels required by lenders when we pledge assets to secure borrowings and our assessment of domestic and
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
international market conditions.
Our debt-to-equity ratio at December 31, 2020 and 2019 was 5.1:1 and 7.1:1, respectively. Our economic leverage ratio, which is computed as the sum of Recourse Debt, cost basis of TBA derivative and CMBX notional outstanding, and net forward purchases (sales) of investments divided by total equity, at December 31, 2020 and 2019 was 6.2:1 and 7.2:1, respectively. Our capital ratio, which represents our ratio of stockholders’ equity to total assets (inclusive of total market value of TBA derivatives and shown net of debt issued by securitization vehicles), was 13.6% and 12.0% at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Risk Management
For more information on COVID-19, including actions we have taken in response, please refer to the section titled “Business Environment and COVID-19” within this Item 7.
We are subject to a variety of risks in the ordinary conduct of our business. The effective management of these risks is of critical importance to the overall success of Annaly. The objective of our risk management framework is to identify, measure and monitor these risks.
Our risk management framework is intended to facilitate a holistic, enterprise wide view of risk. We have built a strong and collaborative risk management culture throughout Annaly focused on awareness which supports appropriate understanding and management of our key risks. Each employee is accountable for identifying, monitoring and managing risk within their area of responsibility.
Risk Appetite
We maintain a firm-wide risk appetite statement which defines the types and levels of risk we are willing to take in order to achieve our business objectives, and reflects our risk management philosophy. We engage in risk activities based on our core expertise that aim to enhance value for our stockholders. Our activities focus on income generation and capital preservation through proactive portfolio management, supported by a conservative liquidity and leverage posture.
The risk appetite statement asserts the following key risk parameters to guide our investment management activities:
Governance
Risk management begins with our Board, through the review and oversight of the risk management framework, and executive management, through the ongoing formulation of risk management practices and related execution in managing risk. The Board exercises its oversight of risk management primarily through the Board Risk Committee (“BRC”) and Board Audit Committee (“BAC”) with support from the other Board Committees. The BRC is responsible for oversight of our risk governance structure, risk management and risk assessment guidelines and policies and our risk appetite. The BAC is responsible for oversight of the quality and integrity of our accounting, internal controls and financial reporting practices, including independent auditor selection, evaluation and review, and oversight of the internal audit function. The Management Development and Compensation Committee is responsible for oversight of risk related to our compensation policies and practices. The Corporate Responsibility Committee assists the Board in its oversight of any matters that may present reputational or ESG risk to us, and
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
the Nominating/Corporate Governance Committee assists the Board in its oversight of our corporate governance framework and the annual self-evaluation of the Board.
Risk assessment and risk management are the responsibility of our management. A series of management committees has oversight or decision-making responsibilities for risk management activities. Membership of these committees is reviewed regularly to ensure the appropriate personnel are engaged in the risk management process. Four primary management committees have been established to provide a comprehensive framework for risk management. The management committees responsible for our risk management include the Enterprise Risk Committee (“ERC”), Asset and Liability Committee (“ALCO”), Investment Committee and the Financial Reporting and Disclosure Committee (“FRDC”). Each of these committees reports to our management Operating Committee which is responsible for oversight and management of our operations, including oversight and approval authority over all aspects of our enterprise risk management.
Audit Services is an independent function with reporting lines to the BAC. Audit Services is responsible for performing our internal audit activities, which includes independently assessing and validating key controls within the risk management framework.
Our compliance group is responsible for oversight of our regulatory compliance. Our Chief Compliance Officer has reporting lines to the BAC.
Description of Risks
We are subject to a variety of risks due to the business we operate. Risk categories are an important component of a robust enterprise wide risk management framework.
We have identified the following primary categories that we utilize to identify, assess, measure and monitor risk.
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Capital, Liquidity and Funding Risk Management
Our capital, liquidity and funding risk management strategy is designed to ensure the availability of sufficient resources to support our business and meet our financial obligations under both normal and adverse market and business environments. Our capital, liquidity and funding risk management practices consist of the following primary elements:
Funding
Our primary financing sources are repurchase agreements provided through counterparty arrangements and through Arcola, other secured financing, debt issued by securitization vehicles, mortgages, credit facilities, note sales and various forms of equity. We maintain excess liquidity by holding unencumbered liquid assets that could be either used to collateralize additional borrowings or sold.
We seek to conservatively manage our repurchase agreement funding position through a variety of methods including diversity, breadth and depth of counterparties and maintaining a staggered maturity profile.
Our wholly-owned subsidiary, Arcola, provides direct access to third party funding as a FINRA member broker-dealer. Arcola borrows funds through the General Collateral Finance Repo service offered by the FICC, with FICC acting as the central counterparty. In addition, Arcola has borrowed funds through direct repurchase agreements.
To reduce our liquidity risk we maintain a laddered approach to our repurchase agreements. At December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the weighted average days to maturity was 64 days and 65 days, respectively.
Our repurchase agreements generally provide that in the event of a margin call we must provide additional securities or cash on the same business day that a margin call is made. Should prepayment speeds on the mortgages underlying our Agency and Residential mortgage-backed securities and/or market interest rates or other factors move suddenly and cause declines in the market value of assets posted as collateral, resulting margin calls may cause an adverse change in our liquidity position.
At December 31, 2020, we had total financial assets and cash pledged against existing liabilities of $71.7 billion. The weighted average haircut was approximately 4% on repurchase agreements. The quality and character of the Residential Securities and commercial real estate investments that we pledge as collateral under the repurchase agreements and interest rate swaps did not materially change at December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. While haircut and margin requirements related to the Agency collateral we pledge under repurchase agreements and interest rate swaps were largely unchanged during the year
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
ended December 31, 2020, our counterparties did increase haircuts and margin requirements on credit assets beginning in March 2020, as a result of market disruptions brought on by COVID-19, which have since returned closer to pre-pandemic levels.
The following table presents our quarterly average and quarter-end repurchase agreement and reverse repurchase agreement balances outstanding for the periods presented:
The following table provides information on our repurchase agreements and other secured financing by maturity date at December 31, 2020. The weighted average remaining maturity on our repurchase agreements and other secured financing was 82 days at December 31, 2020:
(1) Approximately 2% of the total repurchase agreements and other secured financing had a remaining maturity over 1 year.
The table below presents our outstanding debt balances and associated weighted average rates and days to maturity at December 31, 2020:
(1) Determined based on estimated weighted-average lives of the underlying debt instruments.
(2) Includes financing under credit facilities.
(3) Non-recourse to Annaly.
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Excess Liquidity
Our primary source of liquidity is the availability of unencumbered assets which may be provided as collateral to support additional funding needs. We target minimum thresholds of available, unencumbered assets to maintain excess liquidity. The following table illustrates our asset portfolio available to support potential collateral obligations and funding needs.
Assets are considered encumbered if pledged as collateral against an existing liability, and therefore are no longer available to support additional funding. An asset is considered unencumbered if it has not been pledged or securitized. The following table also provides the carrying amount of our encumbered and unencumbered financial assets at December 31, 2020:
(1) The amounts reflected in the table above are on a settlement date basis and may differ from the total positions reported on the
Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition.
(2) Includes assets transferred or pledged to securitization vehicles
(3) Includes interests in certain joint ventures and equity instruments.
We maintain liquid assets in order to satisfy our current and future obligations in normal and stressed operating environments. These are held as the primary means of liquidity risk mitigation. The composition of our liquid assets is also considered and is subject to certain parameters. The composition is monitored for concentration risk and asset type. We believe the assets we consider liquid can be readily converted into cash, through liquidation or by being used as collateral in financing arrangements (including as additional collateral to support existing financial arrangements). Our balance sheet also generates liquidity on an on-going basis through mortgage principal and interest repayments and net earnings held prior to payment of dividends. The following table presents our liquid assets as a percentage of total assets at December 31, 2020:
(1)Carrying value approximates the market value of assets. The assets listed in this table include $71.7 billion of assets that have been pledged as collateral against existing liabilities at December 31, 2020. Please refer to the Encumbered and Unencumbered Assets table for related information.
(2)The amounts reflected in the table above are on a settlement date basis and may differ from the total positions reported on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition.
(3)Excludes securitized Agency mortgage-backed securities of consolidated VIEs carried at fair value of $0.6 billion
(4)Excludes securitized residential mortgage loans transferred or pledged to consolidated VIEs carried at fair value of $3.2 billion.
(5)Excludes securitized commercial mortgage loans of consolidated VIEs carried at fair value of $2.2 billion.
(6)Excludes senior securitized commercial mortgage loans of consolidated VIEs carried at fair value of $0.9 billion.
(7)Excludes certain second lien loans.
(8)Denominator is computed based on the carrying amount of encumbered and encumbered financial assets, excluding assets transferred or pledged to securitization vehicles of $6.9 billion.
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Maturity Profile
We consider the profile of our assets, liabilities and derivatives when managing both liquidity risk as well as investment/market risk employing a measurement of both the maturity gap and interest rate sensitivity gap. We determine the amount of liquid assets that are required to be held by monitoring several liquidity metrics. We utilize several modeling techniques to analyze our current and potential obligations including the expected cash flows from our assets, liabilities and derivatives. The following table illustrates the expected final maturities and cash flows of our assets, liabilities and derivatives. The table is based on a static portfolio and assumes no reinvestment of asset cash flows and no future liabilities are entered into. In assessing the maturity of our assets, liabilities and off balance sheet obligations, we use the stated maturities, or our prepayment expectations for assets and liabilities that exhibit prepayment characteristics. Cash and cash equivalents are included in the ‘Less than 3 Months’ maturity bucket, as they are typically held for a short period of time.
With respect to each maturity bucket, our maturity gap is considered negative when the amount of maturing liabilities exceeds the amount of maturing assets. A negative gap increases our liquidity risk as we must enter into future liabilities. Our interest rate sensitivity gap is the difference between interest earning assets and interest bearing liabilities maturing or re-pricing within a given time period. Unlike the calculation of maturity gap, interest rate sensitivity gap includes the effect of our interest rate swaps. A gap is considered positive when the amount of interest-rate sensitive assets exceeds the amount of interest-rate sensitive liabilities. A gap is considered negative when the amount of interest-rate sensitive liabilities exceeds interest-rate sensitive assets. During a period of rising interest rates, a negative gap would tend to adversely affect net interest income, while a positive gap would tend to result in an increase in net interest income. During a period of falling interest rates, a negative gap would tend to result in an increase in net interest income, while a positive gap would tend to affect net interest income adversely. Because different types of assets and liabilities with the same or similar maturities may react differently to changes in overall market rates or conditions, changes in interest rates may affect net interest income positively or negatively even if assets and liabilities were perfectly matched in each maturity category. The amount of assets and liabilities utilized to compute our interest rate sensitivity gap was determined in accordance with the contractual terms of the assets and liabilities, except that adjustable-rate loans and securities are included in the period in which their interest rates are first scheduled to adjust and not in the period in which they mature. The effects of interest rate swaps, whereby we generally pay a fixed rate and receive a floating rate and effectively lock in our financing costs for a longer term, are also reflected in our interest rate sensitivity gap.
The interest rate sensitivity of our assets and liabilities in the following table at December 31, 2020 could vary substantially based on actual prepayment experience.
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
The methodologies we employ for evaluating interest rate risk include an analysis of our interest rate “gap,” measurement of the duration and convexity of our portfolio and sensitivities to interest rates and spreads.
Stress Testing
We utilize liquidity stress testing to ensure we have sufficient liquidity under a variety of scenarios and stresses. These stress tests assist with the management of our pool of liquid assets and influence our current and future funding plans. Our stress tests are modeled over both short term and longer time horizons. The stresses applied include market-wide and firm-specific stresses.
Liquidity Management Policies
We utilize a comprehensive liquidity policy structure to inform our liquidity risk management practices including monitoring and measurement, along with well-defined key risk indicators. Both quantitative and qualitative targets are utilized to measure the ongoing stability and condition of the liquidity position, and include the level and composition of unencumbered assets, as well as both short-term and long-term sustainability of the funding composition under stress conditions.
We also monitor early warning metrics designed to measure the quality and depth of liquidity sources based upon both company-specific and market conditions. The metrics assist in assessing our liquidity conditions and are integrated into our escalation protocol.
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Investment/Market Risk Management
One of the primary risks we are subject to is investment/market risk. Changes in the level of interest rates can affect our net interest income, which is the difference between the income we earn on our interest earning assets and the interest expense incurred from interest bearing liabilities and derivatives. Changes in the level of interest rates and spreads can also affect the value of our securities and potential realization of gains or losses from the sale of these assets. We may utilize a variety of financial instruments, including interest rate swaps, swaptions, options, futures and other hedges, in order to limit the adverse effects of interest rates on our results. In the case of interest rate swaps, we utilize contracts linked to LIBOR but may also enter into interest rate swaps where the floating leg is linked to the overnight index swap rate or another index, particularly in light of a potential transition away from LIBOR. In addition, we may use MAC interest rate swaps in which we may receive or make a payment at the time of entering such interest rate swap to compensate for the off-market nature of such interest rate swap. MAC interest rate swaps offer price transparency, flexibility and more efficient portfolio administration through compression which is the process of reducing the number of unique interest rate swap contracts and replacing them with fewer contracts containing market defined terms. Our portfolio and the value of our portfolio, including derivatives, may be adversely affected as a result of changing interest rates and spreads.
We simulate a wide variety of interest rate scenarios in evaluating our risk. Scenarios are run to capture our sensitivity to changes in interest rates, spreads and the shape of the yield curve. We also consider the assumptions affecting our analysis such as those related to prepayments. In addition to predefined interest rate scenarios, we utilize Value-at-Risk measures to estimate potential losses in the portfolio over various time horizons utilizing various confidence levels. The following tables estimate the potential changes in economic net interest income over a twelve month period and the immediate effect on our portfolio market value (inclusive of derivative instruments), should interest rates instantaneously increase or decrease by 25, 50 or 75 basis points, and the effect of portfolio market value if mortgage option-adjusted spreads instantaneously increase or decrease by 5, 15 or 25 basis points (assuming shocks are parallel and instantaneous). All changes to income and portfolio market value are measured as percentage changes from the projected net interest income and portfolio value at the base interest rate scenario. The net interest income simulations incorporate the interest expense effect of rate resets on liabilities and derivatives as well as the amortization expense and reinvestment of principal based on the prepayments on our securities, which varies based on the level of rates. The results assume no management actions in response to the rate or spread changes. The following table presents estimates at December 31, 2020. Actual results could differ materially from these estimates.
Credit Risk Management
Key risk parameters have been established to specify our credit risk appetite. We seek to manage credit risk by making investments which conform within the firm’s specific investment policy parameters and optimize risk-return attributes.
While we do not expect to encounter credit risk in our Agency mortgage-backed securities, we face credit risk on the non-Agency mortgage-backed securities and CRT securities in our portfolio. In addition, we are also exposed to credit risk on
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
residential mortgage loans, commercial real estate investments and corporate debt. MSR values may also be impacted if overall costs to service the underlying mortgage loans increase due to borrower performance. We are subject to risk of loss if an issuer or borrower fails to perform its contractual obligations. We have established policies and procedures for mitigating credit risk, including establishing and reviewing limits for credit exposure. We will originate or purchase commercial investments that meet our comprehensive underwriting process and credit standards and are approved by the appropriate committee. Once a commercial investment is made, our ongoing surveillance process includes regular reviews, analysis and oversight of investments by our investment personnel and appropriate committee. We review credit and other risks of loss associated with each investment. Our management monitors the overall portfolio risk and determines estimates of provision for loss. Additionally, ALCO has oversight of our credit risk exposure.
Our portfolio composition, based on balance sheet values, at December 31, 2020 and 2019 was as follows:
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Counterparty Risk Management
Our use of repurchase and derivative agreements and trading activities create exposure to counterparty risk relating to potential losses that could be recognized if the counterparties to these agreements fail to perform their obligations under the contracts. In the event of default by a counterparty, we could have difficulty obtaining our assets pledged as collateral. A significant portion of our investments are financed with repurchase agreements by pledging our Residential Securities and certain commercial real estate investments as collateral to the applicable lender. The collateral we pledge generally exceeds the amount of the borrowings under each agreement. If the counterparty to the repurchase agreement defaults on its obligations and we are not able to recover our pledged asset, we are at risk of losing the over-collateralization or haircut. The amount of this exposure is the difference between the amount loaned to us plus interest due to the counterparty and the fair value of the collateral pledged by us to the lender including accrued interest receivable on such collateral.
We also use interest rate swaps and other derivatives to manage interest rate risk. Under these agreements, we pledge securities and cash as collateral or settle variation margin payments as part of a margin arrangement.
If a counterparty were to default on its obligations, we would be exposed to a loss to a derivative counterparty to the extent that the amount of our securities or cash pledged exceeded the unrealized loss on the associated derivative and we were not able to recover the excess collateral. Additionally, we would be exposed to a loss to a derivative counterparty to the extent that our unrealized gains on derivative instruments exceeded the amount of the counterparty’s securities or cash pledged to us.
We monitor our exposure to counterparties across several dimensions including by type of arrangement, collateral type, counterparty type, ratings and geography. Additionally, ALCO has oversight of our counterparty exposure.
The following table summarizes our exposure to counterparties by geography at December 31, 2020:
Operational Risk Management
We are subject to operational risk in each of our business and support functions. Operational risk may arise from internal or external sources including human error, fraud, systems issues, process change, vendors, business interruptions and other external events. Model risk considers potential errors with a model’s results due to uncertainty in model parameters and inappropriate methodologies used. The result of these risks may include financial loss and reputational damage. We manage operational risk through a variety of tools including policies and procedures that cover topics such as business continuity, personal conduct, cybersecurity and vendor management. Other tools include testing, including disaster recovery testing; systems controls, including access controls; training, including cybersecurity awareness training; and monitoring, which includes the use of key risk indicators. Employee-level lines of defense against operational risk include proper segregation of incompatible duties, activity-level internal controls over financial reporting, the empowerment of business units to identify and mitigate operational risk sources, testing by our internal audit staff, and our overall governance framework.
We have established a Cybersecurity Committee to help mitigate cybersecurity risks. The role of the committee is to oversee cyber risk assessments, monitor applicable key risk indicators, review cybersecurity training procedures, oversee our Cybersecurity Incident Response Plan and engage third parties to conduct periodic penetration testing. Our cybersecurity risk assessment includes an evaluation of cyber risk related to sensitive data held by third parties on their systems. The Cybersecurity Committee periodically reports to the ERC, and the Board via the BRC and the BAC. There is no assurance that these efforts will effectively mitigate cybersecurity risk and mitigation efforts are not an assurance that no cybersecurity incidents will occur. We currently maintain cybersecurity insurance, however, there is no assurance that the insurance policy will cover all cybersecurity breaches or that the policy will cover all losses.
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Compliance, Regulatory and Legal Risk Management
Our business is organized as a REIT, and we seek to continue to meet the requirements for taxation as a REIT. The determination that we are a REIT requires an analysis of various factual matters and circumstances. Accordingly, we closely monitor our REIT status within our risk management program. We also regularly assess our risk management in respect of our regulated and licensed subsidiaries, which include our registered broker-dealer subsidiary Arcola and our subsidiary that is registered with the SEC as an investment adviser under the Investment Advisers Act.
The financial services industry is highly regulated and receives significant attention from regulators, which may impact both our company as well as our business strategy. We proactively monitor the potential impact regulation may have both directly and indirectly on us. We maintain a process to actively monitor both actual and potential legal action that may affect us. Our risk management framework is designed to identify, measure and monitor these risks under the oversight of the ERC.
We currently rely on the exemption from registration provided by Section 3(c)(5)(C) of the Investment Company Act, and we seek to continue to meet the requirements for this exemption from registration. The determination that we qualify for this exemption from registration depends on various factual matters and circumstances. Accordingly, in conjunction with our legal department, we closely monitor our compliance with Section 3(c)(5)(C) within our risk management program. The monitoring of this risk is also under the oversight of the ERC.
As a result of the Dodd-Frank Act, the U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission (“CFTC”) gained jurisdiction over the regulation of interest rate swaps. The CFTC has asserted that this causes the operators of mortgage real estate investment trusts that use swaps as part of their business model to fall within the statutory definition of Commodity Pool Operator (“CPO”), and, absent relief from the Division of Swap Dealer and Intermediary Oversight or the CFTC, to register as CPOs. On December 7, 2012, as a result of numerous requests for no-action relief from the CPO registration requirement for operators of mortgage real estate investment trusts, the Division of Swap Dealer and Intermediary Oversight of the CFTC issued no-action relief entitled “No-Action Relief from the Commodity Pool Operator Registration Requirement for Commodity Pool Operators of Certain Pooled Investment Vehicles Organized as Mortgage Real Estate Investment Trusts” that permits a CPO to receive relief by filing a claim to perfect the use of the relief. A claim submitted by a CPO will be effective upon filing, so long as the claim is materially complete. The conditions that must be met relate to initial margin and premiums requirements, net income derived annually from commodity interest positions that are not qualifying hedging transactions, marketing of interests in the mortgage real estate investment trust to the public, and identification of the entity as a mortgage real estate investment trust in its federal tax filings with the Internal Revenue Service. While we disagree with the CFTC’s position that mortgage REITs that use swaps as part of their business model fall within the statutory definition of a CPO, we have submitted a claim for the relief set forth in the no-action relief entitled “No-Action Relief from the Commodity Pool Operator Registration Requirement for Commodity Pool Operators of Certain Pooled Investment Vehicles Organized as Mortgage Real Estate Investment Trusts” and believe we meet the criteria for such relief set forth therein.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our critical accounting policies that require us to make significant judgments or estimates are described below. For more information on these critical accounting policies and other significant accounting policies, see “Significant Accounting Policies” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Valuation of Financial Instruments
Residential Securities
There is an active market for our Agency mortgage-backed securities, CRT securities and non-Agency mortgage-backed securities. Since we primarily invest in securities that can be valued using actively quoted prices for actively traded assets, there is a high degree of observable inputs and less subjectivity in measuring fair value. Internal fair values are determined using quoted prices from the TBA securities market, the Treasury curve and the underlying characteristics of the individual securities, which may include coupon, periodic and life caps, reset dates and the expected life of the security. While prepayment rates may be difficult to predict and require estimation and judgment in the valuation of Agency mortgage-backed securities, we use several third party models to validate prepayment speeds used in fair value measurements of residential securities. All internal fair values are compared to external pricing sources and/or dealer quotes to determine reasonableness. Additionally, securities used as collateral for repurchase agreements are priced daily by counterparties to ensure sufficient collateralization, providing additional verification of our internal pricing.
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Residential Mortgage Loans
There is an active market for the residential whole loans in which we invest. Since we primarily invest in residential loans that can be valued using actively quoted prices for similar assets, there are observable inputs in measuring fair value. Internal fair values are determined using quoted prices for similar market transactions, the swap curve and the underlying characteristics of the individual loans, which may include loan term, coupon, and reset dates. While prepayment rates may be difficult to predict and are a significant estimate requiring judgment in the valuation of residential whole loans, we validate prepayment speeds against those provided by independent pricing analytic providers specializing in residential mortgage loans. Internal fair values are generally compared to external pricing sources to determine reasonableness.
MSRs
Fair value estimates for our investment in MSRs are obtained from models, which use significant unobservable inputs in their valuations. These valuations primarily utilize discounted cash flow models that incorporate unobservable market data inputs including prepayment rates, delinquency levels, costs to service and discount rates. Model valuations are then compared to valuations obtained from third-party pricing providers. Management reviews the valuations received from third-party pricing providers and uses them as a point of comparison to modeled values. The valuation of MSRs requires significant judgment by management and the third-party pricing providers.
Commercial Real Estate Investments
The fair value of commercial mortgage-backed securities classified as available-for-sale is determined based upon quoted prices of similar assets in recent market transactions and requires the application of judgment due to differences in the underlying collateral. These securities must also be evaluated for impairment if the fair value of the security is lower than its amortized cost. Determining whether there is an other-than-temporary impairment may require us to exercise significant judgment and make estimates to determine expected cash flows incorporating assumptions such as changes in interest rates and loss expectations. For commercial real estate loans and preferred equity investments classified as held for investment, we apply significant judgment in evaluating the need for a loss reserve. Estimated net recoverable value of the commercial real estate loans and preferred equity investments and other factors such as the fair value of any collateral, the amount and status of senior debt, the prospects of the borrower and the competitive landscape where the borrower conducts business must be considered in determining the allowance for loan losses. For commercial real estate loans held for sale, significant judgment may need to be applied in determining the fair value of the loans and whether a valuation allowance is necessary. Factors that may need to be considered to determine the fair value of a loan held for sale include the borrower’s credit quality, liquidity and other market factors and the fair value of the underlying collateral.
Interest Rate Swaps
We use the overnight indexed swap (“OIS”) curve as an input to value substantially all of our uncleared interest rate swaps. We believe using the OIS curve, which reflects the interest rate typically paid on cash collateral, enables us to most accurately determine the fair value of uncleared interest rate swaps. Consistent with market practice, we exchange collateral (also called margin) based on the fair values of our interest rate swaps. Through this margining process, we may be able to compare our recorded fair value with the fair value calculated by the counterparty or derivatives clearing organization, providing additional verification of our recorded fair value of the uncleared interest rate swaps. We value our cleared interest rate swaps using the prices provided by the derivatives clearing organization.
Revenue Recognition
Interest income from coupon payments is accrued based on the outstanding principal amounts of the Residential Securities and their contractual terms. Premiums and discounts associated with the purchase of the Residential Securities are amortized or accreted into interest income over the projected lives of the securities using the interest method. To aid in determining projected lives of the securities, we use third-party model and market information to project prepayment speeds. Our prepayment speed projections incorporate underlying loan characteristics (i.e., coupon, term, original loan size, original loan-to-value ratio, etc.) and market data, including interest rate and home price index forecasts and expert judgment. Prepayment speeds vary according to the type of investment, conditions in the financial markets and other factors and cannot be predicted with any certainty. Changes to model assumptions, including interest rates and other market data, as well as periodic revisions to the model will cause changes in the results. Adjustments are made for actual prepayment activity as it relates to calculating the effective yield. Gains or losses on sales of Residential Securities are recorded on trade date based on the specific identification method.
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Consolidation of Variable Interest Entities
Determining whether an entity has a controlling financial interest in a VIE requires significant judgment related to assessing the purpose and design of the VIE and determination of the activities that most significantly impact its economic performance. We must also identify explicit and implicit variable interests in the entity and consider our involvement in both the design of the VIE and its ongoing activities. To determine whether consolidation of the VIE is required, we must apply judgment to assess whether we have the power to direct the most significant activities of the VIE and whether we have either the rights to receive benefits or the obligation to absorb losses that could be potentially significant to the VIE.
Use of Estimates
The use of GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ materially from those estimates.
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Glossary of Terms
A
Adjustable-Rate Loan / Security
A loan / security on which interest rates are adjusted at regular intervals according to predetermined criteria. The adjustable interest rate is tied to an objective, published interest rate index.
Agency
Refers to a federally chartered corporation, such as the Federal National Mortgage Association, or the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, or an agency of the U.S. Government, such as the Government National Mortgage Association.
Agency Mortgage-Backed Securities
Refers to residential mortgage-backed securities that are issued or guaranteed by an Agency.
Amortization
Liquidation of a debt through installment payments. Amortization also refers to the process of systematically reducing a recognized asset or liability (e.g., a purchase premium or discount for a debt security) with an offset to earnings.
Average GAAP Cost of Interest Bearing Liabilities and Average Economic Cost of Interest Bearing Liabilities
Average GAAP cost of interest bearing liabilities represents annualized interest expense divided by average interest bearing liabilities. Average interest bearing liabilities reflects the average balances during the period. Average economic cost of interest bearing liabilities represents annualized economic interest expense divided by average interest bearing liabilities.
Average Life
On a mortgage-backed security, the average time to receipt of each dollar of principal, weighted by the amount of each principal prepayment, based on prepayment assumptions.
Average Yield on Interest Earnings Assets and Average Yield on Interest Earnings Assets (excluding PAA)
Average yield on interest earning assets represents annualized interest income divided by average interest earning assets. Average interest earning assets reflects the average amortized cost of our investments during the period. Average yield on interest earning assets (excluding PAA) is calculated using annualized interest income (excluding PAA).
B
Basis Point (“bp”)
One hundredth of one percent, used in expressing differences in interest rates. One basis point is 0.01% of
yield. For example, a bond’s yield that changed from 3.00% to 3.50% would be said to have moved 50 basis points.
Benchmark
A bond or an index referencing a basket of bonds whose terms are used for comparison with other bonds of similar maturity. The global financial market typically looks to U.S. Treasury securities as benchmarks.
Beneficial Owner
One who benefits from owning a security, even if the security’s title of ownership is in the name of a broker or bank.
B-Note
Subordinate mortgage notes and/or subordinate mortgage loan participations.
B-Piece
The most subordinate commercial mortgage-backed security bond class.
Board
Refers to the board of directors of Annaly.
Bond
The written evidence of debt, bearing a stated rate or stated rates of interest, or stating a formula for determining that rate, and maturing on a date certain, on which date and upon presentation a fixed sum of money plus interest (usually represented by interest coupons attached to the bond) is payable to the holder or owner. Bonds are long-term securities with an original maturity of greater than one year.
Book Value Per Share
Calculated by summing common stock, additional paid-in capital, accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) and accumulated deficit and dividing that number by the total common shares outstanding.
Broker
Generic name for a securities firm engaged in both buying and selling securities on behalf of customers or its own account.
C
Capital Buffer
Includes unencumbered financial assets which can be either sold or utilized as collateral to meet liquidity needs.
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Capital Ratio
Calculated as total stockholders’ equity divided by total assets inclusive of outstanding market value of TBA positions and exclusive of consolidated VIEs.
Carry
The amount an asset earns over its hedging and financing costs. A positive carry happens when the rate on the securities being financed is greater than the rate on the funds borrowed. A negative carry is when the rate on the funds borrowed is greater than the rate on the securities that are being financed.
CMBX
The CMBX index is a synthetic tradable index referencing a basket of 25 CMBS of a particular rating and vintage. The CMBX index allows investors to take a long position (referred to as selling protection) or short position (referred to as purchasing protection) on the respective basket of CMBS securities and is structured as a “pay-as-you-go” contract whereby the protection seller receives and the protection buyer pays a standardized running coupon on the contracted notional amount. Additionally, the protection seller is obligated to pay to the protection buyer the amount of principal losses and/or coupon shortfalls on the underlying CMBS securities as they occur.
Collateral
Securities, cash or property pledged by a borrower or party to a derivative contract to secure payment of a loan or derivative. If the borrower fails to repay the loan or defaults under the derivative contract, the secured party may take ownership of the collateral.
Collateralized Loan Obligation (“CLO”)
A securitization collateralized by loans and other debt instruments.
Collateralized Mortgage Obligation (“CMO”)
A multiclass bond backed by a pool of mortgage pass-through securities or mortgage loans.
Commodity Futures Trading Commission (“CFTC”)
An independent U.S. federal agency established by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission Act of 1974. The CFTC regulates the swaps, commodity futures and options markets. Its goals include the promotion of competitive and efficient futures markets and the protection of investors against manipulation, abusive trade practices and fraud.
Commercial Mortgage-Backed Security
Securities collateralized by a pool of mortgages on commercial real estate in which all principal and interest from the mortgages flow to certificate holders in a defined sequence or manner.
Constant Prepayment Rate (“CPR”)
The percentage of outstanding mortgage loan principal that prepays in one year, based on the annualization of the
Single Monthly Mortality, which reflects the outstanding mortgage loan principal that prepays in one month.
Convexity
A measure of the change in a security’s duration with respect to changes in interest rates. The more convex a security is, the more its duration will change with interest rate changes.
Core Earnings (excluding PAA) and Core Earnings (excluding PAA) Per Average Common Share
Core earnings (excluding PAA) is defined as the sum of (a) economic net interest income, (b) TBA dollar roll income and CMBX coupon income, (c) realized amortization of MSRs, (d) other income (loss) (excluding depreciation expense related to commercial real estate and amortization of intangibles, non-core income allocated to equity method investments and other non-core components of other income (loss)), (e) general and administrative expenses (excluding transaction expenses and non-recurring items), and (f) income taxes (excluding the income tax effect of non-core income (loss) items) and excludes (g) the premium amortization adjustment representing the cumulative impact on prior periods, but not the current period, of quarter-over-quarter changes in estimated long-term prepayment speeds related to our Agency mortgage-backed securities. Core earnings (excluding PAA) per average common share is calculated by dividing core earnings (excluding PAA) by average basic common shares for the period.
Corporate Debt
Non-government debt instruments issued by corporations. Long-term corporate debt can be issued as bonds or loans.
Counterparty
One of two entities in a transaction. For example, in the bond market a counterparty can be a state or local government, a broker-dealer or a corporation.
Coupon
The interest rate on a bond that is used to compute the amount of interest due on a periodic basis.
Credit and Counterparty Risk
Risk to earnings, capital or business, resulting from an obligor’s or counterparty’s failure to meet the terms of any contract or otherwise failure to perform as agreed. Credit and counterparty risk is present in lending, investing, funding and hedging activities.
Credit Derivatives
Derivative instruments that have one or more underlyings related to the credit risk of a specified entity (or group of entities) or an index that exposes the seller to potential loss from specified credit-risk related events. An example is credit derivatives referencing the commercial mortgage-backed securities index.
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Credit Risk Transfer (“CRT”) Securities
Credit Risk Transfer securities are risk sharing transactions issued by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and similarly structured transactions arranged by third party market participants. The securities issued in the CRT sector are designed to synthetically transfer mortgage credit risk from Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and/or third parties to private investors.
Current Face
The current remaining monthly principal on a mortgage security. Current face is computed by multiplying the original face value of the security by the current principal balance factor.
D
Dealer
Person or organization that underwrites, trades and sells securities, e.g., a principal market-maker in securities.
Default Risk
Possibility that a bond issuer will fail to pay principal or interest when due.
Derivative
A financial product that derives its value from the price, price fluctuations and price expectations of an underlying instrument, index or reference pool (e.g. futures contracts, options, interest rate swaps, interest rate swaptions and certain to-be-announced securities).
Discount Price
When the dollar price is below face value, it is said to be selling at a discount.
Duration
The weighted maturity of a fixed-income investment’s cash flows, used in the estimation of the price sensitivity of fixed-income securities for a given change in interest rates.
E
Economic Capital
A measure of the risk a firm is subject to. It is the amount of capital a firm needs as a buffer to protect against risk. It is a probabilistic measure of potential future losses at a given confidence level over a given time horizon.
Economic Interest Expense
Non-GAAP financial measure that is comprised of GAAP interest expense and the net interest component of interest rate swaps.
Economic Leverage Ratio (Economic Debt-to-Equity Ratio)
Calculated as the sum of recourse debt, cost basis of TBA and CMBX derivatives outstanding and net forward
purchases (sales) of investments divided by total equity. Recourse debt consists of repurchase agreements and other secured financing (excluding certain non-recourse credit facilities). Certain credit facilities (included within other secured financing), debt issued by securitization vehicles, participations issued, and mortgages payable are non-recourse to us and are excluded from this measure.
Economic Net Interest Income
Non-GAAP financial measure that is composed of GAAP net interest income less Economic Interest Expense.
Encumbered Assets
Assets on the company’s balance sheet which have been pledged as collateral against a liability.
Eurodollar
A U.S. dollar deposit held in Europe or elsewhere outside the United States.
F
Face Amount
The par value (i.e., principal or maturity value) of a security appearing on the face of the instrument.
Factor
A decimal value reflecting the proportion of the outstanding principal balance of a mortgage security, which changes over time, in relation to its original principal value.
Fannie Mae
Federal National Mortgage Association.
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (“FDIC”)
An independent agency created by the U.S. Congress to maintain stability and public confidence in the nation’s financial system by insuring deposits, examining and supervising financial institutions for safety and soundness and consumer protection, and managing receiverships.
Federal Funds Rate
The interest rate charged by banks on overnight loans of their excess reserve funds to other banks.
Federal Home Loan Banks (“FHLB”)
U.S. Government-sponsored banks that generally provide reliable liquidity to member financial institutions to support housing finance and community investment.
Federal Housing Financing Agency (“FHFA”)
The FHFA is an independent regulatory agency that oversees vital components of the secondary mortgage market including Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and the Federal Home Loan Banks.
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, Inc. (“FINRA”)
FINRA is a non-governmental organization tasked with regulating all business dealings conducted between dealers, brokers and all public investors.
Fixed-Rate Mortgage
A mortgage featuring level monthly payments, determined at the outset, which remain constant over the life of the mortgage.
Fixed Income Clearing Corporation (“FICC”)
The FICC is an agency that deals with the confirmation, settlement and delivery of fixed-income assets in the U.S. The agency ensures the systematic and efficient settlement of U.S. Government securities and mortgage-backed security transactions in the market.
Floating Rate Bond
A bond for which the interest rate is adjusted periodically according to a predetermined formula, usually linked to an index.
Floating Rate CMO
A CMO tranche which pays an adjustable rate of interest tied to a representative interest rate index such as the LIBOR, the Constant Maturity Treasury or the Cost of Funds Index.
Freddie Mac
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.
Futures Contract
A legally binding agreement to buy or sell a commodity or financial instrument in a designated future month at a price agreed upon at the initiation of the contract by the buyer and seller. Futures contracts are standardized according to the quality, quantity, and delivery time and location for each commodity. A futures contract differs from an option in that an option gives one of the counterparties a right and the other an obligation to buy or sell, while a futures contract represents an obligation of both counterparties, one to deliver and the other to accept delivery. A futures contract is part of a class of financial instruments called derivatives.
G
GAAP
U.S. generally accepted accounting principles.
Ginnie Mae
Government National Mortgage Association.
H
Hedge
An investment made with the intention of minimizing the impact of adverse movements in interest rates or securities prices.
I
In-the-Money
Description for an option that has intrinsic value and can be sold or exercised for a profit; a call option is in-the-money when the strike price (execution price) is below the market price of the underlying security.
Interest Bearing Liabilities
Refers to repurchase agreements, debt issued by securitization vehicles and credit facilities. Average interest bearing liabilities is based on daily balances.
Interest Earning Assets
Refers to Residential Securities, U.S. Treasury securities, reverse repurchase agreements, commercial real estate debt and preferred equity interests, residential mortgage loans and corporate debt. Average interest earning assets is based on daily balances.
Interest-Only (IO) Bond
The interest portion of mortgage, Treasury or bond payments, which is separated and sold individually from the principal portion of those same payments.
Interest Rate Risk
The risk that an investment’s value will change due to a change in the absolute level of interest rates, in the spread between two rates, in the shape of the yield curve or in any other interest rate relationship. As market interest rates rise, the value of current fixed income investment holdings declines. Diversifying, deleveraging and hedging techniques are utilized to mitigate this risk. Interest rate risk is a form of market risk.
Interest Rate Swap
A binding agreement between counterparties to exchange periodic interest payments on some predetermined dollar principal, which is called the notional principal amount. For example, one party will pay fixed and receive a variable rate.
Interest Rate Swaption
Options on interest rate swaps. The buyer of a swaption has the right to enter into an interest rate swap agreement at some specified date in the future. The swaption agreement will specify whether the buyer of the swaption will be a fixed-rate receiver or a fixed-rate payer.
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
International Swaps and Derivatives Association (“ISDA”) Master Agreement
Standardized contract developed by ISDA used as an umbrella under which bilateral derivatives contracts are entered into.
Inverse IO Bond
An interest-only bond whose coupon is determined by a formula expressing an inverse relationship to a benchmark rate, such as LIBOR. As the benchmark rate changes, the IO coupon adjusts in the opposite direction. When the benchmark rate is relatively low, the IO pays a relatively high coupon payment, and vice versa.
Investment/Market Risk
Risk to earnings, capital or business resulting in the decline in value of our assets caused from changes in market variables, such as interest rates, which affect the values of Residential Securities and other investment instruments.
Investment Advisers Act
Refers to the Investment Advisers Act of 1940, as amended.
Investment Company Act
Refers to the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended.
L
Leverage
The use of borrowed money to increase investing power and economic returns.
Leverage Ratio (Debt-to-Equity Ratio)
Calculated as total debt to total stockholders’ equity. For purposes of calculating this ratio total debt includes repurchase agreements, other secured financing, debt issued by securitization vehicles, participations issued and mortgages payable. Certain credit facilities (included within other secured financing), debt issued by securitization vehicles, participations issued and mortgages payable are non-recourse to us.
LIBOR (London Interbank Offered Rate)
The rate banks charge each other for short-term Eurodollar loans. LIBOR is frequently used as the base for resetting rates on floating-rate securities and the floating-rate legs of interest rate swaps.
Liquidity Risk
Risk to earnings, capital or business arising from our inability to meet our obligations when they come due without incurring unacceptable losses because of inability to liquidate assets or obtain adequate funding.
Long-Term CPR
Our projected prepayment speeds for certain Agency mortgage-backed securities using third-party model and market information. Our prepayment speed projections incorporate underlying loan characteristics (e.g., coupon, term, original loan size, original loan-to-value ratio, etc.) and market data, including interest rate and home price index forecasts. Changes to model assumptions, including interest rates and other market data, as well as periodic revisions to the model will cause changes in the results.
Long-Term Debt
Debt which matures in more than one year.
M
Market Agreed Coupon (“MAC”) Interest Rate Swap
An interest rate swap contract structure with pre-defined, market agreed terms, developed by SIFMA and ISDA with the purpose of promoting liquidity and simplified administration.
Monetary Policy
Action taken by the Federal Open Market Committee of the Federal Reserve System to influence the money supply or interest rates.
Mortgage-Backed Security (“MBS”)
A security representing a direct interest in a pool of mortgage loans. The pass-through issuer or servicer collects the payments on the loans in the pool and “passes through” the principal and interest to the security holders on a pro rata basis.
Mortgage Loan
A mortgage loan granted by a bank, thrift or other financial institution that is based solely on real estate as security and is not insured or guaranteed by a government agency.
Mortgage Servicing Rights (“MSRs”)
Contractual agreements constituting the right to service an existing mortgage where the holder receives the benefits and bears the costs and risks of servicing the mortgage.
N
NAV
Net asset value.
Net Interest Income
Represents interest income earned on our portfolio investments, less interest expense paid for borrowings.
Net Interest Margin and Net Interest Margin (excluding PAA)
Net interest margin represents our interest income less interest expense divided by average interest earning assets. Net interest margin (excluding PAA) represents the sum of
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
our interest income (excluding PAA) plus TBA dollar roll income and CMBX coupon income less interest expense and the net interest component of interest rate swaps divided by the sum of average interest earning assets plus average outstanding TBA contract and CMBX balances.
Net Interest Spread and Net Interest Spread (excluding PAA)
Net interest spread represents the average yield on interest earning assets less the average GAAP cost of interest bearing liabilities. Net interest spread (excluding PAA) represents the average yield on interest earning assets (excluding PAA) less the average economic cost of interest bearing liabilities.
Non-Performing Loan (“NPL”)
A loan that is close to defaulting or is in default.
Notional Amount
A stated principal amount in a derivative contract on which the contract is based.
O
Operational Risk
Risk to earnings, capital, reputation or business arising from inadequate or failed internal processes or systems, human factors or external events.
Option Contract
A contract in which the buyer has the right, but not the obligation, to buy or sell an asset at a set price on or before a given date. Buyers of call options bet that a security will be worth more than the price set by the option (the strike price), plus the price they pay for the option itself. Buyers of put options bet that the security’s price will drop below the price set by the option. An option is part of a class of financial instruments called derivatives, which means these financial instruments derive their value from the worth of an underlying investment.
Original Face
The face value or original principal amount of a security on its issue date.
Out-of-the-Money
Description for an option that has no intrinsic value and would be worthless if it expired today; for a call option, this situation occurs when the strike price is higher than the market price of the underlying security; for a put option, this situation occurs when the strike price is less than the market price of the underlying security.
Overnight Index Swaps (“OIS”)
An interest rate swap in which a fixed rate is exchanged for an overnight floating rate.
Over-The-Counter (“OTC”) Market
A securities market that is conducted by dealers throughout the country through negotiation of price rather than through the use of an auction system as represented by a stock exchange.
P
Par
Price equal to the face amount of a security; 100%.
Par Amount
The principal amount of a bond or note due at maturity. Also known as par value.
Pass-Through Security
A securitization structure where a GSE or other entity “passes” the amount collected from the borrowers every month to the investor, after deducting fees and expenses.
Pool
A collection of mortgage loans assembled by an originator or master servicer as the basis for a security. In the case of Ginnie Mae, Fannie Mae, or Freddie Mac mortgage pass-through securities, pools are identified by a number assigned by the issuing agency.
Premium
The amount by which the price of a security exceeds its principal amount. When the dollar price of a bond is above its face value, it is said to be selling at a premium.
Premium Amortization Adjustment (“PAA”)
The cumulative impact on prior periods, but not the current period, of quarter-over-quarter changes in estimated long-term prepayment speeds related to our Agency mortgage-backed securities.
Prepayment
The unscheduled partial or complete payment of the principal amount outstanding on a mortgage loan or other debt before it is due.
Prepayment Risk
The risk that falling interest rates will lead to increased prepayments of mortgage or other loans, forcing the investor to reinvest at lower prevailing rates.
Prepayment Speed
The estimated rate at which mortgage borrowers will pay off the mortgages that underlie an MBS.
Prime Rate
The indicative interest rate on loans that banks quote to their best commercial customers.
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Principal and Interest
The term used to refer to regularly scheduled payments or prepayments of principal and payments of interest on a mortgage or other security.
R
Rate Reset
The adjustment of the interest rate on a floating-rate security according to a prescribed formula.
Real Estate Investment Trust (“REIT”)
A special purpose investment vehicle that provides investors with the ability to participate directly in the ownership or financing of real-estate related assets by pooling their capital to purchase and manage mortgage loans and/or income property.
Recourse Debt
Debt on which the economic borrower is obligated to repay the entire balance regardless of the value of the pledged collateral. By contrast, the economic borrower’s obligation to repay non-recourse debt is limited to the value of the pledged collateral. Recourse debt consists of repurchase agreements and other secured financing (excluding certain non-recourse credit facilities). Certain credit facilities (included within other secured financing), debt issued by securitization vehicles, participations issued, and mortgages payable are non-recourse to us and are excluded from this measure.
Reinvestment Risk
The risk that interest income or principal repayments will have to be reinvested at lower rates in a declining rate environment.
Re-Performing Loan (“RPL”)
A type of loan in which payments were previously delinquent by at least 90 days but have resumed.
Repurchase Agreement
The sale of securities to investors with the agreement to buy them back at a higher price after a specified time period; a form of short-term borrowing. For the party on the other end of the transaction (buying the security and agreeing to sell in the future) it is a reverse repurchase agreement.
Residential Securities
Refers to Agency mortgage-backed securities, CRT securities and non-Agency mortgage-backed securities.
Residual
In securitizations, the residual is the tranche that collects any cash flow from the collateral that remains after obligations to the other tranches have been met.
Return on Average Equity
Calculated by taking earnings divided by average stockholders’ equity.
Reverse Repurchase Agreement
Refer to Repurchase Agreement. The buyer of securities effectively provides a collateralized loan to the seller.
Risk Appetite Statement
Defines the types and levels of risk we are willing to take in order to achieve our business objectives, and reflects our risk management philosophy.
S
Secondary Market
Ongoing market for bonds previously offered or sold in the primary market.
Secured Overnight Financing Rate (“SOFR”)
Broad measure of the cost of borrowing cash overnight collateralized by Treasury securities and was chosen by the Alternative Reference Rate Committee as the preferred benchmark rate to replace dollar LIBOR in coming years.
Settlement Date
The date securities must be delivered and paid for to complete a transaction.
Short-Term Debt
Generally, debt which matures in one year or less. However, certain securities that mature in up to three years may be considered short-term debt.
Spread
When buying or selling a bond through a brokerage firm, investors will be charged a commission or spread, which is the difference between the market price and cost of purchase, and sometimes a service fee. Spreads differ based on several factors including liquidity.
T
Target Assets
Includes Agency mortgage-backed securities, to-be-announced forward contracts, CRT securities, MSRs, non-Agency mortgage-backed securities, residential mortgage loans, commercial real estate investments, and corporate debt.
Taxable REIT Subsidiary (“TRS”)
An entity that is owned directly or indirectly by a REIT and has jointly elected with the REIT to be treated as a TRS for tax purposes. Annaly and certain of its direct and indirect subsidiaries have made separate joint elections to treat these subsidiaries as TRSs.
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
To-Be-Announced Securities (“TBAs”)
A contract for the purchase or sale of a mortgage-backed security to be delivered at a predetermined price, face amount, issuer, coupon and stated maturity on an agreed-upon future date but does not include a specified pool number and number of pools.
TBA Dollar Roll Income
TBA dollar roll income is defined as the difference in price between two TBA contracts with the same terms but different settlement dates. The TBA contract settling in the later month typically prices at a discount to the earlier month contract with the difference in price commonly referred to as the “drop”. TBA dollar roll income represents the equivalent of interest income on the underlying security less an implied cost of financing.
Total Return
Investment performance measure over a stated time period which includes coupon interest, interest on interest, and any realized and unrealized gains or losses.
Total Return Swap
A derivative instrument where one party makes payments at a predetermined rate (either fixed or variable) while receiving a return on a specific asset (generally an equity index, loan or bond) held by the counterparty.
U
Unencumbered Assets
Assets on our balance sheet which have not been pledged as collateral against an existing liability.
U.S. Government-Sponsored Enterprise (“GSE”) Obligations
Obligations of Agencies originally established or chartered by the U.S. government to serve public purposes as specified by the U.S. Congress, such as Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac; these obligations are not explicitly guaranteed as to the timely payment of principal and interest by the full faith and credit of the U.S. government.
V
Value-at-Risk (“VaR”)
A statistical technique which measures the potential loss in value of an asset or portfolio over a defined period for a given confidence interval.
Variable Interest Entity (“VIE”)
An entity in which equity investors (i) do not have the characteristics of a controlling financial interest, and/or (ii) do not have sufficient equity at risk for the entity to finance its activities without additional subordinated financial support from other parties.
Variation Margin
Cash or securities provided by a party to collateralize its obligations under a transaction as a result of a change in value of such transaction since the trade was executed or the last time collateral was provided.
Volatility
A statistical measure of the variance of price or yield over time. Volatility is low if the price does not change very much over a short period of time, and high if there is a greater change.
Voting Interest Entity (“VOE”)
An entity that has sufficient equity to finance its activities without additional subordinated financial support from other parties and in which equity investors have a controlling financial interest.
W
Warehouse Lending
A line of credit extended to a loan originator to fund mortgages extended by the loan originators to property purchasers. The loan typically lasts from the time the mortgage is originated to when the mortgage is sold into the secondary market, whether directly or through a securitization. Warehouse lending can provide liquidity to the loan origination market.
Weighted Average Coupon
The weighted average interest rate of the underlying mortgage loans or pools that serve as collateral for a security, weighted by the size of the principal loan balances.
Weighted Average Life (“WAL”)
The assumed weighted average amount of time that will elapse from the date of a security’s issuance until each dollar of principal is repaid to the investor. The WAL will change as the security ages and depending on the actual realized rate at which principal, scheduled and unscheduled, is paid on the loans underlying the MBS.
Y
Yield-to-Maturity
The expected rate of return of a bond if it is held to its maturity date; calculated by taking into account the current market price, stated redemption value, coupon payments and time to maturity and assuming all coupons are reinvested at the same rate; equivalent to the internal rate of return.
ANNALY CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES