ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The discussion and analysis below includes certain forward-looking statements that are subject to risks, uncertainties and other factors, as described in “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, that could cause our actual growth, results of operations, performance, financial position and business prospects and opportunities for this fiscal year and the periods that follow to differ materially from those expressed in, or implied by, those forward-looking statements.
Business Review and Outlook
It is management’s view that the Company has made good progress over the last fiscal year. Following the successful CE mark approval of its lead product, sugarBEAT® in May 2019, the Company announced in February 2020 that after discussions with the U.S. FDA, it had established that the Company may sell its CGM product with a digital service offering in the U.S. without FDA approval, as a non-medical wellbeing application.
The Company subsequently announced its intention to commence commericalization of this product application under the proBEATÔ brand and initiated a staged launch in December 2020; the product being launched in conjunction with a digital program for weight loss targeted at persons with diabetes, under the brand BEATdiabetes.life. In addition to this, Nemaura also submitted a PMA application to the FDA in July 2020 for the sugarBEAT® product itself.
Progress was also made in the UK, with the UK Licensee, Dallas Burston Ethitronix Limited, initiating their own user testing / soft-launch program. While some delays were experienced as a result of COVID-19, the conclusion of this test program resulted in the receipt of very positive feedback for the sugarBEAT® device itself and subsequent to the March 31, 2021, year-end, resulted in the first orders being placed with the Company by the Licensee, in preparation for the Licensee’s broader product launch in the UK later in 2021.
In summary the Company is preparing for a transition to commercial sales and developing the related commercial operations during the forthcoming fiscal year.
Corporate Overview
Since inception we have devoted substantially all of our efforts establishing a new business and while operations have commenced, we have generated no revenue from our limited operations. We are a holding corporation for a diagnostic medical device company and a clinical trial company specializing in discovering, developing, and commercializing diagnostic medical devices with initial applications in the area of diabetes.
Affiliated Company Relationships
Pharma was incorporated in November 2005. Through October 2013, all technology development and related transactions were incurred by Pharma. As new technology platforms were invented and developed, additional companies were set up to contain these new technology platforms, and to aid in the process of raising further investments to progress the development of these subsequent technologies. However, due to the small size of the operations, low number of employees and laboratory and office space required, initially, certain costs were borne by Pharma and charges to DDL were made as required. On April 4, 2018, a service agreement was put into place between Pharma and DDL. This covered the development of sugarBEAT® under Pharma’s ISO13485 Accreditation. In lieu of these services, Pharma invoices DDL on a periodic basis for said services. Services are provided at cost plus a service surcharge amounting to less than 10% of the total costs incurred. This agreement includes all aspects of the development, registration and manufacture of sugarBEAT®. Full legal title and beneficial ownership of the CE mark and all related intellectual property remains with Nemaura Medical under the terms of the service contract.
Dr. D.F.H. Chowdhury and Mr. Bashir Timol are officers of Pharma. The current management at DDL, including Dr. D. F. H. Chowdhury allocate 15% - 20% of their time to oversee the current operations at Pharma and will in due course implement a new management team in Pharma, and provide ongoing support in an advisory role. Pharma is a drug delivery company, which means that its activities are entirely related to the administration of drugs to the body of a human or animal subject. DDL is a diagnostic company, which means it is entirely focused on extracting molecules from the human or animal subject and analyzing it to make a diagnosis or to monitor the level of a particular molecule such as glucose. These are two independent businesses engaged in different activities, therefore there is no conflict of interest between the two and management does not see any conflicts arising from the allocations of some of DDL management time to overseeing the operations of Pharma.
Payments made solely for work that Dr. D. F. H. Chowdhury performs for Pharma in his capacity as manager are not charged to Nemaura Medical Inc. and are not included in our consolidated financial statements.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Management’s plans and basis of presentation
The Company has experienced recurring losses and negative cash flows from operations. On March 31, 2021, the Company had cash balances of $31,865,371, total stockholders’ equity of $8,358,172 and an accumulated deficit of $23,771,717. To date, the Company has in large part relied on equity financing to fund its operations. Initially additional funding also came from related party contributions. The Company expects to continue to incur losses from operations for the near-term and these losses could be significant as product development, regulatory activities, clinical trials and other commercial and product development related expenses are incurred.
Management’s strategic assessment includes the following potential options:
- support the UK and EU launch of sugarBEAT®;
- obtaining further regulatory approval for the sugarBEAT® device in other countries such as the U.S.;
- exploring licensing and partnership opportunities in other territories;
- developing the sugarBEAT® device for commercialization for other applications; and
- considering whether additional future capital raises can further enhance and accelerate the delivery of the Company’s strategic growth objectives.
Results of Operations
Year Ended March 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended March 31, 2020
Revenue
There was no revenue recognized in the years ended March 31, 2021 and March 31, 2020. In 2014, we received an upfront non-refundable cash payment of £1 million (approximately $1.38 million at March 31, 2021) in connection with an Exclusive Marketing Rights Agreement with an unrelated third party that provides the third party the exclusive right to market and promote the sugarBEAT® device and related patch under its own brand in the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland. We have deferred this licensing revenue until we complete our continuing performance obligations, which include securing successful CE marking of the sugarBEAT® patch (received in May 2019), and we expect to record the revenue in income over an approximately 10-year term after CE mark approval is obtained and once revenues commence. Although the revenue is deferred at March 31, 2021 and 2020, the cash payment became immediately available and was being used to fund our operations, including research and development costs associated with obtaining the CE mark approval.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $1,554,603 and $2,009,323 for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. This decrease was driven by the change in type of work needed to prepare the product for launch, with a reduction in subcontracted activities as the Company draws closer to commercialization. Historically significant research and development expenditure has related to clinical trials and improvements made to the sugarBEAT® device, and expenditures included sub-contractor activities, and consultant’s fees and wages. We expect these sugarBEAT® related research and development expenses to reduce in future periods as the product is launched, however the Company expects to continue to incur research and development costs to both enhance, refine and extend the platform capabilities for alternative applications.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $3,032,138 and $2,769,161 for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. These costs consisted of fees for legal, professional, consultancy, audit services, investor relations, insurance, and wages. We expect general and administrative expenses will increase going forward as the business transitions to a different cost structure over time to support an increase in operational functions associated with sales, marketing, customer service, as well as enhancements to other existing functions that support product manufacture and commercialization.
Other Comprehensive Income
For the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020 other comprehensive income was $472,559 and $2,986, respectively, arising from foreign currency translation adjustments.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have experienced net losses and negative cash flows from operations since our inception. We have sustained cumulative losses of $23,844,671 through March 31, 2021. We have historically financed our operations through the issuances of equity, UK government grants and contributions of services from related entities.
At March 31, 2021, the Company had net working capital of $27,565,625 which included cash balances of $31,865,371. The Company reported a net loss of $6,258,596 for the year ended March 31, 2021.
We do not currently have any major research programs underway and are focused on commercialization and revenue generation and therefore we expect that research and development costs for glucose monitoring will be reduced in the future.
We believe the cash position as of March 31, 2021, is adequate for our current level of operations through June 2022, and for the achievement of certain of our product development milestones. The $5 million note purchase agreement entered into on April 15, 2020, in addition to the $20 million note purchase agreement entered into on February 8, 2021 are subject to a security agreement and grant the investor a first-priority security interest in all rights, title, interest, claims and demands of the Company in and to all of the Company’s patents and all other proprietary rights, and all rights corresponding to the Company’s patents throughout the world, now owned and existing, and all replacements, proceeds, products and accessions thereof in order to induce the Investor to extend the credit evidenced by the note. The security agreement extends to any assets acquired at any time that the Company’s obligations under the note purchase agreements are outstanding.
Our plan is to utilize the cash on hand to continue establishing commercial manufacturing operations for the commercial supply of the sugarBEAT® device and patches now that CE mark approval has been received.
Cash Flows
Net cash used by our operating activities for the year ended March 31, 2021, was $5,998,097 which reflected the following key cashflow movements: A net loss of $6,258,596 which is partially offset by non-cash items booked as an expense relating to the accretion of the debt discount ($2,007,687), stock-based compensation paid to third party suppliers ($163,171), and depreciation and amortization ($98,075). Cashflows were also impacted by an increase in inventory held of $564,313 and prepaid expenses of $817,050, as the Company geared up towards commercialization.
Net cash used by our operating activities for the year ended March 31, 2020, was $3,449,545 which reflected our net loss of $4,160,196, increased by an increase in inventory of $258,523 and increase in accrued expenses and other liabilities of $102,898 and a reduction in liability due to related parties of $91,347. This was offset by stock-based compensation $565,039, an increase in accounts payable of $138,485. This was further offset by depreciation and amortization of $67,818.
Net cash used in investing activities was $836,440 for the year ended March 31, 2021, which reflected expenditures made in developing intellectual property, primarily related to patent filings of $81,952 and the purchase of property and equipment of $90,730. Cash of $663,758 was invested in software development to support broadening the product portfolio in-line with the Company’s commercial strategy.
Net cash used in investing activities was $211,031 for the year ended March 31, 2020, which reflected expenditures made in developing intellectual property, primarily related to patent filings of $53,206 and the purchase of property and equipment of $157,825.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended March 31, 2021, was $37,986,392. Proceeds from the issuance of common stock in relation to equity funding was $15,750,672 with associated cash costs of $957,193; the sale of warrants providing a further $400,503. $25,000,000 was provided via the issuance of two notes payable during the year, with associated cash costs incurred of $1,525,035 while repayments made were $600,000. $82,555 of cash expense was incurred in relation to concluding the full repayment of the Insurance financing arrangement.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended March 31, 2020, was $97,231. Proceeds from the ATM facility delivered gross proceeds of $152,492, with associated cash costs of $40,365. The sale of warrants provided $26,000, while $40,896 of cash expense was incurred in relation to the repayment of the Insurance financing arrangement.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements, including unrecorded derivative instruments that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Contractual Obligations
None.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions about future events that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Future events and their effects cannot be determined with absolute certainty. Therefore, the determination of estimates requires the exercise of judgment. Actual results inevitably will differ from those estimates, and such differences may be material to the consolidated financial statements. The most significant accounting estimates inherent in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements include estimates associated with research and development, income taxes and intangible assets, revenue recognition and stock-based compensation for non-employees.
The Company's financial position, results of operations and cash flows are impacted by the accounting policies the Company has adopted. In order to get a full understanding of the Company's consolidated financial statements, one must have a clear understanding of the accounting policies employed. A summary of the Company's critical accounting policies are as follows:
Revenue recognition: While the Company is not currently recognizing revenue, we have considered the guidelines within Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. This standard applies to all contracts with customers, except for contracts that are within the scope of other standards, such as leases, insurance, collaboration arrangements and financial instruments. Under ASC Topic 606, an entity recognizes revenue when its customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration that the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that an entity determines are within the scope of ASC Topic 606, the entity performs the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. The Company only applies the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that the entity will collect the consideration it is entitled to in exchange for the goods or services it transfers to the customer. At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC Topic 606, the Company assesses the goods or services promised within each contract and determines those that are performance obligations and assesses whether each promised good or service is distinct. The Company then recognizes as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
The Company may enter into product development and other agreements with collaborative partners. The terms of the agreements may include non-refundable signing and licensing fees, milestone payments and royalties on any product sales derived from collaborations.
The Company has entered into license agreements and for these, recognizes up front license payments as revenue upon delivery of the license only if the license has stand-alone value to the customer. However, where further performance criteria must be met, revenue is deferred and recognized on a straight-line basis over the period the Company is expected to complete its performance obligations.
Royalty revenue will be recognized upon the sale of the related products provided the Company has no remaining performance obligations under the agreement.
Research and development expenses: The Company charges research and development expenses to operations as incurred. Research and development expenses primarily consist of salaries and related expenses for personnel and outside contractor and consulting services. Other research and development expenses include the costs of materials and supplies used in research and development, prototype manufacturing, clinical studies, related information technology and an allocation of facilities costs.
Income taxes: Income taxes are accounted for under the asset and liability method. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, and operating loss carry forwards. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the year in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred income tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. A valuation allowance is provided to reduce the carrying amount of deferred income tax assets if it is considered more likely than not that some portion, or all, of the deferred income tax assets will not be realized.
The Company recognizes the effect of income tax positions only if those positions are more likely than not of being sustained. Recognized income tax positions are measured at the largest amount that is greater than 50% likely of being realized. Changes in recognition or measurement are reflected in the period in which the change in judgment occurs. The Company has elected to classify interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits as part of income tax expense in the consolidated statements of comprehensive loss.
Intangible assets: Intangible assets consist of licenses and patents associated with the sugarBEAT® device and are amortized on a straight-line basis, generally over their legal lives of up to 20 years and are reviewed for impairment. Costs capitalized relate to invoices received from third parties and not any internal costs. The Company evaluates its intangible assets (all have finite lives) and other long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that they may not be recoverable, or at least annually. Recoverability of finite and other long-lived assets is measured by comparing the carrying amount of an asset group to the future undiscounted net cash flows expected to be generated by that asset group. The Company groups assets for purposes of such review at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows of the asset group are largely independent of the cash flows of the other groups of assets and liabilities. The amount of impairment to be recognized for finite and other long-lived assets is calculated as the difference between the carrying value and the fair value of the asset group, generally measured by discounting estimated future cash flows. There were no impairment indicators present during the years ended March 31, 2021 or 2020.
Software development costs: Capitalization of software development costs incurred in the research and development of new software products and enhancements to existing software products for external use begins when a product’s technological feasibility has been established and ends when the resulting product is available for general market release. Amortization of the capitalized software is classified within product cost of goods sold in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
For each capitalized software product, the annual amortization is equal to the greater of:
1. The amount computed using the ratio of software product’s current fiscal year gross revenue bears to the total current fiscal year and anticipated future gross revenues for the product, or
2. The amount computed based on a straight-line method over the remaining estimated economic life of the product, which can be a range between 3 - 8 years.
Annually, or more frequently if required by triggering events, an analysis of the net realizable value of the capitalized software is completed and the amount by which unamortized software costs exceeds the net realizable value, if any, is recognized as a charge to income in the period it is determined.
Stock-based compensation: The Company accounts for stock-based payments in accordance with stock-based payment accounting guidance which requires all stock-based payments to be recognized based upon their fair values. The fair value of stock-based awards is estimated at the grant date using the Black-Scholes Option Pricing Model and the portion that is ultimately expected to vest is recognized as compensation cost over the requisite service period. The determination of fair value using the Black-Scholes Option Pricing Model is affected by the Company’s stock price as well as assumptions regarding a number of complex and subjective variables, including expected stock price volatility, risk-free interest rate, expected dividends and projected employee stock option exercise behaviors. The Company accounts for forfeitures of unvested awards as they occur.
To date, the Company has not granted any stock-based compensation awards to employees.
The Company accounts for share-based payments to non-employees by aligning it with the accounting for share-based payments to employees, with certain exceptions.