Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated by the forward-looking statements due to important factors and risks including, but not limited to, those set forth in the “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this report.
Overview
9 Meters is a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on rare and unmet needs in gastroenterology. Our pipeline includes drug candidates for short bowel syndrome (SBS), celiac disease, and three early-stage candidates for undisclosed rare and/or orphan diseases. Our product development pipeline is currently positioned as described in the table below (all upcoming milestones as of the date of this report):
NM-002 Long-Acting GLP-1
NM-002 is a long-acting injectable glucagon-like-peptide-1 (“GLP-1”) analogue being developed for SBS, a debilitating orphan disease with an underserved market. It affects up to 20,000 people in the U.S., with similar prevalence in Europe. Patients with SBS cannot absorb enough water, vitamins, protein, fat, calories and other nutrients from food. It is a severe disease with life-changing consequences, such as impaired intestinal absorption, diarrhea and metabolic complications. A portion of patients have life-long dependency on Parenteral Support (PS) to survive with risk of life-threatening infections and extra-organ impairment. NM-002 links exenatide, a GLP-1 analogue, to a long-acting linker technology and is designed specifically to address the gastric effects in SBS patients by slowing digestive transit time. The asset uses proprietary XTEN® technology to extend the half-life of exenatide, allowing for once- to twice-per-month dosing, thus potentially increasing convenience for patients and caregivers. NM-002 is patent-protected and has received orphan drug designation by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). We dosed our first patients in a Phase 1b/2a study in adult patients suffering from SBS in July 2020.
We announced top-line results in the fourth quarter of 2020. The study met its primary objective as NM-002 demonstrated excellent safety and tolerability. In addition, NM-002 demonstrated a clinically relevant improvement in total stool output (TSO) volume within 48 hours of first dose. The Phase 1b/2a clinical trial was an open-label, two-dose study evaluating the safety and tolerability of three escalating fixed doses of NM-002 (50 mg, 100 mg, 150 mg) in 9 adults with SBS for 56 days. The trial was conducted at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center. Patients in each of the three cohorts received two
subcutaneous doses two weeks apart with six weeks of subsequent follow-up. The study assessed the safety and tolerability of repeated doses on Days 1 and 15 at each dose level. Because reduced TSO volume and bowel movement frequency are correlated with improved intestinal absorption and potentially less need for intravenous supplementation for nutrition and hydration, these were key secondary objectives in the trial. The primary purpose of this open-label Phase 1b/2a study was to learn about the compound and its safety and potential efficacy in order to inform future development.
NM-002 was generally safe and well tolerated: 17 treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs) were observed in 9 patients, 15 of which were mild, transient and self-limited without further intervention. The majority of TEAEs were GI-related (nausea and vomiting).
Importantly, 8 of the 9 patients experienced meaningful declines in TSO following each dose, relative to a baseline output. The rapid onset of clinical improvements in stool volumes, as observed in all 9 patients having substantial reductions in stool output within 48 hours of the first dose, shows the potential for NM-002 to address the primary problem of chronic malabsorptive diarrhea in SBS patients. Following communication from the FDA in the first quarter of 2021, we plan to initiate a phase 2 study in the second quarter of 2021 in approximately 20 patients using TSO as the primary efficacy outcome measure. This trial is planned to be a multi-center, double-blind, double-dummy, randomized placebo-controlled trial. The FDA has provided global anchor questions and specific guidance for performance of exit interviews to support clinical meaningfulness of observed efficacy.
NM-002 has received Orphan Drug Designation from the FDA. The FDA Office of Orphan Products Development grants orphan designation to advance the evaluation of safe and effective drugs and biologics to treat, prevent or diagnose rare diseases affecting fewer than 200,000 people in the U.S. Under the Orphan Drug Act, orphan designation qualifies drug sponsors for development incentives conferred by the FDA, including tax credits for qualified clinical testing.
NM-001 (Larazotide) Tight Junction Regulator
In 2019, we initiated a Phase 3 clinical trial for our co-lead drug candidate, larazotide acetate or larazotide, for the treatment of celiac disease. Larazotide has the potential to be a first-to-market therapeutic for celiac disease, an unmet medical need affecting an estimated 1% of the U.S. population or more than 3 million individuals. Patients with celiac disease have no treatment alternative other than a strict lifelong adherence to a gluten-free diet, which is difficult to maintain and can be deficient in key nutrients. In celiac disease, larazotide is the only drug which has successfully met its primary clinical efficacy endpoint with statistical significance in a Phase 2b efficacy trial, which was comprised of 342 patients. We completed the End of Phase 2 meeting with the FDA for the treatment of celiac disease with larazotide and received Fast Track designation. Larazotide has been shown to be safe and effective after being tested in several clinical trials involving nearly 600 patients.
We have approximately 110 active clinical trial sites in our Phase 3 trial with three treatment groups, 0.25 mg of larazotide, 0.5 mg of larazotide and a placebo arm. In addition, after consultation with the FDA, the analytical approach to the primary endpoint was modified to perform a continuous variable analysis instead of a responder analysis of the primary efficacy outcome. The new methodology enables a more capital-efficient study, with reduction in participants from 630 to 525. Site activation and patient enrollment have been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. We continue to monitor the evolving situation with COVID-19, which is likely to directly or indirectly impact the pace of enrollment over the next several months. Given challenges in enrollment related to the COVID-19 pandemic, interim results and topline data readouts are now anticipated in 2022.
NM-003 Long-Acting GLP-2
NM-003 is a proprietary long-acting glucagon-like-peptide (“GLP-2”) receptor agonist that utilizes proprietary XTEN® technology to extend circulating half-life. On December 9, 2020, we announced that the FDA has granted orphan drug designation to NM-003 for prevention of acute graft versus host disease. NM-003 is currently undergoing an indication selection process through an ongoing probability of technical and regulatory success analysis.
NM-004 Immunomodulator
NM-004 is a double-cleaved mesalamine with an immunomodulator. These two assets are being evaluated for development in rare and/or orphan indications via an ongoing probability of technical and regulatory success analysis. NM-004 is currently undergoing an indication selection process through an ongoing probability of technical and regulatory success analysis.
NM-102 Tight Junction Microbiome Modulator
NM-102, a small molecule peptide, is being developed as a potential microbiome modulator and undergoing an indication selection process. NM-102 is expected to enter an IND-enabling pathway in 2021 and is a long-acting, degradation-resistant peptide, believed to be gut-restricted, and presumed to prevent gut microbial metabolites and antigens from trafficking into systemic circulation. NM-102 is currently being evaluated for development in rare and/or orphan indication through an ongoing probability of technical and regulatory success analysis.
Corporate Development During 2019 and 2020
Agreement and Plan of Merger and Reorganization with RDD Pharma, Ltd.
On October 6, 2019, we entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger and Reorganization pursuant to which we agreed to acquire all of the outstanding capital stock of privately-held RDD Pharma, Ltd., an Israel corporation (“RDD”), in exchange for common stock issued by us to the existing RDD shareholders (the “RDD Merger”). The RDD Merger closed on April 30, 2020. In connection with the RDD Merger, we changed our name from Innovate Biopharmaceuticals, Inc. to 9 Meters Biopharma, Inc.
RDD Merger Financing
On April 29, 2020, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with various accredited investors, pursuant to which we agreed to issue and sell to the investors units (“Units”) consisting of (i) one share of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock (the "Series A Preferred Stock") and (ii) one five-year warrant (the "Preferred Warrants") to purchase one share of Series A Preferred Stock (the “RDD Merger Financing”). On May 4, 2020, we closed the RDD Merger Financing and sold an aggregate of (i) 382,779 shares of Series A Preferred Stock, which converted into 38,277,900 shares of common stock on June 30, 2020, upon receipt of approval by our stockholders (the “Automatic Conversion”), and (ii) Preferred Warrants to purchase up to 382,779 shares of Series A Preferred Stock, which, following the Automatic Conversion, became exercisable for 38,277,900 shares of common stock. The exercise price of the Preferred Warrants was $58.94 per share of Series A Preferred Stock, and following the Automatic Conversion, became $0.5894 per share of common stock, subject to adjustments as provided under the terms of the Preferred Warrants. In addition, broker warrants covering 8,112 Units and broker warrants covering 10,899 shares of Series A Preferred Stock, which, following the Automatic Conversion, became exercisable for 2,712,300 shares of common stock, were issued in connection with the RDD Merger Financing. Gross proceeds from the RDD Merger Financing were approximately $22.6 million with net proceeds of approximately $19.2 million after deducting commissions and estimated offering costs.
Naia Acquisition
On May 6, 2020, we entered into and consummated a two-step merger with Naia Rare Diseases, Inc. in accordance with the terms of an Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “Naia Acquisition”). The consideration for the Naia Acquisition at closing consisted of $2.1 million in cash and 4,835,438 shares of common stock valued at $2.2 million, plus the pre-payment of certain operating costs on behalf of Naia totaling $0.1 million. Consideration for the Naia Acquisition also included potential future development and sales milestone payments worth up to $80.4 million and royalties on net sales of certain products to which Naia has exclusive rights by license. No contingent consideration for the Naia Acquisition was recorded at the time of acquisition because the potential development and sales milestones were not deemed probable.
Warrant Exchange
Pursuant to a purchase agreement dated April 29, 2019, we issued warrants to purchase up to 4,318,272 shares of our common stock (the “April Warrants”) and granted the placement agent warrants to purchase up to 215,914 shares of common
stock (the “Placement Agent Warrants”). On December 19, 2019, we entered into separate exchange agreements with each of the purchasers of the April Warrants and the Placement Agent Warrants (the “Exchange Agreements”). Pursuant to the Exchange Agreements, we agreed to issue to the purchasers an aggregate of 5,441,023 shares of our common stock (the “Exchange Shares”) at a ratio of 1.2 Exchange Shares for each purchaser warrant in exchange for the cancellation and termination of all of the outstanding April Warrants and Placement Agent Warrants. On December 26, 2019, we issued 3,593,714 Exchange Shares in exchange for the cancellation and termination of Exchange Warrants to purchase 2,994,762 shares of common stock. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we issued 1,847,309 Exchange Shares in exchange for the cancellation and termination of the remaining outstanding Exchange Warrants.
Additional Note
On January 10, 2020, we entered into an additional securities purchase agreement and unsecured convertible promissory note with the Convertible Noteholder in the principal amount of $2,750,000 (the “Additional Note”). The Convertible Noteholder could elect to convert all or a portion of the Additional Note, at any time from time to time into our common stock at a conversion price of $3.25 per share, subject to adjustment for stock splits, dividends, combinations and similar events. The purchase price of the Additional Note was $2.5 million and carried an original issuance discount of $250,000, which was included in the principal amount of the Additional Note.
The Additional Note bore interest at the rate of 10% (which would increase to 18% upon and during the continuance of an event of default) per annum, compounding on a daily basis. All principal and accrued interest on the Additional Note was originally due on the second anniversary of the date of the Additional Note’s issuance. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we made principal payments of $2.7 million on the Additional Note, consisting of $1.0 million in cash payments and $1.7 million in stock conversions. In January 2021, we paid the remaining balance of principal and accrued interest of approximately $59,000, which was paid in cash.
Warrant Extension and Offer to Amend and Exercise
Effective February 6, 2020, we entered into amendments with the holders of our outstanding short-term warrants originally issued March 18, 2019 (the “Short-Term Warrants”) to extend the exercise period of each Short-Term Warrant by six months. The Short-Term Warrants, as amended, are exercisable for up to an aggregate of 4,181,068 shares of our common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, until September 18, 2020. Except as specifically amended, the terms and conditions of each Short-Term Warrant remained in full force and effect and were not affected by this amendment. See “Note 1-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the accompanying financial statements included in this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for additional terms of the Short-Term Warrants.
On February 12, 2020, we offered to amend outstanding warrants to purchase an aggregate of 12,346,631 shares of common stock (the “Original Warrants”) held by holders of certain outstanding warrants (the “Offer to Amend and Exercise”). The Original Warrants of eligible holders who elected to participate in the Offer to Amend and Exercise were amended to (i) shorten the exercise period so that they expired concurrently with the closing of the RDD Merger on April 30, 2020 and (ii) reduced the exercise price to $0.10 per share. The amended warrants were required to be exercised for cash, and any cashless exercise provisions in the Original Warrants were omitted. On April 29, 2020, warrants to purchase 12,230,418 shares of common stock were exercised in the Offer to Amend and Exercise for aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $1.2 million.
December 2020 Offering
On December 11, 2020, we entered into an underwriting agreement (the “Underwriting Agreement”) with William Blair & Company, L.L.C. and Truist Securities, Inc., as representatives of the several underwriters named therein (the “Underwriters”), in connection with the public offering of 46,153,847 shares of our common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, at a price of $0.65 per share, less underwriting discounts and commissions (the “December 2020 Offering”). Pursuant to the terms of the Underwriting Agreement, we granted the Underwriters a 30-day option to purchase up to an additional 6,923,077 shares of common stock at the same price, which the Underwriters exercised in full on December 14, 2020. On December 15, 2020, upon closing of the December 2020 Offering, we received net proceeds of approximately $32.0 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses. We plan to use the proceeds from the December 2020 Offering to progress the development of our product pipeline, including initiating a Phase 2 trial for SBS in 2021.
Financial Overview
Since our inception, we have focused our efforts and resources on identifying and developing our research and development programs. We have not had any products approved for commercial sale and have incurred operating losses in each year since inception. Substantially all of our operating losses resulted from expenses incurred in connection with our research and development programs and from general and administrative costs associated with our operations. To date, we have financed our operations primarily through public offerings of equity securities and private placements of convertible debt and equity securities. In December 2020, we received net proceeds of approximately $32.0 million in the December 2020 Offering described above.
As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $132.1 million. We incurred net losses of $61.5 million and $27.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future, which may fluctuate significantly between periods. We anticipate that our expenses will increase substantially as and to the extent we:
•continue research and development, including preclinical and clinical development of our existing and future product candidates, including NM-001 and NM-002;
•experience delays in our clinical trials due to the COVID-19 pandemic;
•seek regulatory approval for our product candidates;
•commercialize any product candidates for which we obtain regulatory approval;
•maintain and protect our intellectual property rights;
•add operational, financial and management information systems and personnel; and
•continue to incur additional legal, accounting, regulatory, tax-related and other expenses required to operate as a public company.
As such, we will need substantial additional funding to support our operating activities. Adequate funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. We currently anticipate that we will seek to fund our operations through equity or debt financings, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements, or other sources of financing. Our failure to obtain sufficient funds on a timely basis or on acceptable terms could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition.
COVID-19
The effect of the COVID-19 pandemic and its associated restrictions has increased and may continue to increase the expected development timelines and the anticipated aggregate costs for our product candidates by, among other things, causing disruptions in the supply chain for clinical supplies, delays in the timing and pace of subject enrollment in clinical trials and lower than anticipated subject enrollment and completion rates, delays in the review and approval of our regulatory submissions by the FDA and other agencies with respect to our product candidates, and other unforeseen disruptions. Site activation and patient enrollment have recently been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and we expect the pace of enrollment may continue to be impacted by the pandemic over the next several months. We are working closely with our clinical trial sites and product candidate manufacturers to ensure that patient safety and clinical supply of our product candidates are not adversely impacted by the pandemic. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we put in place several safety measures for our employees, patients, healthcare providers and suppliers. These measures included, but were not limited to, substantially restricting travel, limiting access to our corporate office, including allowing employees to work remotely, providing personal protective equipment to employees, investigator sites and third-party vendors, implementing social distancing protocols, and coordinating safety protocols with our investigator sites.
The ultimate impact resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic will depend, among other factors, on the extent of the pandemic in the regions with clinical trial sites, the timing and availability of the COVID-19 vaccines and length and severity of travel restrictions and other limitations ordered by governmental agencies. To date, we have not experienced supply chain delays or shortages as a result of the pandemic.
The economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and its effect on capital markets and investor sentiment may adversely impact our ability to raise capital when needed or on acceptable terms to fund our development programs and operations.
However, we recently closed the December 2020 Offering and received net proceeds of approximately $32.0 million, which we plan to use for the Phase 2 trial in SBS and to continue progress on our Phase 3 trial in celiac.
We do not yet know the full extent of potential delays or impacts on our business, clinical trial activities, ability to access capital or on healthcare systems or the global economy as a whole. However, these effects could have a material adverse impact on our business and financial condition.
Research and Development Updates
In July 2020, we dosed our first patients in our Phase 1b/2a clinical trial for the treatment of SBS. In December 2020, we announced positive top-line results. NM-002 was generally safe and well tolerated and 8 of the 9 patients experienced meaningful declines in TSO following each dose, relative to a baseline output. The rapid onset of clinical improvements in stool volumes, as observed in all 9 patients having substantial reductions in stool output within 48 hours of the first dose, shows the potential for NM-002 to address the primary problem of chronic malabsorptive diarrhea in SBS patients.
During 2019, we dosed the first patient in our Phase 3 clinical trial for larazotide in adult patients with celiac disease. We have approximately 110 active clinical trial sites with three parallel treatment groups, 0.25 mg of larazotide tid, 0.5 mg of larazotide tid and a placebo arm. We currently anticipate a readout from the trial in 2022. In May 2020, we received a thorough QT (TQT) study waiver from the FDA for the Phase 3 trial of larazotide in celiac disease. The waiver supports larazotide’s strong precedent of safety and could potentially streamline the program’s timeline and cost effectiveness. In addition, after consultation with the FDA, the definition of the primary endpoint was modified to utilize a continuous variable instead of a responder analysis. The new methodology enables a more capital-efficient study, with reduction in participants from 630 to 525. Recently, we engaged Beyond Celiac to identify potential and appropriate patients for enrollment in the Phase 3 trial. We are planning to implement multiple additional measures to potentially enhance enrollment. We do not expect these measures to be implemented until COVID-19 restrictions are significantly lifted.
NM-102, a small molecule peptide, is being developed as a potential microbiome modulator and undergoing an indication selection process. NM-102 is expected to enter an IND-enabling pathway in 2021 and is a long-acting, degradation-resistant peptide, believed to be gut-restricted, and presumed to prevent gut microbial metabolites and antigens from trafficking into systemic circulation.
NM-003 is a proprietary long-acting GLP-2 agonist with improved serum half-life compared with short-acting versions, which we intend to progress through a clinical and regulatory pathway in an undisclosed orphan and rare GI indication. On December 9, 2020, we announced that the FDA has granted orphan drug designation to NM-003, a proprietary long-acting GLP-2 receptor agonist, for prevention of acute graft versus host disease. NM-003, also called teduglutide, is designed as a long-acting injectable GLP-2 receptor agonist that utilizes proprietary XTEN® technology to extend circulating half-life. NM-003 is currently undergoing an indication selection process through an ongoing probability of technical and regulatory success analysis.
NM-004 is a double-cleaved mesalamine with an immunomodulator. NM-102, NM-003 and NM-004 are being evaluated for development in rare and/or orphan indications via an ongoing probability of technical and regulatory success analysis.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table sets forth the key components of our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased approximately $2.8 million, or 20%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was driven primarily by a decrease of approximately $6.0 million in our clinical trial expense due to significant fees incurred in the prior year associated with our former clinical research organization and start-up fees for our Phase 3 clinical trial in celiac. This decrease was offset by an increase in research and development license fees of approximately $2.0 million due upon dosing of the first patient in our Phase 1b/2a trial for the treatment of SBS. In addition, personnel costs and benefits associated with our research and development personnel increased by approximately $0.3 million due to the addition of research and development personnel during the year ended December 31, 2020. Non-cash share-based compensation expense increased by approximately $0.9 million primarily due to the accelerated vesting of certain outstanding options upon closing of the RDD Merger and additional options awarded as a non-cash merger bonus, some of which were fully vested upon grant. The table below summarizes our research and development expenses allocated to our current clinical programs, license fees and other research and development expenses for the periods indicated.
Acquired In-process Research and Development
Acquired in-process research and development expense was approximately $32.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 and represents expenses associated with the RDD Merger and Naia Acquisition that closed during the year ended December 31, 2020. Approximately $28.8 million represents non-cash acquired in-process research and development expense paid in equity ownership. There was no acquired in-process research and development expense during the year ended December 31, 2019.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by less than $0.1 million, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to decreases in (i) other general corporate fees including patent protection of our intellectual property of approximately $0.6 million, (ii) professional fees of $1.1 million due to legal fees associated with the RDD Merger and RDD Merger Financing that were accounted for as offering fees and (iii) costs associated with operating as a public company of approximately $0.3 million. These decreases were offset by an increase in personnel costs and benefits of approximately $1.0 million. The increase in personnel costs and benefits includes an increase in severance costs of $0.6 million upon termination of former Innovate employees and additional general and administrative personnel hired upon closing of the RDD Merger. In addition, non-cash stock compensation expense increased by approximately $0.9 million due to accelerated vesting of certain outstanding options upon closing of the RDD Merger and additional options awarded as a non-cash merger bonus, some of which were fully vested upon grant.
Warrant Inducement Expense
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized warrant inducement expense of approximately $7.2 million and $1.3 million, respectively. The warrant inducement expense represents the accounting fair value of consideration issued to induce conversion of the April Warrants and Placement Agent Warrants exchanged for 1.2 shares of our common stock per warrant and to induce the exercise of certain warrants in the Offer to Amend and Exercise, further described in “Note 1-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other expense, net, for the year ended December 31, 2020, decreased by approximately $0.9 million, or 59%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in other expense consists of a decrease of approximately $1.0 million for the loss on extinguishment of debt that was incurred in March 2019, further described in “Note 6-Debt.” In addition, the gain on fair value of warrant liabilities increased by approximately $2.7 million. These changes were offset by increases in interest expense of approximately $2.2 million, which represents the non-cash beneficial conversion feature associated with our convertible note further described in “Note 6-Debt.” Interest income decreased by approximately $0.1 million and the gain on fair value of derivative liability decreased by approximately $0.5 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $37.9 million, compared to approximately $4.6 million as of December 31, 2019. The increase in cash and cash equivalents was primarily due to the net proceeds received in the December 2020 Offering of approximately $32.0 million. In addition, the Company closed the RDD Merger Financing in May 2020, which provided net proceeds of approximately $19.2 million. The proceeds received in both financings were supplemented by proceeds from sales of our common stock through the ATM of approximately $2.6 million and warrant exercise proceeds of $2.5 million. These increases in cash were offset by expenditures for business operations, research and development and clinical trial costs, including the recent completion of the Phase 1b/2a clinical trial in SBS and continued progress in our Phase 3 trial for celiac disease.
To date, we have not generated revenue from product sales. We do not know when, or if, we will generate any revenue from product sales. We expect to incur substantial expenditures in the foreseeable future for the continued development and
clinical trials of our product candidates. We will continue to require additional financing to develop and eventually commercialize our product candidates. Our future liquidity and capital requirements will depend on a number of factors, including the outcome of our clinical trials, which could be delayed due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, and our ability to complete the development and commercialization of our products. There are a number of variables beyond our control including the timing, success and overall expense associated with our clinical trials. Consequently, there can be no assurance that we will be able to achieve our objectives and we may need to seek additional equity or debt financings. If we are unable to raise additional funds when needed, our ability to develop our product candidates will be impaired. We may also be required to delay, reduce, or terminate some or all of our development programs and clinical trials. We have concluded that the prevailing conditions and ongoing liquidity risks faced by us raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities of approximately $19.4 million primarily consisted of a net loss of $61.5 million, a non-cash gain of $2.6 million for the change in the fair value of the warrant liabilities and a non-cash gain of approximately $0.8 million for the change in fair value of the convertible note derivative liabilities. These decreases were offset by adjustments for non-cash share-based compensation of approximately $4.7 million, non-cash warrant inducement expense of $7.2 million, non-cash interest expense of approximately $1.8 million, a non-cash beneficial conversion feature of approximately $2.2 million associated with the conversion of convertible note principal and interest, and non-cash in process research and development expense of approximately $28.8 million. In addition, the net change in operating assets and liabilities increased by approximately $0.8 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in operating activities of approximately $18.0 million primarily consisted of a net loss of $27.0 million and a non-cash gain of $1.2 million for the extinguishment of the Senior Convertible Note derivative liability and changes in the fair value of the warrant liabilities and the Unsecured Convertible Note derivative liability. These decreases were offset by adjustments for non-cash share-based compensation of approximately $2.9 million, non-cash warrant inducement expense of $1.3 million, non-cash loss of $1.0 million on the extinguishment of debt, non-cash interest expense of approximately $1.1 million, write-off of deferred offering costs associated with the ATM facility of $0.1 million and a net change of approximately $3.9 million due to changes in operating assets and liabilities.
Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities represents the purchase of property and equipment of approximately $2,500 and the purchase of in-process research and development, net of assets received, of approximately $3.2 million. Net cash used in investing activities of approximately $12,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019, represented the purchase of computer equipment.
Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities of approximately $55.9 million primarily consisted of (i) proceeds of $37.1 million from the sale of our common stock and warrants, (ii) proceeds of $22.6 million from the issuance of preferred stock and warrants in the RDD Merger Financing, (iii) proceeds of $2.5 million from the issuance of the Additional Note and (iv) proceeds of approximately $2.5 million from the exercise of warrants. These increases were offset by approximately $2.5 million in debt repayments and approximately $6.4 million in stock issuance costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities of approximately $16.8 million primarily consisted of (i) $20.7 million received from the sale of our common stock and warrants; and (ii) $5.0 million received from the issuance of the Unsecured Convertible Note. These increases were offset by approximately $7.8 million in debt repayments, approximately $1.0 million in stock issuance costs and approximately $0.1 million in debt issuance costs.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
In October 2017, we entered into a three-year lease agreement for office space that expired on September 30, 2020. Base annual rent for the three-year lease period was $60,000. Monthly rent payments of $5,000 were due in advance of the first day of each month for the 24-month term. A security deposit of approximately $5,000 was paid in October 2017. In July 2020, we signed a four-year lease agreement for the same office space with additional square footage that will expire on September 30, 2024 (the “Second Term”). Base annual rent for the Second Term is $72,000 with monthly rent payments of $6,000.
We estimated the present value of the lease payments over the remaining term of the lease using a discount rate of 12%, which represented our estimated incremental borrowing rate. The two-year renewal option was excluded from the lease payments as we concluded the exercise of this option was not considered reasonably certain.
Periodically, we enter into separation and general release agreements with former executives that include separation benefits consistent with the former executive’s employment agreements. We recognized severance expense totaling $0.8 million and $0.3 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Severance payments are made in equal installments over 12 months from the date of separation. The accrued severance obligation in respect of the former executives is $0.3 million as of December 31, 2020.
We are obligated to make future payments to third parties under in-license agreements, including sublicense fees, royalties and payments that become due and payable on the achievement of certain development and commercialization milestones. In general, the amount and timing of sub-license fees and the achievement and timing of development and commercialization milestones are not probable and estimable, and as such, these commitments have not been included on the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred development milestone fees of approximately $2.2 million associated with the dosing of the first patient in our Phase 1b/2a clinical trial for the treatment of SBS.
We also enter into agreements in the normal course of business with contract research organizations and other third parties with respect to services for clinical trials, clinical supply manufacturing and other operating purposes that are generally terminable by us with thirty to ninety days advance notice.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4) of Regulation S-K as promulgated by the SEC.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
Use of Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the
reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Changes in estimates are reflected in reported results for the period in which they become known. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Critical Accounting Policies
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are critical to the process of making significant judgments and estimates in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements and understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Areas of our consolidated financial statements where estimates may have the most significant effect include fair value measurements, accrued expenses, share-based compensation, income taxes and management’s assessment of our ability to continue as a going concern. Changes in the facts or circumstances underlying these estimates could result in material changes and actual results could differ from these estimates.
Acquired In-process Research and Development Expense
We have acquired and may in the future acquire, rights to develop and commercialize new drug candidates and/or other in-process research and development assets. The up-front acquisition payments, as well as future milestone payments associated with asset acquisitions that are deemed probable to achieve the milestones and do not meet the definition of a derivative, are expensed as acquired in-process research and development provided that the drug has not achieved regulatory approval for marketing, and, absent obtaining such approval, have no alternative future use. See “Note 3-Merger and Acquisition” to our consolidated financial statements for further discussion of acquired in-process research and development expense related to the RDD Merger and Naia Acquisition.
Fair Value Measurements
We account for derivative instruments in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 815, Derivative and Hedging, which establishes accounting and reporting standards for derivative instruments, including certain derivative instruments embedded in other financial instruments or contracts and requires recognition of all derivatives on the balance sheet at fair value. Our derivative financial instruments consist of embedded options in our convertible debt. The embedded derivatives include provisions that provide the noteholder with certain conversion and put rights at various conversion or redemption values as well as certain call options for us.
The fair value of the embedded derivatives issued in connection with the convertible debt financings was determined by using a Monte Carlo simulation technique (“MCS”) to value the embedded derivative associated with each note. As part of the MCS valuation a discounted cash flow (“DCF”) model is used to value the debt on a stand-alone basis and determine the discount rate to utilize in both the DCF and MCS models. The significant estimates used in the DCF model include the time to maturity of the convertible debt and calculated discount rate, which includes an estimate of our specific risk premium. The MCS methodology calculates the theoretical value of an option based on certain parameters, including (i) the threshold of exercising the option, (ii) the price of the underlying security, (iii) the time to expiration or expected term, (iv) the expected volatility of the underlying security, (v) the risk-free rate and (vi) the number of paths. We recognized a gain of approximately $0.8 million for the change in fair value of derivative liability during the year ended December 31, 2020.
The Short-Term Warrants, March Long-Term Warrants, New Warrants, April Warrants and Placement Agent Warrants that we issued during the year ended December 31, 2019 are freestanding financial instruments that contained net settlement options and required us to settle these warrants in cash under certain circumstances. The March Long-Term Warrants and New Warrants were collectively referred to as the Long-Term Warrants. The April Warrants and Placement Agent Warrants were collectively referred to as the Exchange Warrants. We accounted for these warrants as liabilities and initially recorded the warrant liabilities at fair value on the date of grant. The warrant liabilities were subsequently re-measured to fair value at each balance sheet date until the warrant liabilities were settled. Changes in the fair value of the warrants were recognized as a non-cash component of other income and expense in the statements of operations and comprehensive loss. As of December
31, 2020, all warrant liabilities had been exercised or settled. There are approximately 38.7 million equity warrants outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
The valuation technique utilized for our derivative liability and warrant liabilities involves management’s estimates and judgment based on unobservable inputs and is classified in Level 3. Changes to estimates and assumptions used in estimating the fair value of an instrument may produce materially different values and could have a material impact to our reported net losses in future periods. See “Note 1-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” and “Note 6-Debt” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional details regarding the accounting policy and fair value assumptions used in accounting for our fair value instruments.
Accrued Expenses
We incur periodic expenses such as cost associated with clinical trials and non-clinical activities, manufacturing of pharmaceutical active ingredients and drug products, regulatory fees and activities, fees paid to external service providers and consultants, salaries and related employee benefits and professional fees. We are required to estimate our accrued expenses, which involves reviewing quotations and contracts, identifying services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice monthly in arrears for services performed or when contractual milestones are met. We estimate accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date based on facts and circumstances known at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary.
Costs incurred in research and development of products are charged to research and development expense as incurred. Costs for preclinical studies and clinical trial activities are recognized based on an evaluation of the vendors’ progress towards completion of specific tasks, using data such as patient enrollment, clinical site activations or information provided by vendors regarding the actual costs incurred. Payments for these activities are based on the terms of individual contracts and payment timing may differ significantly from the period in which services are performed. We determine accrual estimates through reports from and discussions with applicable personnel and outside service providers as to the progress or state of clinical trials, or the services completed. Nonrefundable advance payments for goods or services that will be used in future research and development activities are expensed when the activity is performed or when the goods have been received, rather than when payment is made. The estimates of accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date are based on the facts and circumstances known at the time. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from those actually incurred, our estimates and assumptions could differ significantly from actual costs, which could result in increases or decreases in research and development expenses in future periods when actual results are known.
Share-based Compensation
We account for share-based compensation using the fair value method of accounting which requires the grant of stock options to be recognized in the consolidated statements of operations based on the option’s fair value at the grant date. The expense associated with share-based compensation is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of each award; however, the amount of compensation expense recognized at any date must be at least equal to the portion of the grant-date value of the award that is vested at that date.
We estimate the fair value of our stock-based awards using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, which requires the input of valuation assumptions, some of which are highly subjective. Key valuation assumptions include:
•Expected dividend yield: the expected dividend is assumed to be zero as we have never paid dividends and have no current plans to pay any dividends on our common stock.
•Expected stock price volatility: due to our limited historical trading data as a public company, the expected volatility is derived from the average historical volatilities of publicly traded companies within the same industry that we consider to be comparable to our business over a period approximating the expected term. In evaluating comparable companies, we consider factors such as industry, stage of life cycle, financial leverage, size and risk profile.
•Risk-free interest rate: the risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield in effect at the time of grant for zero coupon U.S. Treasury notes with maturities approximately equal to the expected term.
•Expected term: the expected term represents the period that the stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding. Our historical stock option exercise data does not provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate an expected term for employees due to a lack of sufficient data. Therefore, we estimate the expected term by using the simplified method provided by the SEC. The simplified method calculates the expected term as the average of the time-to-vesting and the contractual life of options. The expected term for non-employees is the contractual life of the option.
Income Taxes
No provision for federal and state income tax expense has been recorded for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 due to the valuation allowance recorded against the net deferred tax asset and recurring losses. Deferred income taxes reflect the net tax effects of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income tax purposes.
As of December 31, 2020, we had net operating loss carryforwards for federal, state and foreign income tax purposes of approximately $60,096,300, $59,538,000 and $18,736,600 respectively. Federal loss carryforwards of $3,551,900 begin to expire in 2034 and $56,544,400 of the federal losses carryforward indefinitely. The state loss carryforwards begin to expire in 2029. Foreign net operating losses carry forward indefinitely, and may be subject to limitation. As of December 31, 2020, we had contribution carryforwards of approximately $10,300, which begin to expire in 2022. In addition, we have federal research and development credits of $1,358,200, which begin to expire in 2038.
The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, contains provisions which limit the ability to utilize the net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards in the case of certain events, including significant changes in ownership interests. If our net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards are limited, and we have taxable income which exceeds the permissible yearly net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards, we would incur a federal income tax liability even though net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards would be available in future years.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For details of recent accounting pronouncements that we have adopted or are currently being evaluated, see “Note 1-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-Recently Issued Accounting Standards” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.