Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and accompanying notes to financial statements appearing elsewhere in this report.
Executive Overview
Our primary strategy is to invest in non-operated minority working and mineral interests in oil and gas properties, with a core area of focus in the premier basins within the United States. Using this strategy, we participated in 6,640 gross (475.1 net) producing wells as of December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, we had leased approximately 183,527 net acres, of which approximately 90% were developed and substantially all were located in the Williston Basin in the United States.
Our average daily production for full year 2020 was 33,078 Boe per day, and in the fourth quarter of 2020 was 35,738 Boe per day (approximately 76% oil). During 2020, we added 17.8 net wells to production, and we ended 2020 with 28.1 net wells in process.
Our financial and operating performance for the year ended December 31, 2020 included the following:
•Oil and gas sales of $324.1 million in 2020, plus an additional $188.3 million of cash settlements on commodity derivatives during 2020
•Cash flows from operations of $331.7 million in 2020
•Proved reserves of 122.6 MMBoe at December 31, 2020, as estimated by our third-party reserve engineers under SEC guidelines
Impacts of COVID-19 Pandemic and Economic Environment
The novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and efforts to mitigate the spread of the disease have created unprecedented challenges for our industry, including a drastic decline in demand for crude oil. In addition, in March 2020, members of OPEC failed to agree on production levels which led to a substantial decrease in oil prices and an increasingly volatile market. The oil price war ended in April 2020, with a deal to cut global petroleum output but did not go far enough to offset the impact of COVID-19 on demand. As a result of lower demand caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and the oversupply of crude oil, spot and future prices of crude oil fell to historic lows during the second quarter of 2020 and remained depressed through much of 2020. Operators in the Williston Basin responded by significantly decreasing drilling and completion activity, and by shutting in or curtailing production from a significant number of producing wells.
As a result of these factors, we reduced our 2020 developmental capital spending to $162.8 million, a reduction of 56% compared to our developmental capital expenditures in 2019. Our 2020 production was significantly lower than originally expected due to actions by many of our operating partners to shut-in or curtail production and defer development plans as a result of the low commodity price environment. We estimate that curtailments, shut-ins and delayed well completions reduced our average daily production by approximately 16,800 Boe per day in the second quarter of 2020 and by approximately 11,000 Boe per day in the third quarter of 2020. We estimate that curtailments and shut-ins reduced our average daily production by approximately 4,200 Boe per day in the fourth quarter of 2020. Conditions have improved with the recovery of commodity prices in late 2020 and early 2021, but operators’ decisions on these matters are evolving rapidly, and it remains difficult to predict the future effects on our company and its business. However, we expect that our cash flow from operations and borrowing availability under our revolving credit facility will allow us to meet our liquidity needs for at least the next twelve 12 months.
As a result of low commodity prices during 2020, we incurred a full-cost ceiling test impairment charge of $1,066.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Depending on future commodity price levels, the trailing twelve-month average price used in the ceiling calculation may decline, which could cause additional future write downs of our oil and natural gas properties. In addition to commodity prices, our production rates, levels of proved reserves, future development costs, transfers of unevaluated properties and other factors will determine our actual ceiling test calculation and impairment analysis in future periods. Any ceiling test impairment charge would be non-cash in nature and should not impact any covenants under our various debt instruments.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have instituted various measures to protect our workforce and our business operations, such as remote working and business travel restrictions. As a non-operator with no field operations, substantially all of our employees’ work can be completed from home. We will continue to monitor the guidelines and recommendations provided by the relevant authorities, and we will continue to make decisions aimed at protecting and furthering the interests of all stakeholders.
Reverse Stock Split
On September 18, 2020, we effected a 1-for-10 reverse stock split of the Company’s issued and outstanding shares of common stock (the “Reverse Stock Split”). References to numbers of shares of common stock and per share data have been adjusted to reflect the Reverse Stock Split on a retroactive basis. See Note 5 to our financial statements for further information.
Source of Our Revenues
We derive our revenues from the sale of oil, natural gas and NGLs produced from our properties. Revenues are a function of the volume produced, the prevailing market price at the time of sale, oil quality, Btu content and transportation costs to market. We use derivative instruments to hedge future sales prices on a substantial, but varying, portion of our oil production. We expect our derivative activities will help us achieve more predictable cash flows and reduce our exposure to downward price fluctuations. The use of derivative instruments has in the past, and may in the future, prevent us from realizing the full benefit of upward price movements but also mitigates the effects of declining price movements.
Principal Components of Our Cost Structure
•Oil price differentials. The price differential between our well head price and the NYMEX WTI benchmark price is primarily driven by the cost to transport oil via train, pipeline or truck to refineries.
•Gain (loss) on commodity derivatives, net. We utilize commodity derivative financial instruments to reduce our exposure to fluctuations in the prices of oil and gas. Gain (loss) on commodity derivatives, net is comprised of (i) cash gains and losses we recognize on settled commodity derivatives during the period, and (ii) non-cash mark-to-market gains and losses we incur on commodity derivative instruments outstanding at period-end.
•Production expenses. Production expenses are daily costs incurred to bring oil and natural gas out of the ground and to the market, together with the daily costs incurred to maintain our producing properties. Such costs also include field personnel compensation, salt water disposal, utilities, maintenance, repairs and servicing expenses related to our oil and natural gas properties.
•Production taxes. Production taxes are paid on produced oil and natural gas based on a percentage of revenues from products sold at market prices (not hedged prices) or at fixed rates established by federal, state or local taxing authorities. We seek to take full advantage of all credits and exemptions in our various taxing jurisdictions. In general, the production taxes we pay correlate to the changes in oil and natural gas revenues.
•Depreciation, depletion, amortization and accretion. Depreciation, depletion, amortization and accretion includes the systematic expensing of the capitalized costs incurred to acquire, explore and develop oil and natural gas properties. As a full cost company, we capitalize all costs associated with our development and acquisition efforts and allocate these costs to each unit of production using the units-of-production method. Accretion expense relates to the passage of time of our asset retirement obligations.
•General and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses include overhead, including payroll and benefits for our corporate staff, costs of maintaining our headquarters, costs of managing our acquisition and development operations, franchise taxes, audit and other professional fees and legal compliance.
•Interest expense. We finance a portion of our working capital requirements, capital expenditures and acquisitions with borrowings. As a result, we incur interest expense that is affected by both fluctuations in interest rates and our financing decisions. We capitalize a portion of the interest paid on applicable borrowings into our full cost pool. We include interest expense that is not capitalized into the full cost pool, the amortization of deferred financing costs and bond premiums (including origination and amendment fees), commitment fees and annual agency fees as interest expense.
•Impairment expense. Under the full cost method of accounting, the Company is required to perform a ceiling test each quarter. The test determines a limit, or ceiling, on the book value of the proved oil and gas properties. If the net book value, including related deferred taxes, exceeds the ceiling, an impairment expense or non-cash writedown is required.
•Income tax expense. Our provision for taxes includes both federal and state taxes. We record our federal income taxes in accordance with accounting for income taxes under GAAP which results in the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the book carrying amounts and the tax basis of assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences and carryforwards are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. A valuation allowance is established to reduce deferred tax assets if it is more likely than not that the related tax benefits will not be realized.
Selected Factors That Affect Our Operating Results
Our revenues, cash flows from operations and future growth depend substantially upon:
•the timing and success of drilling and production activities by our operating partners;
•the prices and the supply and demand for oil, natural gas and NGLs;
•the quantity of oil and natural gas production from the wells in which we participate;
•changes in the fair value of the derivative instruments we use to reduce our exposure to fluctuations in the price of oil;
•our ability to continue to identify and acquire high-quality acreage and drilling opportunities; and
•the level of our operating expenses.
In addition to the factors that affect companies in our industry generally, the location of substantially all of our acreage and wells in the Williston Basin subjects our operating results to factors specific to this region. These factors include the potential adverse impact of weather on drilling, production and transportation activities, particularly during the winter and spring months, and the limitations of the developing infrastructure and transportation capacity in this region.
The price of oil in the Williston Basin can vary depending on the market in which it is sold and the means of transportation used to transport the oil to market. Light sweet crude from the Williston Basin has a higher value at many major refining centers because of its higher quality relative to heavier and sour grades of oil; however, because of the Williston Basin’s location relative to traditional oil transport centers, this higher value is generally offset to some extent by higher transportation costs. While rail transportation has historically been more expensive than pipeline transportation, Williston Basin’s prices have at times justified shipment by rail to markets across the United States. Additional pipeline infrastructure has increased takeaway capacity in the Williston Basin which has improved wellhead values in the region, specifically the Dakota Access Pipeline (“DAPL”) which has given the region low-cost transportation with access to Gulf Coast markets, which generally have higher benchmark pricing than WTI prices, offsetting some of the additional cost for the mode and increased distance of transportation.
The price at which our oil production is sold typically reflects a discount to the NYMEX benchmark price. Thus, our operating results are also affected by changes in the oil price differentials between the NYMEX and the sales prices we receive for our oil production. Our oil price differential to the NYMEX benchmark price during 2020 was $6.63 per barrel, as compared to $6.28 per barrel in 2019. Fluctuations in our oil price differential are due to several factors such as takeaway capacity relative to production levels in the Williston Basin, regional storage capacity, and seasonal refinery maintenance temporarily depressing crude demand.
As described in “Item 1A. Risk Factors,” DAPL is subject to ongoing litigation and regulatory review that could threaten its continued operation. During any period that DAPL is forced to shut down, we would expect our average oil price differential to increase, although it is difficult to predict with any precision what effect this would have.
Another significant factor affecting our operating results is drilling costs. The cost of drilling wells can vary significantly, driven in part by volatility in oil prices that can substantially impact the level of drilling activity in the Williston Basin. Generally, higher oil prices have led to increased drilling activity, with the increased demand for drilling and completion services driving these costs higher. Lower oil prices have generally had the opposite effect. In addition, individual components of the cost can vary depending on numerous factors such as the length of the horizontal lateral, the number of fracture stimulation stages, and the type and amount of proppant. During 2020, the weighted average authorization for expenditure (or AFE) cost for wells we elected to participate in was $7.5 million, compared to $8.0 million for the wells we elected to participate in during 2019.
Market Conditions
The price that we receive for the oil and natural gas we produce is largely a function of market supply and demand. Being primarily an oil producer, we are more significantly impacted by changes in oil prices than by changes in the price of natural gas. World-wide supply in terms of output, especially production from properties within the United States, the production quota set by OPEC, and the strength of the U.S. dollar can adversely impact oil prices. Historically, commodity prices have been volatile and we expect the volatility to continue in the future. Factors impacting the future oil supply balance are world-wide demand for oil, as well as the growth in domestic oil production.
During the first half of 2020, the oil and natural gas industry witnessed an abrupt and significant decline in oil prices from $63.00 per Bbl in early January to an average of $27.95 per Bbl during the second quarter of 2020. This sudden decline in oil prices was attributable to two primary factors: (1) the precipitous decline in global oil demand resulting from the worldwide spread of COVID-19 and (2) a sudden, unexpected increase in global oil supply resulting from actions initiated by Saudi Arabia to increase its oil production to world markets following the failure of efforts by members of OPEC+ to agree on coordinated production cuts in March 2020. The OPEC price war ended in April 2020, with a deal to cut global petroleum output but did not go far enough to offset the dramatic negative impact of COVID-19 on demand. Oil prices improved since the second quarter of 2020, but the general outlook for commodity prices and the oil and natural gas industry remains uncertain, and we anticipate ongoing volatility.
Prices for various quantities of natural gas, NGLs and oil that we produce significantly impact our revenues and cash flows. The following table lists average NYMEX prices for oil and natural gas for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
________________________
(1)Based on average NYMEX closing prices.
The average 2020 NYMEX pricing was $39.24 per barrel of oil or 31% lower than the average NYMEX price per barrel in 2019, which was partially offset by a $16.16 per barrel of oil increase in settled derivatives in 2020 as compared to 2019. Our average 2020 realized oil price per barrel after reflecting settled derivatives was $52.69 compared to $54.66 in 2019. Our 2020 realized gas price per Mcf was $1.14 compared to $1.60 in 2019, which was primarily driven by lower NYMEX pricing for both natural gas and natural gas liquids gas gathering as well as processing constraints in the Williston Basin. Recent construction projects have greatly expanded processing capacity within the basin as well as a significant new natural gas liquids pipeline. However, continued expansion of gathering systems in our basin will likely be required to fully harness these new systems and to improve long-term pricing realizations.
We employ a hedging program that mitigates the risk associated with fluctuations in commodity prices. The following tables reflect the weighted average price of open commodity price swap derivative contracts as of December 31, 2020, by year with associated volumes.
___________
(1)We have entered into crude oil derivative contracts that give counterparties the option to extend certain current derivative contracts for additional periods. Options covering a notional volume of 3.1 million barrels for 2022 are exercisable on or about December 31, 2021. If the counterparties exercise all such options, the notional volume of our existing crude oil derivative contracts will increase by 3.1 million barrels at a weighted average price of $52.68 per barrel for 2022.
(2)We have entered into crude oil derivative contracts that give counterparties the option to extend certain current derivative contracts for additional periods. Options covering a notional volume of 1.5 million barrels for 2023 are exercisable on or about December 31, 2022. If the counterparties exercise all such options, the notional volume of our existing crude oil derivative contracts will increase by 1.5 million barrels at a weighted average price of $47.98 per barrel for 2023.
From time to time, we also hedge our oil basis differential to mitigate price risk associated with fluctuations in takeaway capacity. As of December 31, 2020, we have hedged approximately 1.5 million barrels for 2021 at a weighted average price of $(2.39) per barrel. See Note 12 to our financial statements.
Results of Operations for 2020, 2019 and 2018
The following table sets forth selected operating data for the periods indicated. Production volumes and average sales prices are derived from accrued accounting data for the relevant period indicated.
Oil and Natural Gas Sales
Our revenues vary from year to year primarily as a result of changes in realized commodity prices and production volumes. In 2020, our oil, natural gas and NGL sales, excluding the effect of settled commodity derivatives, decreased 46% from 2019, driven by a 14% decrease in production volumes coupled with a 37% decrease in realized prices, excluding the effect of settled commodity derivatives. The lower average realized price in 2020 as compared to 2019 was principally driven by lower average NYMEX oil and natural gas prices. The lower NYMEX oil prices were also affected by a higher average oil price differential in 2020 as compared to 2019. The oil price differential during 2020 averaged $6.63 per barrel, as compared to $6.28 per barrel in 2019.
In 2019, our oil, natural gas and NGL sales, excluding the effect of settled commodity derivatives, increased 22% from 2018, driven primarily by a 51% increase in production levels offset by a 19% decrease in realized price, excluding the effect of settled derivatives. The lower average realized price in 2019 as compared to 2018 was principally driven by lower average NYMEX oil and natural gas prices, and gas gathering and processing constraints in the Williston Basin that lowered realized gas prices. The lower NYMEX oil prices were partially offset by a lower average oil price differential in 2019 as compared to 2018. The oil price differential during 2019 averaged $6.28 per barrel, as compared to $7.12 per barrel in 2018.
We add production through drilling success as we place new wells into production and through additions from acquisitions, which is offset by the natural decline of our oil and natural gas production from existing wells. Our acquisition program is a significant driver of our net well additions in certain years. Curtailments, shut-ins and completion delays due to the significant decline in commodity prices drove our 14% decrease in production levels in 2020 as compared to 2019, more than offsetting additions from acquisitions and new wells brought online. See “Impacts of COVID-19 Pandemic and Economic Environment” above. During 2019, our substantial acquisition activities (see Note 3 to our financial statements) combined with increased development activity and improved performance from enhanced completion techniques helped drive an increase in production levels as compared to 2018. In 2019, the number of net wells we added to production (excluding acquisitions) increased by 38% as compared to 2018. The higher number of new well completions and per well productivity improvements drove the 51% increase in production as compared to 2018. Our production for each of the last three years is set forth in the following table:
__________________________________
(1)Natural gas and NGLs are converted to Boe at the rate of one barrel equals six Mcf based upon the approximate relative energy content of oil and natural gas, which is not necessarily indicative of the relationship of oil and natural gas prices.
Commodity Derivative Instruments
We enter into commodity derivative instruments to manage the price risk attributable to future oil and natural gas production. Our gain (loss) on commodity derivatives, net was a gain of $228.1 million in 2020, compared to a loss of $128.8 million in 2019, and a gain of $185.0 million in 2018. Gain (loss) on commodity derivatives, net is comprised of (i) cash gains and losses we recognize on settled commodity derivative instruments during the period, and (ii) unsettled gains and losses we incur on commodity derivative instruments outstanding at period-end.
For 2020, we realized a gain on settled commodity derivatives of $188.3 million, compared to a $44.4 million gain in 2019 and a $22.9 million loss in 2018. The percentage of oil production hedged under our derivative contracts was 104%, 76%, and 64% in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. The weighted average oil price on our settled commodity derivative contracts
in 2020, 2019, and 2018 was $58.04, $61.51, and $59.27, respectively. Our average realized price (including all commodity derivative cash settlements) in 2020 was $42.32 per Boe compared to $45.82 per Boe in 2019, and $50.50 per Boe in 2018. The gain (loss) on settled commodity derivatives increased our average realized price per Boe by $15.55 in 2020, increased our average realized price per Boe by $3.15 in 2019 and decreased our average realized price per Boe by $2.45 in 2018.
Unsettled commodity derivative gains and losses was a gain of $39.9 million in 2020 compared to a loss of $173.2 million in 2019 and a gain of $207.9 million in 2018. Our derivatives are not designated for hedge accounting and are accounted for using the mark-to-market accounting method whereby gains and losses from changes in the fair value of derivative instruments are recognized immediately into earnings. Mark-to-market accounting treatment creates volatility in our revenues as gains and losses from unsettled derivatives are included in total revenues and are not included in accumulated other comprehensive income in the accompanying balance sheets. As commodity prices increase or decrease, such changes will have an opposite effect on the mark-to-market value of our commodity derivatives. Any gains on our unsettled commodity derivatives are expected to be offset by lower wellhead revenues in the future, while any losses are expected to be offset by higher future wellhead revenues based on the value at the settlement date. At December 31, 2020, all of our derivative contracts are recorded at their fair value, which was a net asset of $33.7 million, an increase of $38.9 million from the $5.2 million net liability recorded as of December 31, 2019. The increase in the net asset at December 31, 2020 as compared to December 31, 2019 was primarily due to changes in forward oil prices relative to prices on our open oil derivative contracts since December 31, 2019. Our open oil derivative contracts are summarized in “