Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
References to “we”, “us”, “our” or the “Company” are to Duddell Street Acquisition Corp., except where the context requires otherwise. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding our financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward looking statements. When used in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, words such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions, as they relate to us or our management, identify forward looking statements. Such forward looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. No assurance can be given that results in any forward-looking statement will be achieved and actual results could be affected by one or more factors, which could cause them to differ materially. The cautionary statements made in this Annual Report should be read as being applicable to all forward-looking statements whenever they appear in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. For these statements, we claim the protection of the safe harbor for forward-looking statements contained in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including but not limited to, those detailed in our filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on August 28, 2020. We were incorporated for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses that we have not yet identified ("Business Combination"). We are an emerging growth company and, as such, are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
Our sponsor is Duddell Street Holdings Limited, a Cayman Islands limited liability company (“Sponsor”). The registration statement for our Initial Public Offering was declared effective on October 28, 2020. On November 2, 2020, we consummated our Initial Public Offering of 17,500,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the Class A ordinary shares included in the Units being offered, the “Public Shares”), at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $175.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $10.1 million, inclusive of approximately $6.1 million in deferred underwriting commissions. The underwriters were granted a 45-day option from the date of the final prospectus relating to the Initial Public Offering to purchase up to 2,625,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments, if any, at $10.00 per Unit. In addition, our Sponsor agreed to surrender for no consideration up to 656,250 Class B ordinary shares, par value $0.0001 (the “founder shares”) to the extent that the over-allotment option is not exercised in full by the underwriters. On November 30, 2020, the Sponsor surrendered for no consideration 656,250 Class B ordinary shares.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private placement (“Private Placement”) of 5,500,000 warrants (each, a “Private Placement Warrant” and collectively, the “Private Placement Warrants”), at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant with our Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $5.5 million.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement, $175.0 million ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the sale of the Units in the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement were placed in a trust account ("Trust Account") with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee and invested in United States “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
We intend to complete our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement of the Private Placement Warrants, our capital shares, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt. The issuance of additional shares of our ordinary shares in a business combination:
● may significantly dilute the equity interest of investors in this offering, which dilution would increase if the anti-dilution provisions in the Class B ordinary shares resulted in the issuance of Class A shares on a greater than one-to-one basis upon conversion of the Class B ordinary shares;
● may subordinate the rights of holders of our Class A ordinary shares if preferred shares is issued with rights senior to those afforded our Class A ordinary shares;
● could cause a change in control if a substantial number of shares of our Class A ordinary shares are issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
● may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the share ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
● may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our Class A ordinary shares and/or warrants.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities or otherwise incur significant debt to bank or other lenders or owners of a target, it could result in:
● default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial business combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
● acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
● our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt security is payable on demand;
● our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt security contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt security is outstanding;
● our inability to pay dividends on our Class A ordinary shares;
● using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our Class A ordinary shares if declared, our ability to pay expenses, make capital expenditures and acquisitions, and fund other general corporate purposes;
● limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
● increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation;
● limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, and execution of our strategy; and
● other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
We will only have 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or November 2, 2022 (the "Combination Period"), we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account, including interest earned on the funds held in the trust account (less taxes payable and up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish Public Shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any) and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining shareholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii), to the obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and in all cases subject to the other requirements of applicable law.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up to December 31, 2020 has been related to our formation, Initial Public Offering, which was consummated on November 2, 2020, and since the Initial Public Offering, our activity has been limited to the search for a prospective Initial Business Combination, and we will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our Initial Business Combination We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from August 28, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had net loss of approximately $641,000, which consisted of approximately $672,000 in general and administrative expenses, offset by approximately $31,000 in interest income earned on the Trust Account.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had no cash outside of the Trust Account and working capital of approximately $842,000.
Our liquidity needs to date have been satisfied through a payment of $25,000 from our Sponsor to cover certain expenses on our behalf in exchange for the issuance of the founder shares (as defined below), the loan under the Note of approximately $176,000 to us, and the net proceeds from the consummation of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement of $2.0 million held in the bank account of an affiliate of our Sponsor that upon a request us will be transferred to us once our bank account is set up. Subsequent to November 2, 2020, the affiliate of our Sponsor continued to pay an aggregate of approximately $1.6 million for expenses on our behalf. We intend to repay the Note, the amount due to related party and the advance from related party following the opening of the Company’s bank account on March 18, 2021. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our officers, directors and Initial Shareholders may, but are not obligated to, provide us Working Capital Loans. As of December 31, 2020, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loans.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity from our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial Business Combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination.
On January 30, 2020, the World Health Organization (“WHO”) announced a global health emergency because of a new strain of coronavirus (COVID-19). In March 2020, the WHO classified the COVID-19 outbreak as a pandemic (the “COVID-19 pandemic”), based on the rapid increase in exposure globally. The full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our results of operations, financial position and cash flows will depend on future developments, including the duration and spread of the pandemic and related advisories and restrictions. These developments and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the financial markets and the overall economy are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. If the financial markets and/or the overall economy are impacted for an extended period, our results of operations, financial position and cash flows may be materially adversely affected. Additionally, our ability to complete an initial Business Combination, including the Proposed Business Combination, may be materially adversely affected due to significant governmental measures being implemented to contain the COVID-19 pandemic or treat its impact, including travel restrictions, the shutdown of businesses and quarantines, among others, which may limit our ability to have meetings with potential investors or affect the ability of a potential target company’s personnel, vendors and service providers to negotiate and consummate an initial Business Combination in a timely manner. Our ability to consummate an initial Business Combination may also be dependent on the ability to raise additional equity and debt financing, which may be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting market downturn.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
On August 31, 2020, our Initial Shareholders paid an aggregate of $25,000 for certain expenses on our behalf of in exchange for issuance of 5,031,250 Class B ordinary shares (the “founder shares”). Our Sponsor transferred 25,000 of our founder shares to each of Marc Holtzman and Bradford Allen and 300,000 of the founder shares to Peter Lee Coker Jr., the three independent directors. These 350,000 shares will not be subject to forfeiture in the event the underwriters’ over-allotment option is not exercised. The Sponsor agreed to surrender for no consideration up to 656,250 founder shares, on a pro rata basis, to the extent that the option to purchase additional units is not exercised in full by the underwriters. The forfeiture will be adjusted to the extent that the option to purchase additional units is not exercised in full by the underwriters so that the founder shares will represent 20% of our issued and outstanding shares after the Initial Public Offering. If we increase or decrease the size of the Initial Public Offering, we will affect a share capitalization or a share repurchase or redemption or other appropriate mechanism, as applicable, with respect to the Class B ordinary shares prior to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering in such amount as to maintain the number of founder shares at 20% of our issued and outstanding ordinary shares upon the consummation of the Initial Public Offering. On November 27, 2020, the over-allotment option expired and 656,250 founder shares were surrendered for no consideration.
Private Placement Warrants
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the Private Placement of 5,500,000 Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant with our Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $5.5 million.
Due To/ From Related Party
As of December 31, 2020, we had $2 million due from an affiliate of our Sponsor, which comprised of the net proceeds from the consummation of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement held in the bank account of an affiliate of our Sponsor, that will be released to us once our bank account is set up. As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $1.6 million due to an affiliate of our Sponsor. The affiliate of our Sponsor continues to pay for expenses on our behalf.
Related Party Loans
On August 28, 2020, our Sponsor agreed to loan us up to $250,000 to be used for the payment of costs related to the Initial Public Offering pursuant to a promissory note (the "Note"). The Note is non-interest bearing, unsecured and due upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. As of December 31, 2020, we borrowed approximately $176,000 under the Note. The affiliate of our Sponsor continues to pay for expenses on our behalf. We intend to repay the Note, the amount due to related party and the advance from related party once the bank account is set up.
Working Capital Loans
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor, members of our founding team or any of their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required ("Working Capital Loans"). If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination, without interest, or, at the lender's discretion, up to $1.5 million of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post Business Combination entity at a price of $1.00 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. As of December 31, 2020, we had no borrowings under the Working Capital Loans.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities.
The underwriters are entitled to deferred underwriting commissions of $0.35 per unit, or approximately $6.1 million in the aggregate, which will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Investments held in Trust Account
Our portfolio of investments held in the Trust Account is comprised of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities, or a combination thereof. Our investments held in the Trust Account are classified as trading securities. Trading securities are presented on the balance sheets at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these securities is included in net gain on investments held in Trust Account in the accompanying statement of operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in the Trust Account are determined using available market information.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2020, 16,474,748 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of the our balance sheet.
Net Loss Per Ordinary Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Net loss per share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted-average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the periods. An aggregate of 16,474,748 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption at December 31, 2020 have been excluded from the calculation of basic loss per ordinary share, since such shares, if redeemed, only participate in their pro rata share of the Trust earnings. We have not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the Initial Public Offering and Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 14,250,000 Class A ordinary shares in the calculation of diluted loss per ordinary share, since the exercise of the warrants are contingent upon the occurrence of future events. As a result, diluted net loss per ordinary share is the same as basic net loss per ordinary share for the periods presented.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Our management does not believe that there are any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our balance sheet.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.