Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
The Company has no operations or revenue as of the date of this Report. We have terminated our plan to enter the online delivery business, and we are currently in the process of developing a business plan. Management intends to explore and identify viable business opportunities within the U.S. including seeking to acquire a business in a reverse merger.
Plan of Operation
The Company has no operations since inception other than the expenditures related to running the Company, and has no revenue from continuing operations as of the date of this Report. We have terminated our operations in the online delivery industry following the Change of Control, and are currently in the process of developing a business plan, including with respect to searching for, evaluating and obtaining a business opportunity in the U.S.
Management intends to explore and identify business opportunities within the U.S., including a potential acquisition of an operating entity through a reverse merger, asset purchase or similar transaction. Our President has experience in management and business consulting, although no assurances can be given that he can identify and implement a viable business strategy or that any such strategy will result in profits. Our ability to effectively identify, develop and implement a viable plan for our business may be hindered by risks and uncertainties which are beyond our control, including without limitation, the continued negative effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the U.S. and global economies. For more information about the risk of COVID-19 on our business, see Item 1A - Risk Factors.
We do not currently engage in any business activities that provide revenue or cash flow. During the next 12 month period we anticipate incurring costs in connection with investigating, evaluating and negotiating potential business combinations, filing SEC reports, and consummating an acquisition of an operating business.
Given our limited capital resources, we may consider a business combination with an entity which has recently commenced operations, is a developing company or is otherwise in need of additional funds for the development of new products or services or expansion into new markets, or is an established business experiencing financial or operating difficulties and is in need of additional capital. Alternatively, a business combination may involve the acquisition of, or merger with, an entity which desires access to the U.S. capital markets.
As of the date of this Report, our management has not had any discussions with any representative of any other entity regarding a potential business combination. Any target business that is selected may be financially unstable or in the early stages of development. In such event, we expect to be subject to numerous risks inherent in the business and operations of a financially unstable or early stage entity. In addition, we may effect a business combination with an entity in an industry characterized by a high level of risk or in which our management has limited experience, and, although our management will endeavor to evaluate the risks inherent in a particular target business, there can be no assurance that we will properly ascertain or assess all significant risks.
Our management anticipates that we will likely only be able to effect one business combination due to our limited capital. This lack of diversification will likely pose a substantial risk in investing in the Company for the indefinite future, because it will not permit us to offset potential losses from one venture or operating territory against gains from another. The risks we face will likely be heightened to the extent we acquire a business operating in a single industry or geographic region.
We anticipate that the selection of a business combination will be a complex and risk-prone process. Because of general economic conditions, including unfavorable conditions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, rapid technological advances being made in some industries and shortages of available capital, management believes that there are a number of firms seeking business opportunities at this time at discounted rates with which we will compete. We expect that any potentially available business combinations may appear in a variety of different industries or regions and at various stages of development, all of which will likely render the task of comparative investigation and analysis of such business opportunities extremely difficult and complicated.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Management’s discussion and analysis and results of operations are based upon our accompanying financial statements for the fiscal years ended August 31, 2021 and 2020, which have been prepared in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or U.S. GAAP, and which requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Note 3. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to the financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Company’s financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates are the basis for our judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities, which in turn may impact our reported revenue and expenses. Our actual results could differ significantly from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Results Of Operations
We are a start-up corporation with no operations and no revenues from our business operations. Our auditors have issued a going concern opinion. This means that our auditors believe there is substantial doubt that we can continue as an on-going business for the next 12 months. We do not anticipate that we will generate significant revenues until we have raised the funds necessary to engage in a reverse merger or other business combination or otherwise commence operations. There is no assurance we will ever commence material operations or generate revenue even if we raise all necessary funds.
FISCAL YEAR ENDED AUGUST 31, 2021 COMPARED TO AUGUST 31, 2020
Our net loss for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 was $25,610 compared to a net loss of $7,682 during the fiscal year ended August 31, 2020; the Company has not generated any revenue in either period. The increase was due to an increase in general administrative expenses including professional fees in connection with the preparation of SEC reports and our ongoing search for a business to acquire. Expenses incurred were general administrative expenses of $25,610 during fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 compared to $7,682 during the fiscal year ended August 31, 2020.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
As of August 31, 2021, our total assets were $6,314 consisting of prepaid expenses and cash. As of August 31, 2020, our total assets were $20,629 consisting of cash.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
We have not generated positive cash flows from operating activities since inception. For the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021, net cash flows used in operating activities were $29,439, consisting of our net loss of $25,610 and increases of $4,279 in prepaid expenses and $450 in accrued interest. Cash flows used in operating activities for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2020 were $7,682, consisting solely of our net loss. .
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
We have not engaged in any investing activities since our inception.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
For the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021, net cash flows provided by financing activities was $10,845 consisting of $2,893 in related party advances, $1,200 in proceeds from a loan, and $7,050 in related party notes payable, partially offset by a principal payment of $298 on a loan. For the fiscal year ended August 31, 2020, net cash flows provided by financing activities was $28,311 consisting of a director loan of $7,051, issuance of common stock for net proceeds of $26,615, a third party loan of $760, and payment of deferred offering costs of $6,115.
Our existing working capital is expected to be adequate to fund our operations over the next 12 months. We have financed operations to date through the proceeds of loans from insiders and the private placement of equity. We expect we will need to raise additional capital to meet long-term operating requirements. Additional issuances of equity or convertible debt securities will result in dilution to our current shareholders. Further, such securities might have rights, preferences or privileges senior to our common stock. Additional financing may not be available upon acceptable terms, or at all. If adequate funds are not available or are not available on acceptable terms, we may not be able to take advantage of prospective new business endeavors or opportunities, which could significantly and materially restrict our business operations.
On November 3, 2021, the Company entered into a Stock Purchase Agreement with an accredited investor pursuant to which the Company sold to the purchaser 100,000 shares of the Company’s Series A Convertible Preferred Stock (the “Series A”) at a purchase price of $1.00 per share (the “Offering”). The Company received $100,000 in gross proceeds from the Offering, before deducting legal fees and related offering expenses. Each share of the Series A is convertible into three shares of the Company’s common stock.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Going Concern
There is no historical financial information about us upon which to base an evaluation of our performance. We have no operations and have not generated any revenues. We cannot guarantee we will be successful in acquiring an operating business or commencing material business operations. Our business is subject to risks inherent in the search for and establishment of a new business enterprise, including limited capital resources and possible cost overruns due to price and cost increases in services and products.
There can be no assurance that future financing will be available to us on acceptable terms or at all. If financing is not available on satisfactory terms as and when needed, we may be unable to commence, develop or expand our operations. Equity financing could result in additional dilution to existing shareholders.