ITEM 7 - MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and notes thereto included or incorporated by reference elsewhere in this Report. In addition to the historical information contained herein, the discussions in this Report may contain forward-looking statements that may be affected by risks and uncertainties, including those discussed in Item 1A, Risk Factors. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Please refer to page 1 of this Report for a cautionary statement regarding forward-looking information.
References to years or portions of years in this Item refer to our fiscal year ended September 30, unless otherwise indicated. The following amounts are in thousands, except share amounts, unless otherwise indicated.
Recent Developments and Executive Summary
During recent periods, we have undertaken significant internal and external growth initiatives. Our growth initiatives include (1) acquisitions, (2) expansion of existing and acquired businesses, and (3) startup of new services. We acquired the business of Seventh Wave Laboratories, LLC, in July 2018 (the “Seventh Wave Acquisition”), acquired the toxicology business of Smithers Avanza on May 1, 2019 (the “Smithers Avanza Acquisition”), acquired the preclinical testing business of Pre-Clinical Research Services, Inc. as well as related real property, on December 1, 2019 (the “PCRS Acquisition”), acquired the substantially all of the assets of HistoTox Labs, Inc. (“HistoTox Labs”) on April 30, 2021 (the “HistoTox Acquisition”), acquired Bolder BioPATH, Inc. (“Bolder BioPATH”) on May 3, 2021 (the “Bolder Merger”), acquired certain assets related to genetic toxicology services from BioReliance in July, 2021 (the “BioReliance Acquisition”), and completed the purchase of all of the outstanding equity interests in Gateway Pharmacology Laboratories, LLC (“Gateway Laboratories”) on August 2, 2021 (the “Gateway Acquisition”). On September 21, 2021, we announced that we had entered into a merger agreement with Envigo RMS Holding Corp. (“Envigo”) and subsequently completed the acquisition of Envigo on November 5, 2021 (the “Envigo Acquisition”). We undertook an expansion of our facilities in Evansville, Indiana, which we began using for operations in March of 2020, we recently completed capital improvements to our Ft. Collins facility to facilitate growth, and in May 2021 we announced the purchase of our St. Louis facility with the build-out of an additional 15,000 square feet of wet laboratory and office space. We announced new service offerings which we are building internally and startup operations, including clinical pathology; SEND data reporting; cardiovascular safety pharmacology; genetic toxicology; biotherapeutics; and medical device histology and pathology. On April 23, 2021, we completed a public offering of our common stock and obtained funding to support these initiatives and other improvements to our laboratories, facilities and equipment in order to support future growth and enhance our scientific capabilities, client service offerings and client experiences. On September 27, 2021, we issued $140,000 principal amount of 3.25% Convertible Senior Notes due 2027 in connection with funding the cash purchase price of the Envigo acquisition. In addition, we have made other significant investments in upgrading facilities and equipment and filled critical leadership and scientific positions.
Over the last year, we also improved our infrastructure and platform to support future growth and additional potential acquisitions. These improvements included establishing our new corporate name Inotiv, Inc., investments in our information technology platforms, building program management functions to enhance management and communication with clients and multi-site programs, further enhancing client services and improving the client experience. We believe these internal infrastructure initiatives, investments, acquisitions and recruiting efforts, combined with our existing team and the continuing development of our sales and marketing team, have led and will continue to lead to growth in revenue and the ability to improve the service offerings to our clients.
We recognize the recent investments in growth, continuing development of a strong leadership team, improving our platform, recruiting new employees, enhancing and building our scientific strength and adding services are critical to
meeting the future expectations of our clients, employees and shareholders. We believe the actions taken and investments made in recent periods form a solid foundation upon which we can continue to build.
Significant Accomplishments during the year ended September 30, 2021
● Announced an initiative to broaden clinical pathology service offerings
● Appointed Greg Beattie as Chief Operating Officer
● Invested in laboratory infrastructure, data and study management technologies and internal expertise for SEND (Standard for Exchange of Nonclinical Data) capabilities
● Invested in additional vivarium capacity at facility in West Lafayette, IN
● Announced plans to expand offerings to include cardiovascular safety pharmacology
● Changed corporate name to Inotiv, Inc.
● Entered into a partnership with PhoenixBio Co., Ltd. to expand discovery pharmacology offering
● Completed an underwritten public offering of 3,044,117 common shares at a price to the public of $17.00 per share, resulting in net proceeds to the Company of approximately $49,000, after deducting the underwriting discount and estimated offering expenses.
● Obtained $28,000 in additional debt financing from First Internet Bank of Indiana.
● Acquired substantially all of the assets of HistoTox Labs
● Acquired Bolder BioPATH
● Purchased the St. Louis facility and announced plans to expand capacity there
● Joined the broad-market Russell 3000® Index and Russell 2000® Index
● Acquired certain assets related to genetic toxicology services from BioReliance
● Acquired Gateway Laboratories
● Entered into and announced the Envigo Merger Agreement
● Completed the issuance of $140,000 3.25% Convertible Senior Notes due 2027 to fund a portion of the cash purchase price of the Envigo Acquisition, resulting in net proceeds to the Company of approximately $134,500, after deducting the initial purchaser’s discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses.
● Broadened pathology services to include medical device pathology and hired Nicolette Jackson to lead the medical device pathology effort
Events subsequent to September 30, 2021
● Obtained shareholder approval for an increase in our authorized shares and the issuance of our shares in the Envigo Acquisition
● Completed the Envigo Acquisition by merger of a wholly owned subsidiary of ours with and into Envigo
● Completed the acquisition of Plato BioPharma, Inc. (“Plato)
● Pursuant to the Envigo Merger Agreement, we entered into a Shareholders Agreement with certain stockholders of Envigo, and our Board of Directors was expanded to seven members, including newly appointed members Nigel Brown, Ph.D. and Scott Cragg, pursuant to the terms of the Shareholders Agreement.
● Entered into a new Credit Agreement (the “New Credit Agreement”) with Jefferies Finance LLC and the lenders who are parties to the New Credit Agreement, which provides for a term loan facility in the original principal amount of $165,000, a delayed draw term loan facility in the original principal amount of $35,000, and a revolving loan facility in the original principal amount of $15,000
● Repaid all indebtedness due to First Internet Bank under its credit facility using borrowings under the New Credit Agreement
Our financial results for fiscal 2021 were positively impacted by increases in sales and gross margins from the internal growth the Company has experienced in the Service business as well as the acquisition of substantially all of the assets of HistoTox Laboratories, and the acquisitions of Bolder BioPATH and Gateway Laboratories. During the year ended September 30, 2021, we saw an increase in operating expenses as a percentage of revenue compared to the year ended September 30, 2020 as we continued to build infrastructure for growth, which included additional headcount, recruiting and relocation expenses, expenses related to acquisition and integration costs and investments in building out new service offerings. In addition, the financial results were positively impacted by the Products segment of the business as expense reductions implemented in last half of fiscal year 2020 improved margins.
Notwithstanding the COVID-19 pandemic, we have maintained and grown our operations. As part of the “essential critical infrastructure” industry, we believe we continue to have a special responsibility to maintain business continuity and a normal work schedule to the greatest extent practicable. We are doing the important work of supporting our clients in their efforts towards drug discovery and development, including working with multiple clients, at our multiple sites, on a variety of therapy or vaccine candidates for COVID-19 and many other lifesaving medicines.
In the second fiscal quarter of 2020, our team implemented measures to promote a safe working environment and mitigate risk related to COVID-19, including allowing for work-from-home arrangements where possible, while continuing to support each other and our clients. Among other initiatives related to COVID-19, the Company applied for and accepted funds from the SBA Payroll Protection Program (“PPP”) as part of the CARES Act. The PPP loan was received in April 2020 in the amount of $5,051. The funds were used over the eight weeks following the receipt of the funds for payroll, utility and rent expenses, in step with our business continuity measures and as allowed under the PPP. The Company’s application for the forgiveness of the PPP loan in the amount of $4,851 was approved in July 2021.
We believe that the acquisitions of HistoTox Labs, Bolder BioPATH, Gateway Laboratories, Plato and Envigo, together with the availability under our New Credit Agreement, which we intend to use for future acquisitions, internal expansion initiatives and startup of new services, will drive significant long-term value for our customers and shareholders.
Business Overview
We specialize in nonclinical and analytical drug discovery and development services to the pharmaceutical, chemical, and medical device industries, and sell analytical instruments to the pharmaceutical development and contract research industries. Our mission is to focus on bringing new drugs and medical devices through the discovery and preclinical phases of development, all while increasing efficiency, improving data, and reducing the cost of taking new drugs to market. Inotiv is committed to supporting discovery and development objectives as well as helping researchers realize the full potential of their critical R&D projects, all while working together to build a healthier and safer world. Our strategy is to provide services that will generate high-quality and timely data in support of new drug and product approval or expand their use. Our clients and partners include pharmaceutical, biotechnology, biomedical device, academic and government organizations. We believe that we offer an efficient, variable-cost alternative to our clients’ internal drug and product development programs. Outsourcing development work to reduce overhead and speed product approvals through
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration ("FDA") and other regulatory authorities is an established alternative to in-house product development efforts. We derive our revenues from sales of our research services and instruments, both of which are focused on evaluating drug and product safety and efficacy. We have been involved in the research of drug and products to treat diseases in numerous therapeutic areas for over 47 years since our formation as a corporation organized in Indiana in 1974, under the name Bioanalytical Systems, Inc. On March 18, 2021, we filed Articles of Amendment to our Second Amended and Restated Articles of Incorporation, as amended, and amended its Second Amended and Restated Bylaws, as amended, to reflect a corporate name change from Bioanalytical Systems, Inc. to Inotiv, Inc.
We support both the non-clinical and clinical development needs of researchers and clinicians for primarily small molecule drug candidates, but also provide services to biotherapeutics and device companies. We believe that our scientists have the skills in analytical instrumentation development, chemistry, computer software development, pharmacology, histology, pathology, physiology, medicine, surgery, analytical chemistry, drug metabolism, pharmacokinetics, and toxicology to make the services and products we provide increasingly valuable to our current and potential clients. Our principal clients are scientists engaged in analytical chemistry, pharmacology, drug safety evaluation, clinical trials, drug metabolism studies, pharmacokinetics and basic research from small startup biotechnology companies to some of the largest global pharmaceutical companies. We are committed to bringing scientific expertise, quality and speed to every drug discovery and development program to help our clients develop safe and effective life-changing therapies.
Developments within the industries we serve have a direct, and sometimes material, impact on our operations. Currently, many large pharmaceutical companies have major "blockbuster" drugs that are nearing the end of their patent protections. This puts significant pressure on these companies to discover, acquire or develop new drugs with large market opportunity, and to re-evaluate their cost structures and the time-to-market of their products. Contract research organizations have benefited from these developments, as the pharmaceutical industry has turned to outsourcing to both reduce fixed costs and to increase the speed of research and data development necessary for new product applications. The number of significant drugs that have reached or are nearing the end of their patent protection has also benefited the generic drug industry. Generic drug companies provide a significant source of new business for CROs as they develop, test and manufacture their generic compounds.
A significant portion of innovation in the pharmaceutical industry is now driven by smaller, venture capital funded drug discovery companies. Many of these companies are "single-molecule" entities, whose success depends on one or a few innovative compounds. While several biotech companies have reached the status of major pharmaceutical companies, the industry is still characterized by numerous smaller entities. These developmental companies generally do not have the resources to perform much of their research within their organizations and are therefore increasingly dependent on the CRO industry for both their research and for guidance in preparing their regulatory submissions. These companies have provided significant new opportunities for the CRO industry, including Inotiv. We believe that we are ideally positioned to serve these clients as they look for alternatives to the large CROs that cater primarily to the large pharmaceutical company segment of the marketplace.
We review various metrics to evaluate our financial performance, including revenue, margins and earnings. In fiscal 2021, total revenues increased to $89,605 from $60,469, a 48.2% increase from fiscal 2020. Acquired businesses contributed approximately $11,800 of the increased revenue amount, while the remainder was from organic growth, primarily in our services business. In fiscal 2020, delayed and postponed programs negatively impacted revenue by approximately $2,000. We did not experience a significant impact from program delays and postponements in fiscal 2021. Gross profit increased to $30,155 from $18,237, a 65.4% increase due primarily to improved margins after covering fixed cost. Operating expenses were higher by 68.0% in fiscal 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year. The most notable growth in operating expenses is related to our investment and focus to continue to build our infrastructure for growth, which included additional headcount, recruiting and relocation expense, transaction costs related to the HistoTox Labs, Bolder BioPATH, Gateway Laboratories, Envigo and Plato acquisitions, and investments in business development to build out new service offerings.
As of September 30, 2021, we had $156,924 of cash and cash equivalents, including restricted cash, as compared to $1,406 of cash and cash equivalents as of September 30, 2020. The increase in cash is primarily due to net proceeds received in connection with the convertible senior notes issued on September 27, 2021, which were used in the first quarter of fiscal 2022 to pay a portion of the cash consideration in the Envigo Acquisition. In fiscal 2021, we generated $10,740
in cash from operations as compared to $1,290 in the same period in fiscal 2020. Total capital expenditures were $12,472 in fiscal 2021 primarily due to investments in the acquisition and expansion of the St. Louis facility, facility improvements at the Fort Collins location and investments in laboratory equipment to increase capacity at all locations.
As of September 30, 2021, we did not have an outstanding balance on our $5,000 general line of credit, and we had a $1,749 balance on our $3,000 capex line of credit. As described herein, we incurred indebtedness in connection with financing acquisitions and planned expansions of facilities and services. Please refer to the Liquidity and Capital Resources section herein for a description of our credit agreements.
In fiscal 2022, we expect certain trends and risks to potentially affect our business. General risks to the company are shared by the industry as well. Increased demand and decreased supply of certain critical research models affects the ability to procure these models in support of our clients’ projects. The acquisition of Envigo enhances our ability to secure access to these critical resources. We expect also to see inflationary impacts on costs of supplies and wage inflation, particularly affecting entry to mid-level positions, with a subsequent impact on pricing. We expect continued challenges in hiring staff at all levels.
For a detailed discussion of our revenue, margins, earnings and other financial results for fiscal 2021, see “Results of Operations” below.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes the consolidated statement of operations as a percentage of total revenues:
(a) Percentage of service and product revenues, respectively.
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020
Services and Products Revenues
Revenues for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 increased 48.2% to $89,605 compared to $60,469 for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020.
Our Services revenue increased 50.1% in fiscal 2021 to $85,832 compared to $57,177 for the prior fiscal year. Nonclinical services revenues increased due to internal growth year over year as well as the acquisition of substantially all
of the assets of HistoTox Laboratories, and the acquisitions of Bolder BioPATH and Gateway Laboratories. Additionally, we had an estimated $2,000 decrease in Service revenue during fiscal 2020 due to program delays or postponements by clients as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic We did not experience significant impact from program delays and postponements in fiscal 2021. Other laboratory services revenues increased due to internal growth and external growth due to the acquisitions of Bolder BioPATH, HistoTox Labs, and Gateway Laboratories. The following table shows revenue information by Service Category for the periods indicated.
Sales in our Products segment increased 14.6% in fiscal 2021 when compared to fiscal 2020. The increase stems primarily from increased sales of analytical instruments as these instruments are used for a variety of research markets, including COVID-19 related research applications. The increase was partially offset by decreased sales of our Culex automated in vivo sampling instruments and other instruments. The decrease is primarily due to a reduction of orders from universities as they closed and reduced purchasing due to the COVID-19 pandemic and our inability to go on site to install and service client instruments. The following table shows revenue information by Product category for the periods indicated.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue for the year ended September 30, 2021 was $59,450 or 66.3% of revenue compared to $42,232 or 69.8% of revenue for the prior fiscal year.
Cost of Services revenue as a percentage of Services revenue decreased to 66.7% in fiscal 2021 compared to 70.0% in the prior fiscal year due primarily to improved operating leverage and the greater utilization of recently expanded capacity.
Cost of Products revenue as a percentage of Products revenue in fiscal 2021 decreased to 58.0% from 67.6% in the prior fiscal year. This decrease in fiscal 2021 is mainly due to expense reductions implemented in the last half of fiscal 2020, which created improved margins on existing sales and improved margins after covering fixed cost.
Operating Expenses
Selling expenses for fiscal 2021 increased 4.3% to $3,517 from $3,373 compared to fiscal 2020. The increase in fiscal 2021 as compared to the same period in the prior year is mainly due to increased commissions due to increased sales and increased travel expenses, which have been partially offset by the reduction of non-recurring costs of nearly $190 related to the launch of the trade name “Inotiv” prior to the formal change of our corporate name in March 2021.
Research and development expenses for fiscal 2021 decreased 34.4% compared to the prior fiscal year to $405 from $617. The decrease was primarily due to lower internal development investments in product technology compared to fiscal 2020.
Costs related to the development and initiation of new service offerings that are not revenue generating at this time are being identified as Startup costs. During fiscal year 2021, we increased our investments in software solutions and human resources to support existing internal expertise in the area of SEND data management and delivery investments in SEND reporting, safety pharmacology, clinical pathology, medical device pathology, biotherapeutics, and genetic toxicology. These expenses include, but are not limited to, employee compensation expenses, travel expenses, relocation expenses, and recruiting expenses. While certain of these costs are one-time in nature, there are certain costs (e.g. employee compensation expenses) that will be expected to recur once the new offerings are revenue generating at which time the related costs will be included in cost of services on the consolidated statements of operations. Startup costs for the year ended September 30, 2021 were $1,477 as compared to $333 for the year ended September 30, 2020. The increase reflects increased activity in connection with the development of new service offerings in the current year. Certain prior period amounts have been reclassified for consistency with the current year presentation. These reclassifications had no effect on the reported results of operations.
General and administrative expenses increased 78.9% to $30,375 in fiscal 2021 from $16,977 in fiscal 2020. The increase was mainly driven by transaction costs for the acquisitions related to HistoTox Labs, Bolder BioPATH, BioReliance, Gateway Laboratories, Envigo and Plato, as well as an increase in costs to build the infrastructure for growth, which included additional headcount, recruiting and relocation expense and investments in new service offerings. In addition, we announced investments being made in laboratory infrastructure and data and safety management technologies through a partnership with Centric Consulting, LLC.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income for fiscal 2021 was $13,421 primarily due to a gain of $8,362 resulting from the fair value remeasurement of the conversion feature of the convertible senior notes as described in Notes 2 and 7 to our consolidated financial statements included in response to Item 8 of this report, and a gain of $4,851 related to the PPP loan forgiveness in the year ended September 30, 2021. We did not have significant items recorded in other income for the year ended September 30, 2020.
Interest expense for fiscal 2021 increased 13.0% to $1,683 from $1,490 compared to the prior fiscal year. The increase was driven by our credit arrangements with First Internet Bank, as we entered into new financing arrangements, including as part of the acquisitions related to HistoTox Labs and Bolder BioPATH as well as the acquisition and expansion of our St. Louis Facility, which added related debt and increased interest expense. Additionally, we entered into senior convertible notes in late September that added additional expense of $88.
Income Taxes
Our effective tax rates for continuing operations for fiscal years 2021 and 2020 were (78.0%) and (3.2%), respectively. The effective tax rate for fiscal 2021 relates primarily to acquisition-related deferred tax liabilities resulting in the release of pre-existing valuation allowances and resulted in income tax benefit of $4,776 for the year ended September 30, 2021. The effective tax rate for fiscal 2020 primarily related to state income and franchise taxes.
Accrued Expenses
As part of a fiscal 2012 restructuring, we accrued for lease payments at the cease use date for our United Kingdom facility and have considered free rent, sublease rentals and the number of days it would take to restore the space to its original condition prior to our improvements. Based on these matters, we had a $1,117 reserve for lease related costs and for legal and professional fees and other costs to remove improvements previously made to the facility. During fiscal 2021, the Company released all of the remaining reserve for lease related liabilities. At September 30, 2021 and 2020, we had $0 and $168, respectively, reserved for the remaining liability. The reserve was classified as a current liability on the Consolidated Balance Sheets for the year ended September 30, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Comparative Cash Flow Analysis
As of September 30, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents, including restricted cash, of $156,924 compared to $1,406 as of September 30, 2020. In addition, as of September 30, 2021, we had $5,000 available on our general line of credit and $1,251 available on our capex line of credit. As of September 30, 2020, we had $5,000 available on our general line of credit, and $387 available on our capex line of credit.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $10,740 for the year ended September 30, 2021, compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $1,290 for the year ended September 30, 2020. Contributing factors to our cash provided by operations for fiscal 2021 were noncash charges of $6,268 for depreciation and amortization, $1,786 for stock compensation expense, $184 of finance lease interest expense, $208 for provision for doubtful accounts, $98 for decrease in inventories as well as net increases in customer advances of $14,554 as a result of increasing orders and the addition of orders from the HistoTox Labs, Bolder BioPATH and Gateway Laboratories acquisitions, a net increase of $2,619 in accounts payable, and a net increase of $5,103 in accrued expenses and other liabilities. These items were partially offset by an increase of $11,951 in accounts receivable, a gain of $8,362 on the fair value remeasurement of the convertible senior notes, a gain of $4,985 from tax benefits resulting from the release of a valuation allowance related to fiscal 2021 acquisitions, the PPP loan forgiveness of $4,851, an increase of $780 in prepaid expenses and other assets and a net change of $54 in operating leases.
Days’ sales in accounts receivable increased to 84 days at September 30, 2020 from 56 days at September 30, 2020 due to past-due receivables acquired during fiscal 2021, as well an increase in overall receivables due to price increases and increased revenues in fiscal 2021. It is not unusual to see a fluctuation in the Company’s pattern of days’ sales in accounts receivable as invoicing is based on billing milestones and may not be consistent with the timing of revenue recognition. Also, clients may expedite or delay payments from period-to-period for a variety of reasons including, but not limited to, the timing of capital raised to fund on-going research and development projects.
Included in operating activities for fiscal 2020 were noncash charges of $3,929 for depreciation and amortization, $540 for stock option expense, $145 of amortization of finance lease, $211 change on operating lease, $180 for provision for doubtful accounts, $395 for decrease in inventories and a net increase in customer advances of $4,315 due to an increase in new orders as well as the addition of orders from the PCRS Acquisition. These items were partially offset by an increase of $620 in accounts receivable, an increase of $1,149 in prepaid expenses and other assets, and a decrease of $2,047 in accounts payable.
Investing activities used $54,054 for the year ended September 30, 2021 due mainly to capital expenditures of $12,472 and cash paid of $22,389, $17,530 and $1,665 for the HistoTox Labs, Bolder BioPATH and Gateway Laboratories acquisitions, respectively. The capital additions during fiscal 2021 consisted of investments in the acquisition and expansion of the St. Louis facility, facility improvements at the Fort Collins location and the investment in laboratory equipment to increase capacity at all locations. Investing activities used $10,131 in fiscal 2020 due mainly to capital expenditures of $6,200 and $3,931 cash paid for the PCRS Acquisition. The capital additions during fiscal 2020 consisted of investments in the Evansville expansion, investments in Gaithersburg capacity, upgrades in software as well as laboratory and IT equipment.
Financing activities provided $198,832 in the year ended September 30, 2021, compared to $9,641 provided during the year ended September 30, 2020. The cash provided in fiscal 2021 included gross proceeds from the issuance of the convertible senior notes of $140,036, including $18,000 of restricted cash, proceeds from the issuance of common stock of $48,971 and borrowings on long-term loans of $20,441, partially offset by payments of long-term loans of $4,153, as well as proceeds of $246 from the issuance of stock options. The PPP loan repayment of $200, finance lease payments of $286 and payment of debt issuance cost of $6,223 also contributed to the use of cash. The main sources of cash in fiscal 2020 were from borrowings on the long-term loan of $8,777, funds received from the PPP loan of $5,051 and borrowings on the Construction loan and Capex lines of credit of $1,287 and $2,906, respectively. Total long-term loan payments were $1,847 and net repayments on the Revolving Credit facility were $1,062. Finance lease payments of $319 and payment of debt issuance cost of $127 also contributed to the use of cash.
Capital Resources
Credit Facility
Effective as of September 21, 2021, we entered into a Second Amendment to Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the "Amendment"), which amended the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement between us and First Internet Bank of Indiana (“FIB”) as amended (the "Credit Agreement"). Pursuant to the Amendment, FIB consented to the incurrence by us of up to $150,000,000 of indebtedness pursuant to an indenture to be entered into among us, BAS Evansville, Inc. ("BAS Evansville"), as guarantor, and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee (the "Indenture"), and to the guarantee of such indebtedness by BAS Evansville, provided that $18,000,000 of the proceeds of the issuance of notes under the Indenture was deposited in an account with the Lender and that all remaining proceeds of such issuance must be used solely for the purpose of financing the Envigo Acquisition as described in Note 16. In addition, the Amendment amended the Credit Agreement to (i) add the notes issued under the Indenture as permitted indebtedness, (ii) exclude Subordinated Debt (as defined in the Credit Agreement) and, through the earlier of (a) a certain determination that the Envigo Acquisition shall not be consummated or (b) March 31, 2022, the indebtedness incurred pursuant to the Indenture from the calculation of the Senior Funded Debt to Adjusted EBITDA Ratio (as defined in the Amendment) and modified the financial ratio covenants to provide for the treatment of operating leases as operating leases (and not capital leases) in the calculation thereof, regardless of the requirements of FASB ASC 842 or other GAAP changes. The Amendment includes an agreement by us to repay all of our obligations under the Indenture within 90 days following the earlier of (a) a certain determination that the Envigo Acquisition shall not be consummated or (b) March 31, 2022. We consummated the Envigo Acquisition and repaid all of our obligations under the FIB Credit Facility in November 2021 as described in Note 16.
On April 30, 2021, we entered into an Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) with First Internet Bank of Indiana (“FIB”) to, among other things, secure additional debt financing in order to fund portions of the consideration for the HistoTox Labs acquisition and the Bolder merger. The Credit Agreement included eleven term loans (the “Term Loans” ), an equipment draw loan (the “Equipment Loan”), and a revolving line of credit (the “Revolving Facility”). On May 26, 2021, we and FIB entered into an amendment to the Credit Agreement to, among other things, provide a new term loan facility to finance the acquisition and refurbishment of our St. Louis facility, which we had previously leased. The material terms of each of the loans under the Credit Agreement, as amended, are described in Note 7 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in response to Item 8 of this Report.
Included in the Credit Agreement is a requirement that we maintain certain financial covenants, including maintaining a senior funded debt to adjusted EBITDA ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement) of not greater than (i) 5.25 to 1.00 as of the date of the Credit Agreement and as of June 30, 2021, (ii) 4.75 to 1.00 as of September 30, 2021, (iii) 4.50 to 1.00 as of December 31, 2021, (iv) 4.25 to 1.00 as of March 31, 2022, (v) 4.00 to 1.00 as of June 30, 2022, and (vi) 3.50 to 1.00 as of September 30, 2022 and as of each fiscal quarter end thereafter.
Also included in the Credit Agreement is a requirement that we maintain a fixed charge coverage ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement) of not less than (i) 1.20 to 1.00, commencing as of September 30, 2021, and continuing as of each fiscal quarter end thereafter up to and including June 30, 2022, and (ii) 1.25 to 1.00 as of September 30, 2022 and as of each fiscal quarter end thereafter.
Upon an event of default, which includes certain customary events such as, among other things, a failure to make required payments when due, a failure to comply with covenants, certain bankruptcy and insolvency events, and defaults under other material indebtedness, FIB may cease advancing funds, increase the interest rate on outstanding balances, accelerate amounts outstanding, terminate the agreement and foreclose on all collateral.
The obligations of us under the Credit Agreement are secured by all of our assets and are guaranteed by each of our subsidiaries and secured by the assets thereof. We have also obtained a life insurance policy in an amount not less than $5,000 for our President and Chief Executive Officer and provided FIB an assignment of such life insurance policy as collateral.
Acquisition-related Debt
In addition to the indebtedness under the Credit Agreement, certain of our subsidiaries have issued unsecured notes as partial payment of the purchase prices of certain acquisitions as described herein. Each of these notes is subordinated to the indebtedness under the Credit Agreement. Each of these notes described in Note 7 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in response to Item 8 of this Report.
PPP Loan
On April 23, 2020, we were granted a loan (the “Loan”) from Huntington National Bank in the aggregate amount of $5,051, pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) under Division A, Title I of the CARES Act, which was enacted March 27, 2020. The terms of the PPP Loan called for repayment of the principal and accrued interest under the Loan in eighteen installments of $283 beginning on November 16, 2020 and continuing monthly until the final payment was due on April 16, 2022. We applied for forgiveness of the loan in the amount of $4,851, and on July 16, 2021, received notice from Huntington Bank that the SBA had approved the application for forgiveness of the PPP Loan in the full amount requested. We recorded a gain on the extinguishment of debt in the amount of $4,851 included in other income in the consolidated statements of operations for the year ended September 30, 2021.
Convertible Senior Notes
On September 27, 2021, we issued $140,000 principal amount of our 3.25% Convertible Senior Notes due 2027. The Notes were issued pursuant to, and are governed by, an indenture, dated as of September 27, 2021, among us, the guarantor named therein and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee. Pursuant to the purchase agreement between us and the initial purchaser of the Notes, we granted the initial purchaser an option to purchase, for settlement within a period of 13 days from, and including, the date the Notes are first issued, up to an additional $15,000 principal amount of Notes. The Notes issued on September 27, 2021 include $15,000 principal amount of Notes issued pursuant to the full exercise by the initial purchaser of such option. We used the net proceeds from the offering of Notes, together with borrowings under a new senior secured term loan facility, to fund the cash purchase price of the Envigo Acquisition and related fees and expenses. The material terms of the convertible senior notes are described in Note 7 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in response to Item 8 of this Report.
Lease
On January 28, 2015, we entered into a lease agreement with Cook Biotech, Inc. The lease agreement has and will provide us with additional cash in the range of approximately $50 per month during the first year of the initial term to approximately $57 per month during the final year of the initial term.
Our sources of liquidity for fiscal 2022 are expected to consist primarily of cash generated from operations, cash on-hand, and additional borrowings available under our New Credit Agreement. Research services are capital intensive. The investment in equipment, facilities and human capital to serve our markets is substantial and continuing. Rapid changes in automation, precision, speed and technologies necessitate a constant investment in equipment and software to meet market demands. We are also impacted by the heightened regulatory environment and the need to improve our business infrastructure to support our operations, which will necessitate additional capital investment. Our ability to generate capital to reinvest in our capabilities and to obtain additional capital if and as needed through financial transactions is critical to our success. Sustained growth will require additional investment in future periods. Positive cash flow and access to capital will be important to our ability to make such investments. Management believes that the resources described above will be sufficient to fund operations, planned capital expenditures and working capital requirements over the next twelve months.
Inflation
We do not believe that inflation has had a material adverse effect on our business, operations or financial condition.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
"Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" and "Liquidity and Capital Resources" discusses the consolidated financial statements of the Company, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. Preparation of these financial statements requires management to make judgments and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and the disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. Certain significant accounting policies applied in the preparation of the financial statements require management to make difficult, subjective or complex judgments, and are considered critical accounting policies. We have identified the following areas as critical accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition
In accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, we disaggregate our revenue from clients into three revenue streams, service revenue, product revenue and royalties. At contract inception we assess the services promised in the contract with the clients to identify performance obligations in the arrangements.
Service revenue
We enter into contracts with clients to provide drug discovery and development services with payments based on mainly fixed-fee arrangements. We also offer archive storage services to our clients.
Our fixed fee arrangements may involve nonclinical research services (toxicology, pathology, pharmacology), bioanalytical, and pharmaceutical method development and validation, and the analysis of bioanalytical and pharmaceutical samples. For bioanalytical and pharmaceutical method validation services and nonclinical research services, revenue is recognized over time using the input method based on the ratio of direct costs incurred to total estimated direct costs. For contracts that involve in-life study conduct, method development or the analysis of bioanalytical and pharmaceutical samples, revenue is recognized over time when samples are analyzed or when services are performed. We generally bill for services on a milestone basis. These contracts represent a single performance obligation and due to our right to payment for work performed, revenue is recognized over time. Research services contract fees received upon acceptance are deferred until earned and classified within customer advances on the consolidated balance sheets. Unbilled revenues represent revenues earned under contracts in advance of billings.
Archive services provide climate controlled archiving for client’s data and samples. The archive revenue is recognized over time, generally when the service is provided. These arrangements include one performance obligation. Amounts related to future archiving or prepaid archiving contracts for clients where archiving fees are billed in advance are accounted for as deferred revenue and recognized ratably over the period the applicable archive service is performed.
Product revenue
Our products can be sold to multiple clients and have alternative use. Both the transaction sales price and shipping terms are agreed upon in the client order. For these products, all revenue is recognized at a point in time, generally when title of the product and control is transferred to the client based upon shipping terms. These arrangements typically include only one performance obligation. Certain products have maintenance agreements available for clients to purchase. These are typically billed in advance and are accounted for as deferred revenue, are recognized ratably over the applicable maintenance period and are included in customer advances on the consolidated balance sheet.
Royalty revenue
We have an agreement with Teva Pharmaceuticals (formerly Biocraft Laboratories, Inc,) which manufactures and markets pharmaceutical products. We receive royalties in accordance with sales of certain pharmaceuticals that Teva manufactures and sells. The royalties are received on a quarterly basis and the revenue is recognized over the quarter. Royalty revenue is included in service revenue on the consolidated statements of operations. Total royalty revenue recognized was $377 and $641 in the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Long-Lived Assets, Including Goodwill
Long-lived assets, such as property and equipment, and purchased intangibles subject to amortization, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its estimated future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized of the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset.
We carry goodwill at cost. Other intangible assets with definite lives are stated at cost and are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives. All intangible assets acquired that are obtained through contractual or legal right, or are capable of being separately sold, transferred, licensed, rented, or exchanged, are recognized as an asset apart from goodwill. Goodwill is not amortized. At September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, the remaining recorded goodwill was $51,927 and $4,368. The increase is primarily attributable to the HistoTox Labs Acquisition and the Bolder Merger as described in Note 12 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in response to Item 8 of this Report.
We review goodwill for impairment on an annual basis in accordance with ASC 350, Intangibles- Goodwill and Other. In evaluating the goodwill, we must make assumptions regarding the discounted future cash flows of the reporting unit with goodwill. If the discounted cash flows are less than the carrying value, we then determine if an impairment loss is recognized by evaluating the fair value of the goodwill. We utilize fair value techniques accepted by ASC 820, which include the income, market and cost approach. If the fair value of the goodwill is less than the carrying amount, we recognize an impairment loss. Considerable management judgment is necessary to evaluate the impact of operating and macroeconomic changes and to estimate future cash flows. Assumptions used in our impairment evaluations, such as forecasted sales growth rates and our cost of capital or discount rate, are based on the best available market information. Changes in these estimates or a continued decline in general economic conditions could change our conclusion regarding an impairment of goodwill and potentially result in a non-cash impairment loss in a future period. The assumptions used in our impairment testing could be adversely affected by certain risks.
We had one reporting unit with goodwill at September 30, 2021 which was our Services business, which is included in our Services operating segment, based on the discrete financial information available which is reviewed by management. An annual goodwill impairment test was performed for the Services reporting unit at September 30, 2021 and there was no indication of impairment. There have been no significant events since the timing of our impairment tests that would have triggered additional impairment testing after fiscal year-end.
At September 30, 2021, the intangible assets subject to amortization totaled $24,233 as compared to $4,261 at September 30, 2020. The increase in intangible assets relates to the HistoTox Labs, Bolder BioPATH, BioReliance and Gateway Laboratories acquisitions as described in Note 12 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in response to Item 8 of this Report.
Leases
We have various operating and finance leases for facilities and equipment. Facilities leases provide office, laboratory, warehouse, or land, the company uses to conduct its operations. Facilities leases range in duration from two to ten years, with either renewal options for additional terms as the initial lease term expires, or purchase options. Facilities leases are considered as either operating or financing leases.
Equipment leases provide for office equipment, laboratory equipment or services the company uses to conduct its operations. Equipment leases range in duration from 30 to 60 months, with either subsequent annual renewals, additional terms as the initial lease term expires, or purchase options.
We record a right-of-use (“ROU”) asset and lease liability for substantially all leases for which we are a lessee, in accordance with ASU 842. Leases with an initial term of 12 months or less are not recorded on the balance sheet. We recognizes lease expense for the leases on a straight-line basis over the lease term. At inception of a contract, we consider all relevant facts and circumstances to assess whether or not the contract represents a lease by determining whether or not
the contract conveys the right to control the use of an identified asset, either explicit or implicit, for a period of time in exchange for consideration.
Our significant accounting policies, including new accounting pronouncements, are described in more detail in Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in response to Item 8 of this Report.