Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis contain forward-looking statements that are subject to risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results and timing of selected events may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including but not limited to those discussed under "Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements", "Risk Factors" and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Moreover, we operate in a very competitive and rapidly changing environment and new risks emerge from time to time. It is not possible for our management to predict all risks, nor can we assess the impact of all factors on our business or the extent to which any factor, or combination of factors, may cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements we may make. In light of these risks, uncertainties and assumptions, the forward-looking events and circumstances discussed in this Annual Report on Form 10-K may not occur and actual results could differ materially and adversely from those anticipated or implied in the forward-looking statements.
Company Overview
We are a leading residential solar and energy storage service provider, serving over 107,000 customers in more than 20 U.S. states and territories. Our goal is to be the leading provider of clean, affordable and reliable energy for consumers, and we operate with a simple mission: to power energy independence so homeowners have the freedom to live life uninterrupted. We were founded to deliver customers a better energy service at a better price; and, through our solar and solar plus energy storage service offerings, we are disrupting the traditional energy landscape and the way the 21st century customer generates and consumes electricity.
We have a differentiated residential solar dealer model in which we partner with local dealers who originate, design and install our customers' solar energy systems and energy storage systems on our behalf. Our focus on our dealer model enables us to leverage our dealers' specialized knowledge, connections and experience in local markets to drive customer origination while providing our dealers with access to high quality products at competitive prices, as well as technical oversight and expertise. We believe this structure provides operational flexibility, reduces exposure to labor shortages and lowers fixed costs relative to our peers, furthering our competitive advantage.
We offer customers products to power their homes with affordable solar energy. We are able to offer savings compared to utility-based retail rates with little to no up-front expense to the customer in conjunction with solar and solar plus energy storage, and in the case of the latter are able to also provide energy resiliency. We also make it possible in some states for a customer to obtain a new roof and other ancillary products as part of their solar loan. Our solar service agreements take the form of a lease, PPA or loan. The initial term of our solar service agreements is typically 10, 15 or 25 years. Service is an integral part of our agreements and includes operations and maintenance, monitoring, repairs and replacements, equipment upgrades, on-site power optimization for the customer (for both supply and demand), the ability to efficiently switch power sources among the solar panel, grid and energy storage system, as appropriate, and diagnostics. During the life of the contract we have the opportunity to integrate related and evolving home servicing and monitoring technologies to upgrade the flexibility and reduce the cost of our customers' energy supply.
In the case of leases and PPAs, we also currently receive tax benefits and other incentives from federal, state and local governments, a portion of which we finance through tax equity, non-recourse debt structures and hedging arrangements in order to fund our upfront costs, overhead and growth investments. We have an established track record of attracting capital from diverse sources. From our inception through December 31, 2020, we have raised more than $6.7 billion in total capital commitments from equity, debt and tax equity investors.
In addition to providing ongoing service as a standard component of our solar service agreements, we also offer ongoing energy services to customers who purchased their solar energy system through third parties. Under these arrangements, we agree to provide monitoring, maintenance and repair services to these customers for the life of the service contract they sign with us. We believe the quality and scope of our comprehensive energy service offerings, whether to customers that obtained their solar energy system through us or through another party, is a key differentiator between us and our competitors.
We commenced operations in January 2013 and began providing solar energy services under our first solar energy system in April 2013. Since then, our brand, innovation and focused execution have driven significant, rapid growth in our market share and in the number of customers on our platform. We operate one of the largest fleets of residential solar energy systems in the U.S., comprising more than 790 megawatts of generation capacity and serving over 107,000 customers.
Recent Developments
Acquisition of SunStreet
In February 2021, we entered into a Merger Agreement with certain of our subsidiaries, SunStreet and Lenx. Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, we will acquire SunStreet, Lennar Corporation's residential solar platform, in exchange for up to 7,222,229 shares of our common stock, comprised of 3,333,333 shares in initial consideration to be issued at closing, subject to purchase price adjustment, and up to 3,888,896 shares issuable as earnout consideration after closing of the Acquisition. The Acquisition is expected to provide a new strategic path to further scale our business and develop clean and resilient residential microgrids across the U.S.
The completion of the Acquisition is subject to, among other customary mutual conditions, our entry into (a) a transition services agreement, (b) a stockholders agreement, which will provide for certain registration rights and standstill provisions, (c) a master management and services agreement with an affiliate of Lennar Corporation, which will provide for SunStreet's continued provision of operating, maintenance and servicing services for solar service agreements of Lennar Corporation customers, (d) an exclusivity agreement with Lennar Corporation and (e) initial tax equity fund documents. The Merger Agreement contains termination rights if, among other things, the Acquisition does not close on or before September 1, 2021. The Acquisition is expected to close in the second quarter of 2021. See "Item 1A. Risk Factors" for discussion of risks related to the Acquisition.
Earnout Agreement
Pursuant to the Earnout Agreement entered into between us and Lenx, Lenx will have the ability to earn up to 3,888,896 additional shares of common stock over a five-year period in connection with the Acquisition. The earnout payments are conditioned on SunStreet meeting certain commercial milestones tied to achieving specified origination targets. There are two elements to the earnout arrangement. First, we will issue up to 2,777,784 shares if we and our subsidiaries (including SunStreet) place target amounts of solar energy systems into service and enter into qualifying customer agreements related to such solar energy systems through SunStreet's existing homebuilding process. The 2,777,784 shares of common stock issuable under this prong of the earnout can be earned in four installments on a yearly basis (if the origination target for each such year is achieved) or at the end of the four-year period (if the aggregate origination target is achieved in the fourth and final year), with the annual periods commencing on the closing date of the Acquisition. The second element of the earnout is related to the development of microgrid communities. Pursuant to this portion of the earnout, we will issue up to 1,111,112 shares if, prior to the fifth anniversary of the closing date of the Acquisition, we enter into binding agreements for the development of microgrid communities.
Exclusivity Agreement
In connection with the Acquisition, we will become Lennar Corporation's exclusive residential solar and storage service provider for new home communities with solar across the U.S. for a period of four years. Under the exclusivity agreement, Lennar Corporation will agree to exclusively use us or our subsidiaries as its solar and storage service provider. In addition, through the exclusivity agreement we will have the opportunity to leverage Lennar Corporation's existing customer relationships to offer solar service agreements to those customers without an existing solar energy system. Lennar Corporation will retain the ability to terminate the exclusivity agreement if we fail to maintain certain specified performance obligations on a regular basis, including the failure to timely install solar and storage equipment across its new home communities. We are also required to offer competitive prices to Lennar Corporation's homebuyers and incentives to Lennar Corporation.
Tax Equity Commitment
In connection with the Acquisition, Lennar Corporation has committed to contribute an aggregate $200.0 million to four Sunnova tax equity funds, each formed annually during a period of four consecutive years commencing in 2021. The solar service agreements and related solar energy systems acquired by each of these four tax equity funds will generally be originated by SunStreet, though a certain number of solar service agreements may be originated by our dealers if those originated by SunStreet do not fully utilize Lennar Corporation's Funding Commitment for a given Contribution Year. Any amount not utilized during the first and second Contribution Years will increase the Funding Commitment during the third Contribution Year by that amount, and any amount not utilized during the third Contribution Year will increase the Funding Commitment during the fourth Contribution Year by that amount. In connection with the Funding Commitment, each of the tax equity funds will enter into typical tax equity fund transaction documentation, including development and purchase agreements, servicing agreements and limited liability company agreements.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has resulted and may continue to result in widespread adverse impacts on the global economy. Our first priority in our response to this pandemic has been the health and safety of our employees, customers and dealers. To that end, we quickly implemented preventative measures to minimize unnecessary risk of exposure, which we have continued to follow. We have experienced some resulting disruptions to our business operations as the COVID-19 pandemic has continued to spread through the states and U.S. territories in which we operate.
Social distancing guidelines, stay-at-home orders and similar government measures associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as actions by individuals to reduce their potential exposure to the virus, contributed to a decline in origination, with new contract origination, net of cancelations, declining in each of March and April 2020 from the previous month. This decline reflected an inability by our dealers to perform in-person sales calls based on the stay-at-home orders in some locations. To adjust to these government measures, our dealers expanded the use of digital tools and origination channels and created new methods that offset restrictions on their ability to meet with potential new customers in person. Such efforts drove an increase in new contract origination, net of cancelations, in May through November 2020, with each of the months from June 2020 to November 2020 exceeding the number of new contracts originated, net of cancelations, in February 2020. We have seen the use of websites, video conferencing and other virtual tools as part of our origination process expand widely and contribute to our growth. However, local, state or federal government extensions of COVID-19 pandemic response measures may further disrupt the return to in-person sales, which may have a material adverse effect on our business, cash flows, liquidity, financial condition and results of operations due to an inability by our dealers to adjust to virtual sales methods or because such methods prove to be less successful with potential customers.
The service and installation of solar energy systems has continued during the COVID-19 pandemic. This reflects residential solar services' designation as an essential service in all of our service territories. In order to adhere to all applicable state and federal health and safety guidelines, we and our dealers have moved to a contact-free process for installers and service technicians. In addition, an increasing number of jurisdictional authorities, as well as local utilities, are accepting electronic submissions for permits, and inspections are being performed in many locations through video calls and other electronic means. We expect our dealers' ability to install and our ability to service solar energy systems will continue in this manner. However, if there are additional outbreaks of the COVID-19 virus or more stringent health and safety guidelines are adopted, our and our dealers' ability to continue performing installations and service calls may be adversely impacted.
Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, we have seen minimal impact to our supply chain as our technicians and dealers have largely been able to successfully procure the equipment needed to service and install solar energy systems. We have established a geographically diverse group of suppliers, which helps ensure our dealers and customers have access to affordable and effective solar energy and storage options despite potential trade, geopolitical or event-driven risks. Further, we implemented a strategy in 2019, as a result of which the equipment necessary to install and service a significant majority of solar energy systems for the duration of 2021 is already available to us. Currently, we do not anticipate an inability to source parts for our solar energy systems or energy storage systems. However, if supply chains become significantly disrupted due to additional outbreaks of the COVID-19 virus or more stringent health and safety guidelines are implemented, our ability to install and service solar energy systems could become adversely impacted.
As part of our preventative measures to minimize unnecessary risk of exposure and prevent infection, we have continued our work-from-home policy for employees in our Houston headquarters. In May 2020, we re-established critical operations that rely on infrastructure available at headquarters. All employees are required to follow strict social distancing and health safety guidelines in conformity with the restrictions and best practices encouraged by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the World Health Organization and other governmental and regulatory authorities. Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, our call center has remained open and properly staffed to meet our customers' needs. If a customer requires a visit from a service technician, those technicians are available and in almost all cases can complete the service without entering the customer's home. We are continuing to address concerns to protect the health and safety of our employees and those of our customers and dealers, and this includes changes to comply with health-related guidelines as they are modified and supplemented.
There is considerable uncertainty regarding the extent and duration of governmental and other measures implemented to try to slow the spread of the COVID-19 virus, such as large-scale travel bans and restrictions, border closures, quarantines, shelter-in-place orders and business and government shutdowns. Some states that had begun taking steps to reopen their economies experienced a subsequent surge in cases of COVID-19, causing these states to cease such reopening measures in some cases and reinstitute restrictions in others. Restrictions of this nature have caused, and may continue to cause, us and our dealers to experience operational delays and may cause milestones or deadlines relating to our exclusivity arrangements to be missed. To date, we have not received notices from our dealers regarding performance delays resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. However, worsening economic conditions could result in such outcomes over time, which would impact our future financial
performance. Further, the effects of the economic downturn associated with the COVID-19 pandemic may increase unemployment and reduce consumer credit ratings and credit availability, which may adversely affect new customer origination and our existing customers' ability to make payments on their solar service agreements. Periods of high unemployment and a lack of availability of credit may lead to increased delinquency and default rates. We have not experienced a significant increase in default or delinquency rates to date. However, if existing economic conditions continue for a prolonged period of time or worsen, delinquencies on solar service agreements could increase, which would also negatively impact our future financial performance.
As of the date of this report, our responses to the challenges presented by the conditions described above to minimize the impacts to our business have yielded encouraging results. However, our future success also depends on our ability to raise capital from third-party investors and commercial sources. In the initial weeks of the COVID-19 pandemic we saw access to capital markets reduced generally. Although the capital markets have not returned to full strength, we have since been able to raise funding during this challenging time. During 2020, we closed five tax equity funds, closed three securitizations, expanded capacity under one of our existing credit facilities, closed one additional credit facility, raised additional equity capital and continue to have access to capacity under certain of our existing tax equity funds and warehouse facilities. If we are unable to regain access to the capital markets or are unable to raise funds through our tax equity and warehouse financing transactions at competitive terms, it would adversely impact our ability to finance the deployment of our solar energy systems and energy storage systems and our future financial performance.
We cannot predict the full impact the COVID-19 pandemic or the significant disruption and volatility currently being experienced in the capital markets will have on our business, cash flows, liquidity, financial condition and results of operations at this time due to numerous uncertainties. The ultimate impact will depend on future developments, including, among other things, the ultimate duration of the COVID-19 virus, the distribution, acceptance and efficacy of the vaccine, the depth and duration of the economic downturn and other economic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, the consequences of governmental and other measures designed to prevent the spread of the COVID-19 virus, actions taken by governmental authorities, customers, suppliers, dealers and other third parties, our ability and the ability of our customers, potential customers and dealers to adapt to operating in a changed environment and the timing and extent to which normal economic and operating conditions resume. For additional discussion regarding risks associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, see "Risk Factors" elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Financing Transactions
In November 2020, we admitted a tax equity investor with a total capital commitment of $100.0 million. In December 2020, we increased the total capital commitment from an existing tax equity investor from $75.0 million to $155.0 million. See "-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Financing Arrangements-Tax Equity Fund Commitments" below.
In October 2020, we amended the revolving credit facility associated with one of our financing subsidiaries that owns certain tax equity funds to, among other things, increase the aggregate commitment amount from $437.5 million to $460.7 million and increase the maximum commitment amount from $437.5 million to $600.0 million. In January 2021, this revolving credit facility was further amended to, among other things, (a) permit certain transactions in SRECs (or proceeds therefrom) and related hedging arrangements and exclude certain of such amounts from the calculation of net cash flow available to service the indebtedness and (b) allow for borrowings with respect to certain ancillary components. See "-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Financing Arrangements-Warehouse and Other Debt Financings" below.
In November 2020, one of our subsidiaries issued $209.1 million in aggregate principal amount of Series 2020-2 Class A solar asset-backed notes and $45.6 million in aggregate principal amount of Series 2020-2 Class B solar asset-backed notes (collectively, the "SOLII Notes") with a maturity date of November 2055. The SOLII Notes bear interest at an annual rate of 2.73% and 5.47% for the Class A and Class B notes, respectively. In February 2021, one of our subsidiaries issued $150.1 million in aggregate principal amount of Series 2021-A Class A solar loan-backed notes and $38.6 million in aggregate principal amount of Series 2021-A Class B solar loan-backed notes (collectively, the "HELV Notes") with a maturity date of February 2048. The HELV Notes bear interest at an annual rate of 1.80% and 3.15% for the Class A and Class B notes, respectively. See "-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Financing Arrangements-Securitizations" below.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, certain of the holders of our 9.75% convertible senior notes converted approximately $66.0 million aggregate principal amount, including accrued and unpaid interest to the date of each conversion, of our 9.75% convertible senior notes into 4,890,892 shares of our common stock. In January and February 2021, the remaining holders of our 9.75% convertible senior notes converted approximately $97.1 million aggregate principal amount, including accrued and unpaid interest to the date of each conversion, of our 9.75% convertible senior notes into 7,196,035 shares of our common stock. As of February 23, 2021, all of the holders of our 9.75% convertible senior notes have converted their notes into common
stock. As such, there are no longer any 9.75% convertible senior notes outstanding. See "-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Financing Arrangements-Convertible Senior Notes" below.
In December 2020, we sold 4,025,000 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $37.00 per share. We received aggregate net proceeds of approximately $142.7 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of approximately $6.0 million and offering expenses of approximately $0.3 million. See "-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Financing Arrangements-Public Offerings" below.
Securitizations
As a source of long-term financing, we securitize qualifying solar energy systems, energy storage systems and related solar service agreements into special purpose entities who issue solar asset-backed and solar loan-backed notes to institutional investors. We also securitize the cash flows generated by the membership interests in certain of our indirect, wholly-owned subsidiaries that are the managing member of a tax equity fund that owns a pool of solar energy systems, energy storage systems and related solar service agreements that were originated by one of our wholly-owned subsidiaries. We do not securitize the Section 48(a) ITC incentives associated with the solar energy systems and energy storage systems as part of these arrangements. We use the cash flows these solar energy systems and energy storage systems generate to service the monthly, quarterly or semi-annual principal and interest payments on the notes and satisfy the expenses and reserve requirements of the special purpose entities, with any remaining cash distributed to their sole members, who are typically our indirect wholly-owned subsidiaries. In connection with these securitizations, certain of our affiliates receive a fee for managing and servicing the solar energy systems and energy storage systems pursuant to management, servicing, facility administration and asset management agreements. The special purpose entities are also typically required to maintain a liquidity reserve account and a reserve account for equipment replacements and, in certain cases, reserve accounts for financing fund purchase option/withdrawal right exercises or storage system replacement for the benefit of the holders under the applicable series of notes, each of which are funded from initial deposits or cash flows to the levels specified therein. The creditors of these special purpose entities have no recourse to our other assets except as expressly set forth in the terms of the notes. From our inception through December 31, 2020, we have issued $1.7 billion in solar asset-backed and solar loan-backed notes.
Tax Equity Funds
Our ability to offer long-term solar service agreements depends in part on our ability to finance the installation of the solar energy systems and energy storage systems by co-investing with tax equity investors, such as large banks who value the resulting customer receivables and Section 48(a) ITCs, accelerated tax depreciation and other incentives related to the solar energy systems and energy storage systems, primarily through structured investments known as "tax equity". Tax equity investments are generally structured as non-recourse project financings known as "tax equity funds". In the context of distributed generation solar energy, tax equity investors make contributions upfront or in stages based on milestones in exchange for a share of the tax attributes and cash flows emanating from an underlying portfolio of solar energy systems and energy storage systems. In these tax equity funds, the U.S. federal tax attributes offset taxes that otherwise would have been payable on the investors' other operations. The terms and conditions of each tax equity fund vary significantly by investor and by fund. We continue to negotiate with potential investors to create additional tax equity funds.
In general, our tax equity funds are structured using the "partnership flip" structure. Under partnership flip structures, we and our tax equity investors contribute cash into a partnership. The partnership uses this cash to acquire long-term solar service agreements, solar energy systems and energy storage systems developed by us and sells energy from such solar energy systems and energy storage systems, as applicable, to customers or directly leases the solar energy systems and energy storage systems, as applicable, to customers. We assign these solar service agreements, solar energy systems, energy storage systems and related incentives to our tax equity funds in accordance with the criteria of the specific funds. Upon such assignment and the satisfaction of certain conditions precedent, we are able to draw down on the tax equity fund commitments. The conditions precedent to funding vary across our tax equity funds but generally require that we have entered into a solar service agreement with the customer, the customer meets certain credit criteria, the solar energy system is expected to be eligible for the Section 48(a) ITC, we have a recent appraisal from an independent appraiser establishing the fair market value of the solar energy system and the property is in an approved state or territory. Certain tax equity investors agree to receive a minimum target rate of return, typically on an after-tax basis, which varies by tax equity fund. Prior to receiving a contractual rate of return or a date specified in the contractual arrangements, the tax equity investor receives substantially all of the non-cash value attributable to the solar energy systems and energy storage systems, which includes accelerated depreciation and Section 48(a) ITCs, and a significant portion of the value attributable to customer payments; however, we typically receive a majority of the cash distributions, which are typically paid quarterly. After the tax equity investor receives its contractual rate of return or after a specified date, we receive substantially all of the cash. Under the partnership flip structure, in part owing to the allocation of depreciation benefits to the investor, the investor's pre-tax return is much lower than the investor's after-tax return.
We have determined we are the primary beneficiary in these tax equity funds for accounting purposes. Accordingly, we consolidate the assets and liabilities and operating results of these partnerships in our consolidated financial statements. We recognize the tax equity investors' share of the net assets of the tax equity funds as redeemable noncontrolling interests and noncontrolling interests in our consolidated balance sheets. These income or loss allocations, reflected in our consolidated statements of operations, may create significant volatility in our reported results of operations, including potentially changing net loss attributable to stockholders to net income attributable to stockholders, or vice versa, from quarter to quarter.
We typically have an option to acquire, and our tax equity investors may have an option to withdraw and require us to purchase, all the equity interests our tax equity investor holds in the tax equity funds starting approximately six years after the last solar energy system in each tax equity fund is operational. If we or our tax equity investors exercise this option, we are typically required to pay at least the fair market value of the tax equity investor's equity interest and, in certain cases, a contractual minimum amount. Following such exercise, we would receive 100% of the customer payments for the remainder of the term of the solar service agreements. From our inception through December 31, 2020, we have received commitments of $789.5 million through the use of tax equity funds, of which an aggregate of $628.6 million has been funded.
Key Financial and Operational Metrics
We regularly review a number of metrics, including the following key operational and financial metrics, to evaluate our business, measure our performance and liquidity, identify trends affecting our business, formulate our financial projections and make strategic decisions.
Number of Customers. We define number of customers to include each unique customer that is party to a solar service agreement or purchased a solar energy system from us outright, which we subsequently placed in service. For all solar energy systems installed by us, in-service means the related solar energy system and, if applicable, energy storage system, must have met all the requirements to begin operation and be interconnected to the electrical grid. We do not include in our number of customers any customer under a lease, PPA or loan agreement that has reached mechanical completion but has not received permission to operate from the local utility or for whom we have terminated the contract and removed the solar energy system. We also do not include in our number of customers any customer that has been in default under his or her solar service agreement in excess of six months. We track the total number of customers as an indicator of our historical growth and our rate of growth from period to period.
Weighted Average Number of Customers. We calculate the weighted average number of customers based on the number of months a given customer is in-service during a given measurement period. The weighted average number of customers reflects the number of customers at the beginning of a period, plus the total number of new customers added in the period adjusted by a factor that accounts for the partial period nature of those new customers. For purposes of this calculation, we assume all new customers added during a month were added in the middle of that month. We track the weighted average customer count in order to accurately reflect the contribution of the appropriate number of customers to key financial metrics over the measurement period.
Adjusted EBITDA. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) plus net interest expense, depreciation and amortization expense, income tax expense, financing deal costs, natural disaster losses and related charges, net, amortization of payments to dealers for exclusivity and other bonus arrangements, legal settlements and excluding the effect of certain non-recurring items we do not consider to be indicative of our ongoing operating performance such as, but not limited to, costs of our initial public offering ("IPO"), losses on unenforceable contracts, losses on extinguishment of long-term debt, realized and unrealized gains and losses on fair value option instruments and other non-cash items such as non-cash compensation expense,
asset retirement obligation ("ARO") accretion expense, provision for current expected credit losses and non-cash inventory impairment.
Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure we use as a performance measure. We believe investors and securities analysts also use Adjusted EBITDA in evaluating our operating performance. This measurement is not recognized in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ("GAAP") and should not be viewed as an alternative to GAAP measures of performance. The GAAP measure most directly comparable to Adjusted EBITDA is net income (loss). The presentation of Adjusted EBITDA should not be construed to suggest our future results will be unaffected by non-cash or non-recurring items. In addition, our calculation of Adjusted EBITDA is not necessarily comparable to Adjusted EBITDA as calculated by other companies.
We believe Adjusted EBITDA is useful to management, investors and analysts in providing a measure of core financial performance adjusted to allow for comparisons of results of operations across reporting periods on a consistent basis. These adjustments are intended to exclude items that are not indicative of the ongoing operating performance of the business. Adjusted EBITDA is also used by our management for internal planning purposes, including our consolidated operating budget, and by our Board in setting performance-based compensation targets. Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered an alternative to but viewed in conjunction with GAAP results, as we believe it provides a more complete understanding of ongoing business performance and trends than GAAP measures alone. Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP.
We use per customer metrics, including Adjusted Operating Expense per weighted average customer (as described below), as an additional way to evaluate our performance. Specifically, we consider the change in these metrics from period to period as a way to evaluate our performance in the context of changes we experience in the overall customer base. While the Adjusted Operating Expense figure provides a valuable indicator of our overall performance, evaluating this metric on a per unit basis allows for further nuanced understanding by management, investors and analysts of the financial impact of each additional customer.
(1) Amount includes the non-cash effect of equity-based compensation plans of $10.9 million, $9.2 million and $3.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, and partial forgiveness of a loan to an executive officer used to purchase our capital stock of $1.3 million and $0.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Interest Income and Principal Payments from Customer Notes Receivable. Under our loan agreements, the customer obtains financing for the purchase of a solar energy system from us and we agree to operate and maintain the solar energy system throughout the duration of the agreement. Pursuant to the terms of the loan agreement, the customer makes scheduled principal and interest payments to us and has the option to prepay principal at any time in part or in full. Whereas we typically recognize payments from customers under our leases and PPAs as revenue, we recognize payments received from customers under our loan agreements (a) as interest income, to the extent attributable to earned interest on the contract that financed the customer's purchase of the solar energy system; (b) as a reduction of a note receivable on the balance sheet, to the extent attributable to a return of principal (whether scheduled or prepaid) on the contract that financed the customer's purchase of the solar energy system; and (c) as revenue, to the extent attributable to payments for operations and maintenance services provided by us.
While Adjusted EBITDA effectively captures the operating performance of our leases and PPAs, it only reflects the service portion of the operating performance under our loan agreements. We do not consider our types of solar service agreements differently when evaluating our operating performance. In order to present a measure of operating performance that provides comparability without regard to the different accounting treatment among our three types of solar service agreements, we consider interest income from customer notes receivable and principal proceeds from customer notes receivable, net of related revenue, as key performance metrics. We believe these two metrics provide a more meaningful and uniform method of
analyzing our operating performance when viewed in light of our other key performance metrics across the three primary types of solar service agreements.
Adjusted Operating Cash Flow. We define Adjusted Operating Cash Flow as net cash used in operating activities plus principal proceeds from customer notes receivable, financed insurance payments and distributions to redeemable noncontrolling interests and noncontrolling interests less derivative breakage fees from financing structure changes, payments to dealers for exclusivity and other bonus arrangements, net inventory and prepaid inventory (sales) purchases, payments of non-capitalized costs related to our IPO and equity offerings and direct sales costs to the extent the related solar energy system is financed through a loan. Adjusted Operating Cash Flow is a non-GAAP financial measure we use as a liquidity measure. This measurement is not recognized in accordance with GAAP and should not be viewed as an alternative to GAAP measures of liquidity. The GAAP measure most directly comparable to Adjusted Operating Cash Flow is net cash used in operating activities. We believe Adjusted Operating Cash Flow is a supplemental financial measure useful to management, analysts, investors, lenders and rating agencies as an indicator of our ability to internally fund origination activities, service or incur additional debt and service our contractual obligations. We believe investors and analysts will use Adjusted Operating Cash Flow to evaluate our liquidity and ability to service our contractual obligations. However, Adjusted Operating Cash Flow has limitations as an analytical tool because it does not account for all future expenditures and financial obligations of the business or reflect unforeseen circumstances that may impact our future cash flows, all of which could have a material effect on our financial condition and results from operations. In addition, our calculations of Adjusted Operating Cash Flow are not necessarily comparable to liquidity measures presented by other companies. Investors should not rely on these measures as a substitute for any GAAP measure, including net cash used in operating activities.
Adjusted Operating Expense. We define Adjusted Operating Expense as total operating expense less depreciation and amortization expense, financing deal costs, natural disaster losses and related charges, net, amortization of payments to dealers for exclusivity and other bonus arrangements, legal settlements and excluding the effect of certain non-recurring items we do not consider to be indicative of our ongoing operating performance such as, but not limited to, costs of our IPO, losses on unenforceable contracts and other non-cash items such as non-cash compensation expense, ARO accretion expense, provision for current expected credit losses and non-cash inventory impairment. Adjusted Operating Expense is a non-GAAP financial measure we use as a performance measure. We believe investors and securities analysts will also use Adjusted Operating Expense in evaluating our performance. This measurement is not recognized in accordance with GAAP and should not be viewed as an alternative to GAAP measures of performance. The GAAP measure most directly comparable to Adjusted Operating Expense is total operating expense. We believe Adjusted Operating Expense is a supplemental financial measure
useful to management, analysts, investors, lenders and rating agencies as an indicator of the efficiency of our operations between reporting periods. Adjusted Operating Expense should not be considered an alternative to but viewed in conjunction with GAAP total operating expense, as we believe it provides a more complete understanding of our performance than GAAP measures alone. Adjusted Operating Expense has limitations as an analytical tool and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP, including total operating expense.
We use Adjusted Operating Expense per weighted average customer as an additional way to evaluate our performance. Specifically, we consider the change in this metric from period to period as a way to evaluate our performance in the context of changes we experience in the overall customer base. While the Adjusted Operating Expense figure provides a valuable indicator of our overall performance, evaluating this metric on a per customer basis provides a more contextualized understanding of our performance to us, investors and analysts of the financial impact of each additional customer.
Estimated Gross Contracted Customer Value. We calculate estimated gross contracted customer value as defined below. We believe estimated gross contracted customer value can serve as a useful tool for investors and analysts in comparing the remaining value of our customer contracts to that of our peers.
Estimated gross contracted customer value as of a specific measurement date represents the sum of the present value of the remaining estimated future net cash flows we expect to receive from existing customers during the initial contract term of our leases and PPAs, which are typically 25 years in length, plus the present value of future net cash flows we expect to receive from the sale of related SRECs, either under existing contracts or in future sales, plus the carrying value of outstanding customer loans on our balance sheet. From these aggregate estimated initial cash flows, we subtract the present value of estimated net cash distributions to redeemable noncontrolling interests and noncontrolling interests and estimated operating, maintenance and administrative expenses associated with the solar service agreements. These estimated future cash flows reflect the projected monthly customer payments over the life of our solar service agreements and depend on various factors including but not limited to solar service agreement type, contracted rates, expected sun hours and the projected production capacity of the solar equipment installed. For the purpose of calculating this metric, we discount all future cash flows at 6%.
The anticipated operating, maintenance and administrative expenses included in the calculation of estimated gross contracted customer value include, among other things, expenses related to accounting, reporting, audit, insurance, maintenance and repairs. In the aggregate, we estimate these expenses are $20 per kilowatt per year initially, with 2% annual increases for inflation, and an additional $81 per year non-escalating expense included for energy storage systems. We do not include maintenance and repair costs for inverters and similar equipment as those are largely covered by the applicable product and dealer warranties for the life of the product, but we do include additional cost for energy storage systems, which are only
covered by a 10-year warranty. Expected distributions to tax equity investors vary among the different tax equity funds and are based on individual tax equity fund contract provisions.
Estimated gross contracted customer value is forecasted as of a specific date. It is forward-looking and we use judgment in developing the assumptions used to calculate it. Factors that could impact estimated gross contracted customer value include, but are not limited to, customer payment defaults, or declines in utility rates or early termination of a contract in certain circumstances, including prior to installation. The following table presents the calculation of estimated gross contracted customer value as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, calculated using a 6% discount rate.
Sensitivity Analysis. The calculation of estimated gross contracted customer value and associated operational metrics requires us to make a number of assumptions regarding future revenues and costs which may not prove accurate. Accordingly, we present below a sensitivity analysis with a range of assumptions. We consider a discount rate of 4% to be appropriate based on recent transactions that demonstrate a portfolio of residential solar service agreements is an asset class that can be securitized successfully on a long-term basis, with a coupon of less than 4%. We also present these metrics with a discount rate of 6% based on industry practice. The appropriate discount rate for these estimates may change in the future due to the level of inflation, rising interest rates, our cost of capital and consumer demand for solar energy systems. In addition, the table below provides a range of estimated gross contracted customer value amounts if different cumulative customer loss rate assumptions were used. We are presenting this information for illustrative purposes only and as a comparison to information published by our peers.
Significant Factors and Trends Affecting Our Business
Our results of operations and our ability to grow our business over time could be impacted by a number of factors and trends that affect our industry generally, as well as new offerings of services and products we may acquire or seek to acquire in the future. Additionally, our business is concentrated in certain markets, putting us at risk of region-specific disruptions such as adverse economic, regulatory, political, weather and other conditions. See "Item 1A. Risk Factors" for further discussion of risks affecting our business.
Financing Availability. Our future growth depends, in significant part, on our ability to raise capital from third-party investors on competitive terms to help finance the origination of our solar energy systems under our solar service agreements. We have historically used debt, such as convertible senior notes, asset-backed and loan-backed securitizations and warehouse facilities, tax equity, preferred equity and other financing strategies to help fund our operations. From our inception through December 31, 2020, we have raised more than $6.7 billion in total capital commitments from equity, debt and tax equity investors. With respect to tax equity, there are a limited number of potential tax equity investors and the competition for this investment capital is intense. The principal tax credit on which tax equity investors in our industry rely is the Section 48(a) ITC. Starting January 1, 2020, the amount for the Section 48(a) ITC was equal to 30% of the basis of eligible solar property that began construction before 2020 if placed in service before 2026. By statute, the Section 48(a) ITC percentage decreases to 26% for eligible solar property that begins construction during 2020, 2021 or 2022, 22% for 2023 and 10% if construction begins after 2023 or if the property is placed into service after 2025. This reduction in the Section 48(a) ITC will likely reduce our use of tax equity financing in the future unless the Section 48(a) ITC is increased or replaced. IRS guidance includes a safe harbor that may apply when a taxpayer (or in certain cases, a contractor) pays or incurs 5% or more of the costs of a solar energy system before the end of the applicable year, even though the solar energy system is not placed in service until after the end of that year. For installations in 2021, we purchased prior to 2020 substantially all the inverters that we estimated would be deployed under our lease and PPA agreements that we expected would allow the related solar energy systems to qualify for the 30% Section 48(a) ITC by satisfying the 5% ITC Safe Harbor. Based on various market factors, however, not all solar energy
systems installed in 2021 will qualify for the Section 48(a) ITC at 30%. For solar energy systems installed in 2021 not meeting all requirements for the 30% Section 48(a) ITC, such solar energy systems will qualify for the 26% Section 48(a) ITC. Additionally, we may make further inventory purchases in future periods to extend the availability of each period's Section 48(a) ITC. Our ability to raise capital from third-party investors is affected by general economic conditions, the state of the capital markets, inflation levels and concerns about our industry or business.
Cost of Solar Energy Systems. Although the solar panel market has seen an increase in supply, upward pressure on prices may occur due to growth in the solar industry, regulatory policy changes, tariffs and duties and an increase in demand. As a result of these developments, we may pay higher prices on imported solar modules, which may make it less economical for us to serve certain markets. Attachment rates for energy storage systems have trended higher while the price to acquire has trended downward making the addition of energy storage systems a potential area of growth for us.
Energy Storage Systems. Our energy storage systems increase our customers' independence from the centralized utility and provide on-site backup power when there is a grid outage due to storms, wildfires, other natural disasters and general power failures caused by supply or transmission issues. In addition, at times it can be more economic to consume less energy from the grid or, alternatively, to export solar energy back to the grid. Recent technological advancements for energy storage systems allow the energy storage system to adapt to pricing and utility rate shifts by controlling the inflows and outflows of power, allowing customers to increase the value of their solar energy system plus energy storage system. The energy storage system charges during the day, making the energy it stores available to the home when needed. It also features software that can customize power usage for the individual customer, providing backup power, optimizing solar energy consumption versus grid consumption or preventing export to the grid as appropriate. The software is tailored based on utility regulation, economic indicators and grid conditions. The combination of energy control, increased energy resilience and independence from the grid is strong incentive for customers to adopt solar and energy storage. As energy storage systems and their related software features become more advanced, we expect to see increased adoption of energy storage systems.
Government Regulations, Policies and Incentives. Our growth strategy depends in significant part on government policies and incentives that promote and support solar energy and enhance the economic viability of distributed residential solar. These incentives come in various forms, including net metering, eligibility for accelerated depreciation such as the modified accelerated cost recovery system, SRECs, tax abatements, rebates, renewable targets, incentive programs and tax credits, particularly the Section 48(a) ITC and the Section 25D Credit. Policies requiring solar on new homes or new roofs, such as those enacted in California and New York City, also support the growth of distributed solar. The sale of SRECs has constituted a significant portion of our revenue historically. A change in the value of SRECs or changes in other policies or a loss or reduction in such incentives could decrease the attractiveness of distributed residential solar to us, our dealers and our customers in applicable markets, which could reduce our customer acquisition opportunities. Such a loss or reduction could also reduce our willingness to pursue certain customer acquisitions due to decreased revenue or income under our solar service agreements. Additionally, such a loss or reduction may also impact the terms of and availability of third-party financing. If any of these government regulations, policies or incentives are adversely amended, delayed, eliminated, reduced, retroactively changed or not extended beyond their current expiration dates or there is a negative impact from the recent federal law changes or proposals, our operating results and the demand for, and the economics of, distributed residential solar energy may decline, which could harm our business.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue. We recognize revenue from contracts with customers as we satisfy our performance obligations at a transaction price reflecting an amount of consideration based upon an estimated rate of return. We express this rate of return as the solar rate per kWh in the customer contract. The amount of revenue we recognize does not equal customer cash payments because we satisfy performance obligations ahead of cash receipt or evenly as we provide continuous access on a stand-ready basis to the solar energy system. We reflect the differences between revenue recognition and cash payments received in accounts receivable, other assets or deferred revenue, as appropriate.
PPAs. We have determined solar service agreements under which customers purchase electricity from us should be accounted for as revenue from contracts with customers. We recognize revenue based upon the amount of electricity delivered as determined by remote monitoring equipment at solar rates specified under the contracts. The PPAs generally have a term of 25 years with an opportunity for customers to renew for up to an additional 10 years, via two five-year renewal options.
Lease Agreements. We are the lessor under lease agreements for solar energy systems and energy storage systems, which we account for as revenue from contracts with customers. We recognize revenue on a straight-line basis over the contract term as we satisfy our obligation to provide continuous access to the solar energy system. The lease agreements generally have a term of 25 years with an opportunity for customers to renew for up to an additional 10 years, via two five-year renewal options.
We provide customers under our lease agreements a performance guarantee that each solar energy system will achieve a certain specified minimum solar energy production output. The specified minimum solar energy production output may not be achieved due to natural fluctuations in the weather or equipment failures from exposure and wear and tear outside of our control, among other factors. We determine the amount of guaranteed output based on a number of different factors, including (a) the specific site information relating to the tilt of the panels, azimuth (a horizontal angle measured clockwise in degrees from a reference direction) of the panels, size of the solar energy system and shading on site; (b) the calculated amount of available irradiance (amount of energy for a given flat surface facing a specific direction) based on historical average weather data and (c) the calculated amount of energy output of the solar energy system.
If the solar energy system does not produce the guaranteed production amount, we are required to provide a bill credit or refund a portion of the previously remitted customer payments, where the bill credit or repayment is calculated as the product of (a) the shortfall production amount and (b) the dollar amount (guaranteed rate) per kWh that is fixed throughout the term of the contract. These bill credits or remittances of a customer's payments, if needed, are payable in January following the end of the first three years of the solar energy system's placed in service date and then every annual period thereafter. See Note 16, Commitments and Contingencies, to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Loan Agreements. We recognize payments received from customers under loan agreements (a) as interest income, to the extent attributable to earned interest on the contract that financed the customer's purchase of the solar energy system; (b) as a reduction of a note receivable on the balance sheet, to the extent attributable to a return of principal (whether scheduled or prepaid) on the contract that financed the customer's purchase of the solar energy system; and (c) as revenue, to the extent attributable to payments for operations and maintenance services provided by us. Similar to our lease agreements, we provide customers under our loan agreements a performance guarantee that each solar energy system will achieve a certain specified minimum solar energy production output, which is a significant proportion of its expected output.
SRECs. Each SREC represents one megawatt hour (1,000 kWh) generated by a solar energy system. We sell SRECs to utilities and other third parties who use the SRECs to meet renewable portfolio standards and can do so with or without the actual electricity associated with the renewable-based generation source. We account for SRECs generated from solar energy systems owned by us, as opposed to those owned by our customers, as governmental incentives with no costs incurred to obtain them and do not consider those SRECs output of the underlying solar energy systems. We classify SRECs as inventory held until sold and delivered to third parties. We enter into economic hedges with major financial institutions related to expected production of SRECs through forward contracts to partially mitigate the risk of decreases in SREC market rates. The contracts require us to physically deliver the SRECs upon settlement. We recognize the related revenue upon the transfer of the SRECs to the counterparty. The costs related to the sales of SRECs are generally limited to fees for brokered transactions. Accordingly, the sale of SRECs in a period generally has a favorable impact on our operating results for that period. In certain circumstances we are required to purchase SRECs on the open market to fulfill minimum delivery requirements under our forward contracts.
Other Revenue. Other revenue includes certain state and utility incentives, revenue from the direct sale of energy storage systems to customers and sales of service plans. We recognize revenue from state and utility incentives in the periods in which they are earned. We recognize revenue from the direct sale of energy storage systems in the period in which the storage components are placed in service. Service plans are available to customers whose solar energy system was not originally sold by Sunnova. We recognize revenue from service plan contracts over the life of the contract, which is typically five years or ten years.
Cost of Revenue-Depreciation. Cost of revenue-depreciation represents depreciation on solar energy systems under lease agreements and PPAs that have been placed in service.
Cost of Revenue-Other. Cost of revenue-other represents costs to purchase SRECs on the open market, SREC broker fees and other items deemed to be a cost of providing the service of selling power to customers or potential customers, such as certain costs to service loan agreements, costs for filing under the Uniform Commercial Code to maintain title, title searches, credit checks on potential customers at the time of initial contract and other similar costs, typically directly related to the volume of customers and potential customers.
Operations and Maintenance Expense. Operations and maintenance expense represents costs paid to third parties for maintaining and servicing the solar energy systems, property insurance and property taxes. In addition, operations and maintenance expense includes impairments due to natural disaster losses net of insurance proceeds recovered under our business interruption and property damage insurance coverage for natural disasters, write downs and write-offs related to inventory adjustments, losses on disposals and other impairments.
General and Administrative Expense. General and administrative expense represents costs for our employees, such as salaries, bonuses, benefits and all other employee-related costs, including stock-based compensation, professional fees related to legal, accounting, human resources, finance and training, information technology and software services, marketing and communications, travel and rent and other office-related expenses. General and administrative expense also includes depreciation on assets not classified as solar energy systems, including information technology software and development projects, vehicles, furniture, fixtures, computer equipment and leasehold improvements and accretion expense on AROs. We capitalize a portion of general and administrative costs, such as payroll-related costs, that is related to employees who are directly involved in the design, construction, installation and testing of the solar energy systems but not directly associated with a particular asset. We also capitalize a portion of general and administrative costs, such as payroll-related costs, that is related to employees who are directly associated with and devote time to internal information technology software and development projects, to the extent of the time spent directly on the application and development stage of such software project.
Interest Expense, Net. Interest expense, net represents interest on our borrowings under our various debt facilities and amortization of debt discounts and deferred financing costs.
Interest Expense, Net-Affiliates. Interest expense, net-affiliates represents interest expense on our debt facilities, including the amortization of the debt discounts, held by our affiliates.
Interest Income. Interest income represents interest income from the notes receivable under our loan program and income on short term investments with financial institutions.
Loss on Extinguishment of Long-Term Debt, Net. Loss on extinguishment of long-term debt, net resulted from the GAAP treatment of conversions of our 9.75% convertible senior notes into shares of our common stock and represents the difference between the net carrying value of the 9.75% convertible senior notes, including accrued and unpaid interest to the date of each conversion, and the fair value of the common stock issued for the converted notes. See Note 13, Stockholders' Equity, to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Loss on Extinguishment of Long-Term Debt, Net-Affiliates. Loss on extinguishment of long-term debt, net-affiliates resulted from the GAAP treatment of the amendment to the senior secured notes in April 2019 and represents the difference between the net carrying value of the senior secured notes prior to the amendment and the fair value of the notes after the amendment.
Other (Income) Expense. Other (income) expense primarily represents changes in the fair value of certain financial instruments.
Income Tax Expense. We account for income taxes under Accounting Standards Codification 740, Income Taxes. As such, we determine deferred tax assets and liabilities based on temporary differences resulting from the different treatment of items for tax and financial reporting purposes. We measure deferred tax assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to reverse. Additionally, we must assess the likelihood that deferred tax assets will be recovered as deductions from future taxable income. We have a full valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets because we believe it is more likely than not that our deferred tax assets will not be realized. We evaluate the recoverability of our deferred tax assets on a quarterly basis. Currently, for U.S. income tax purposes, there is no provision or benefit for income taxes as we have incurred losses to date. The income tax expense includes the effects of taxes paid in U.S. territories where the tax code for the respective territory may have separate tax reporting requirements. We do not, however, report financial information on a jurisdictional basis.
Net Income (Loss) Attributable to Redeemable Noncontrolling Interests and Noncontrolling Interests. Net income (loss) attributable to redeemable noncontrolling interests and noncontrolling interests represents third-party interests in the net income or loss of certain consolidated subsidiaries based on hypothetical liquidation at book value.
Results of Operations-Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data for the periods indicated.
Revenue
Revenue increased by $29.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily as a result of an increased number of solar energy systems in service. The weighted average number of customers (excluding customers with loan agreements) increased from approximately 60,100 for the year ended December 31, 2019 to approximately 77,900 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Excluding SREC revenue and revenue under our loan agreements, on a weighted average number of customers basis, revenue remained relatively flat at $1,522 per customer for the
year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $1,567 per customer for the same period in 2020 (3% increase). SREC revenue decreased by $2.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to $3.0 million related to certain forward sales of SRECs recognized in December 2019. This decrease was partially offset by an increase in the number of solar energy systems in service, which resulted in additional SREC production. The fluctuations in SREC revenue from period to period are also affected by the total number of solar energy systems, weather seasonality and hedge and spot prices associated with the timing of the sale of SRECs. On a weighted average number of customers basis, revenues under our loan agreements increased from $196 per customer for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $214 per customer for the same period in 2020 (9% increase) primarily due to market changes and an increase in system sizes and battery attachment rates resulting in larger customer loan balances added during 2020.
Cost of Revenue-Depreciation
Cost of revenue-depreciation increased by $14.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily due to an increase in the weighted average number of customers (excluding customers with loan agreements) from approximately 60,100 for the year ended December 31, 2019 to approximately 77,900 for the year ended December 31, 2020. On a weighted average number of customers basis, cost of revenue-depreciation remained relatively flat at $724 per customer for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $750 per customer for the same period in 2020 (4% increase).
Cost of Revenue-Other
Cost of revenue-other increased by $2.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily due to the purchase of SRECs of $1.9 million to fulfill minimum delivery requirements under our forward contracts and an increase in fees related to filings required under the Uniform Commercial Code to maintain title due to higher volumes.
Operations and Maintenance Expense
Operations and maintenance expense increased by $7.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to higher impairments and loss on disposals, meter replacement costs, property insurance and property tax. Operations and maintenance expense per customer, excluding net natural disaster losses and non-cash inventory impairment, increased from $142 per customer for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $184 per customer for the year ended December 31, 2020.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense increased by $17.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to increases of (a) $8.0 million of provision for current expected credit losses related to the adoption of the new accounting standard in 2020, (b) $4.9 million of payroll and employee related expenses primarily due to the hiring of personnel to support growth, (c) $3.5 million of insurance expenses, (d) $3.3 million of financing deal costs and (e) $2.8 million of consultants, contractors and professional fees. These increases were partially offset by a decrease of $3.8 million of IPO costs.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net increased by $46.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily due to increases in realized loss on interest rate swaps of $38.1 million due to the termination of certain debt facilities in 2020, interest expense of $28.9 million due to an increase in the principal debt balance after entering into new financing arrangements and debt discount amortization of $12.7 million. These increases were partially offset by an increase in unrealized gain on interest rate swaps of $33.0 million.
Interest Expense, Net-Affiliates
Interest expense, net-affiliates decreased by $4.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to a decrease in interest expense due to the redemption of the senior secured notes and conversion of the convertible notes in July 2019.
Interest Income
Interest income increased by $11.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily due to an increase in the weighted average number of customers with loan agreements from approximately 8,400 for the year ended December 31, 2019 to approximately 14,200 for the year ended December 31, 2020. On a weighted average number of customers basis, loan interest income increased from $1,380 per customer for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $1,637 per customer for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to higher average loan storage balances.
Loss on Extinguishment of Long-Term Debt, Net
Loss on extinguishment of long-term debt, net increased by $142.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to the conversion of approximately $150.8 million aggregate principal amount, including accrued and unpaid interest to the date of each conversion, of our 9.75% convertible senior notes that met the criteria for extinguishment accounting under GAAP.
Loss on Extinguishment of Long-Term Debt, Net-Affiliates
Loss on extinguishment of long-term debt, net-affiliates decreased by $10.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to the amendment of the senior secured notes in April 2019 that met the criteria for extinguishment accounting under GAAP.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense increased by $0.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to the effects of taxes incurred in jurisdictions where the tax code for the respective jurisdiction may have separate tax-reporting requirements.
Net Income (Loss) Attributable to Redeemable Noncontrolling Interests and Noncontrolling Interests
Net income (loss) attributable to redeemable noncontrolling interests and noncontrolling interests changed by $66.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to losses attributable to noncontrolling interests from tax equity funds added in late 2019 and in 2020.
Results of Operations-Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018
See "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Results of Operations-Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC on February 25, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had total cash of $377.9 million, of which $209.9 million was unrestricted, and $402.4 million of available borrowing capacity under our various financing arrangements. We seek to maintain diversified and cost-effective funding sources to finance and maintain our operations, fund capital expenditures, including customer acquisitions, and satisfy obligations arising from our indebtedness. Historically, our primary sources of liquidity included non-recourse and recourse debt, investor asset-backed and loan-backed securitizations and cash generated from operations. Our business model requires substantial outside financing arrangements to grow the business and facilitate the deployment of additional solar energy systems. We will seek to raise additional required capital, including from new and existing tax equity investors, additional borrowings, securitizations and other potential debt and equity financing sources. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all debt covenants under our financing arrangements.
Additionally, from time-to-time we evaluate the potential acquisition of solar energy systems, energy storage systems and related businesses and joint ventures. As a part of these efforts, we may engage in discussions with potential sellers or other parties regarding the possible purchase of or investment in assets and operations that are strategic and complementary to our existing operations. In addition, we have in the past evaluated and pursued, and may in the future evaluate and pursue, the acquisition of or investment in other energy-related assets that have characteristics and opportunities similar to our existing business lines and enable us to leverage our assets, knowledge and skill sets. Such efforts may involve participation by us in processes that have been made public and involve a number of potential buyers or investors, commonly referred to as "auction" processes, as well as situations in which we believe we are the only party or one of a limited number of parties who are in negotiations with the potential seller or other party. These acquisition and investment efforts may involve assets which, if acquired or constructed, could have a material effect on our financial condition and results of operations.
We expect our solar energy systems in service to generate a positive return rate over the customer agreement, typically 10, 15 or 25 years. Typically, once residential solar energy systems commence operations, they do not require significant additional capital expenditures to maintain operating performance. However, in order to grow, we are currently dependent on financing from outside parties. We believe we will have sufficient cash, investment fund commitments and securitization commitments, as described below, together with cash flows from operations to meet our working capital, debt service obligations, contingencies and anticipated required capital expenditures, including customer acquisitions, for at least the next 12 months. However, we are subject to business and operational risks that could adversely affect our ability to raise additional financing. If financing is not available to us on acceptable terms if and when needed, we may be unable to finance installation of our new customers' solar energy systems in a manner consistent with our past performance, our cost of capital could increase, or we may be required to significantly reduce the scope of our operations, any of which would have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations and prospects. In addition, our tax equity funds and debt instruments impose restrictions on our ability to draw on financing commitments. If we are unable to satisfy such conditions, we may incur
penalties for non-performance under certain tax equity funds, experience installation delays, or be unable to make installations in accordance with our plans or at all. Any of these factors could also impact customer satisfaction, our business, operating results, prospects and financial condition.
Financing Arrangements
The following is a description of our various financing arrangements. For a complete description of the facilities in place as of December 31, 2020 see Note 8, Long-Term Debt, to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Tax Equity Fund Commitments
As of December 31, 2020, we had undrawn committed capital of approximately $135.8 million under our tax equity funds, which may only be used to purchase and install solar energy systems. We intend to establish new tax equity funds in the future depending on their attractiveness, including the availability and size of Section 48(a) ITCs and related safe harbors, and on investor demand for such funding. The terms of the tax equity funds' operating agreements contain allocations of income (loss) and Section 48(a) ITCs that vary over time and adjust between the members after either the tax equity investor receives its contractual rate of return or after a specified date. The following table summarizes our tax equity commitments as of December 31, 2020:
Additionally, in connection with and subject to closing the Acquisition, Lennar Corporation has committed to contribute an aggregate $200.0 million to four Sunnova tax equity funds, each formed annually during a period of four consecutive years commencing in 2021. For additional information regarding our tax equity fund commitments see Note 12, Redeemable Noncontrolling Interests and Noncontrolling Interests, to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Warehouse and Other Debt Financings
We from time to time enter into warehouse credit facilities as a source of funding. Under the warehouse credit facilities, revolving or term financing is provided to special purpose entities, which are typically our wholly-owned subsidiaries, and secured by qualifying solar energy systems (including, if applicable, energy storage systems) and related solar service agreements. The cash flows generated by these solar service agreements are used to cover required debt service payments under the related credit facility and satisfy the expenses and reserve requirements of the special purpose entities. The warehouse credit facilities allow for the pooling and transfer of eligible solar energy systems and related solar service agreements on a non-recourse basis to the subsidiary or us, subject to certain limited exceptions. In connection with these warehouse credit facilities, certain of our affiliates receive a fee for managing and servicing the solar energy systems pursuant to management and servicing agreements. The special purpose entities are also typically required to maintain reserve accounts, including a liquidity reserve account and a reserve account for equipment replacements, each of which are funded from initial deposits or cash flows to the levels specified therein.
The warehouse credit facility structures include certain features designed to protect lenders. One of the common primary
features relates to certain events, such as the insufficiency of cash flows in the collateral pool of assets to meet contractual requirements, the occurrence of which triggers an early repayment of the loans and limits the relevant borrower's ability to obtain additional advances or distribute funds to us. We refer to this as an "amortization event", which may be based on, among other things, a debt service coverage ratio falling or remaining below certain levels, default levels of solar assets exceeding certain thresholds or excess spread falling below certain levels over a multiple month period. In the event of an amortization event, the availability period under a revolving warehouse credit facility may terminate and the borrower may be required to repay the affected outstanding borrowings using available collections received from the asset pool. However, the period of ultimate repayment would be determined by the amount and timing of collections received. An amortization event would impair our liquidity and may require us to utilize our other available contingent liquidity or rely on alternative funding sources, which may or may not be available at the time. The debt agreements of our warehouse credit facilities also typically contain customary events of default for solar warehouse financings that entitle the lenders to take various actions, including the acceleration of amounts due under the related debt agreement and foreclosure on the borrower's assets.
In July 2014, one of our subsidiaries entered into a collateral-based financing agreement with Texas Capital Bank, N.A., as administrative agent, and the lenders party thereto. Outstanding advances under the credit facility bore interest at LIBOR plus an applicable margin. The credit facility had a maturity date occurring in January 2021. In February 2020, we fully repaid the aggregate principal amount outstanding of $92.0 million and terminated the credit facility.
In April 2017, one of our subsidiaries entered into a secured revolving credit facility with Credit Suisse AG, New York Branch, as administrative agent, and the lenders party thereto. The credit facility was amended and restated in March 2019 and further amended in September 2019, December 2019, January 2020, March 2020 and September 2020. Under the amended credit facility, the subsidiary may borrow up to $200.0 million, subject to a borrowing base calculated based on a specified advance rate applied to the net outstanding principal balance of the solar loans securing the credit facility. The proceeds of the loans under the credit facility are available for funding the purchase of solar loans, making deposits in the subsidiary's reserve accounts and paying fees in connection with the credit facility. The credit facility bears interest at an annual rate of adjusted LIBOR plus an applicable margin. The credit facility has a maturity date occurring in November 2022. In June 2020, we used proceeds from the HELIV Notes (as defined below) to repay $149.3 million in aggregate principal amount outstanding. In October 2020, we used proceeds from another credit facility entered into in September 2020 to repay $28.0 million in aggregate principal amount outstanding. Sunnova Energy Corporation guarantees the performance obligations of certain affiliates under agreements entered into in connection with the credit facility, as well as certain indemnity and refund obligations. As of December 31, 2020, we had $28.4 million of available borrowing capacity under the credit facility. In February 2021, we used proceeds from the HELV Notes to repay $107.3 million in aggregate principal amount outstanding.
In April 2017, three of our subsidiaries entered into a secured term loan credit facility with Credit Suisse AG, New York Branch, as administrative agent, and the lenders party thereto. The credit facility was amended and restated in November 2018. Outstanding advances under the credit facility bore interest at LIBOR plus an applicable margin. The credit facility had a maturity date occurring in November 2022. In February 2020, we used proceeds from the SOLI Notes (as defined below) to repay $32.0 million in aggregate principal amount outstanding. In November 2020, we fully repaid the aggregate principal amount outstanding of $10.6 million and terminated the credit facility. Sunnova Energy Corporation had guaranteed the performance obligations of certain affiliates under the agreements entered into in connection with the credit facility, as well as certain indemnity obligations.
In August 2018, one of our subsidiaries entered into a secured revolving credit facility with Credit Suisse AG, New York Branch, as administrative agent, and the lenders party thereto. The credit facility was amended and restated in March 2019 and further amended in September 2019. Under the credit facility, the subsidiary could borrow up to an initial $150.0 million with a maximum commitment amount of $250.0 million based on the aggregate value of solar assets owned by the borrower's subsidiaries, which were primarily tax equity funds, subject to certain concentration limitations. The proceeds of the loan after fees and expenses were available for funding certain reserve accounts required by the credit facility, making distributions to us and paying fees incurred in connection with closing the credit facility. The credit facility bore interest at an annual rate of adjusted LIBOR or, if such rate was not available, a base rate, plus an applicable margin. The credit facility had a maturity date occurring in November 2022. Sunnova Energy Corporation had guaranteed the performance obligations of certain affiliates under agreements entered into in connection with the credit facility as well as certain indemnity and repurchase obligations. In February 2020, we fully repaid the aggregate principal amount outstanding of $226.6 million and terminated the credit facility.
In September 2019, one of our subsidiaries entered into a secured revolving credit facility with Credit Suisse AG, New York Branch, as administrative agent, and the lenders party thereto. The credit facility was amended in December 2019 and further amended in January 2020, February 2020, March 2020, May 2020, June 2020, October 2020, November 2020 and January 2021. Under the credit facility, the subsidiary may borrow up to an initial $460.7 million with a maximum commitment amount of $600.0 million based on the aggregate value of solar assets owned by the borrower's subsidiaries, which are
primarily tax equity funds, subject to certain concentration limitations. The proceeds from the credit facility are available for funding certain reserve accounts required by the credit facility, making distributions to us and paying fees incurred in connection with closing the credit facility. The credit facility bears interest at an annual rate of adjusted LIBOR plus a weighted average margin of 4.15%. The credit facility has a maturity date occurring in November 2022. Sunnova Energy Corporation guarantees the performance obligations of certain affiliates under agreements entered into in connection with the credit facility, as well as certain indemnity and repurchase obligations. In November 2020, we used proceeds from the SOLII Notes to repay $211.5 million in aggregate principal amount outstanding. As of December 31, 2020, we had $360.4 million of available borrowing capacity under the credit facility.
In December 2019, one of our subsidiaries entered into a secured revolving credit facility with Credit Suisse AG, New York Branch, as administrative agent, and the lenders party thereto. The credit facility was amended in September 2020 and November 2020. Under the credit facility, the subsidiary could borrow up to an initial $95.2 million with a maximum commitment amount of $137.6 million, subject to lender consent and certain other conditions. The proceeds from the credit facility were available for purchasing certain eligible equipment the borrower intends will allow certain related solar energy systems to qualify for the 30% Section 48(a) ITC by satisfying the 5% ITC Safe Harbor outlined in IRS Notice 2018-59, funding a reserve account required by the credit facility and paying fees incurred in connection with closing the credit facility. The credit facility bears interest at an annual rate of either LIBOR divided by a percentage equal to 100% minus a reserve percentage or a base rate, plus an applicable margin. The credit facility has a maturity date occurring in December 2022. Sunnova Energy Corporation guarantees the performance obligations of certain affiliates under agreements entered into in connection with the credit facility and also provides a limited payment guarantee in respect of the borrower's obligations under the credit facility that is subject to a cap of $9.5 million, which equates to 10% of the initial commitments. The availability period for additional borrowings under the credit facility ended in December 2020.
In September 2020, one of our subsidiaries entered into a secured revolving credit facility with Banco Popular de Puerto Rico. Under the credit facility, the subsidiary may borrow up to $60.0 million, subject to a borrowing base calculated based on a specified advance rate applied to the net outstanding principal balance of the solar loans securing the credit facility. The proceeds of the loans under the credit facility are available for funding the purchase of solar loans, making deposits in the subsidiary's reserve account and paying fees in connection with the credit facility. The credit facility bears interest at an annual rate of adjusted LIBOR plus an applicable margin. The credit facility has a maturity date occurring in September 2023. Sunnova Energy Corporation guarantees the performance obligations of certain affiliates under agreements entered into in connection with the credit facility. As of December 31, 2020, we had $13.6 million of available borrowing capacity under the credit facility. In February 2021, we used proceeds from the HELV Notes to repay $29.5 million in aggregate principal amount outstanding.
Securitizations
We from time to time securitize solar service agreements and related assets as a source of funding. We access the Rule 144A asset-backed securitization market using wholly-owned special purpose entities to securitize pools of assets, which historically have been solar energy systems and the related lease agreements and PPAs and ancillary rights and agreements both directly or indirectly through interests in the managing member of our tax equity funds. We also securitize our loan agreements and ancillary rights and agreements.
In April 2017, one of our subsidiaries issued $191.8 million in aggregate principal amount of Series 2017-1 Class A solar asset-backed notes, $18.0 million in aggregate principal amount of Series 2017-1 Class B solar asset-backed notes, and $45.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 2017-1 Class C solar asset-backed notes (collectively, the "Notes") with a maturity date of September 2049. The Notes bear interest at an annual rate of 4.94%, 6.00% and 8.00% for the Class A, Class B and Class C notes, respectively.
In November 2018, one of our subsidiaries issued $202.0 million in aggregate principal amount of Series 2018-1 Class A solar asset-backed notes and $60.7 million in aggregate principal amount of Series 2018-1 Class B solar asset-backed notes (collectively, the "Notes II") with a maturity date of July 2048. The Notes II bear interest at an annual rate of 4.87% and 7.71% for the Class A and Class B notes, respectively.
In March 2019, one of our subsidiaries entered into a note purchase agreement pursuant to which certain institutional investors committed to purchase up to $358.0 million principal amount of notes ("RAYSI Notes") in one or more asset-backed private placement securitizations. In March 2019, our subsidiary, the RAYSI Notes issuer, issued an aggregate $133.1 million principal amount of RAYSI Notes pursuant to this note purchase agreement. In June 2019, the RAYSI Notes issuer issued an aggregate $6.4 million in principal amount of RAYSI Notes pursuant to a supplemental note purchase agreement.
In June 2019, one of our subsidiaries issued $139.7 million in aggregate principal amount of Series 2019-A Class A solar loan-backed notes, $14.9 million in aggregate principal amount of Series 2019-A Class B solar loan-backed notes and $13.0 million in aggregate principal amount of Series 2019-A Class C solar loan-backed notes (collectively, the "HELIII Notes") with a maturity date of June 2046. The HELIII Notes bear interest at an annual rate of 3.75%, 4.49% and 5.32% for the Class A, Class B and Class C notes, respectively.
In February 2020, one of our subsidiaries issued $337.1 million in aggregate principal amount of Series 2020-1 Class A solar asset-backed notes and $75.4 million in aggregate principal amount of Series 2020-1 Class B solar asset-backed notes (collectively, the "SOLI Notes") with a maturity date of January 2055. The SOLI Notes bear interest at an annual rate of 3.35% and 5.54% for the Class A and Class B notes, respectively.
In June 2020, one of our subsidiaries issued $135.9 million in aggregate principal amount of Series 2020-A Class A solar loan-backed notes and $22.6 million in aggregate principal amount of Series 2020-A Class B solar loan-backed notes (collectively, the "HELIV Notes") with a maturity date of June 2047. The HELIV Notes bear interest at an annual rate of 2.98% and 7.25% for the Class A and Class B notes, respectively.
In November 2020, one our subsidiaries issued $209.1 million in aggregate principal amount of Series 2020-2 Class A solar asset-backed notes and $45.6 million in aggregate principal amount of Series 2020-2 Class B solar asset-backed notes with a maturity date of November 2055. The SOLII Notes bear interest at an annual rate of 2.73% and 5.47% for the Class A and Class B notes, respectively.
In February 2021, one of our subsidiaries issued $150.1 million in aggregate principal amount of Series 2021-A Class A solar loan-backed notes and $38.6 million in aggregate principal amount of Series 2021-A Class B solar loan-backed notes with a maturity date of February 2048. The HELV Notes bear interest at an annual rate of 1.80% and 3.15% for the Class A and Class B notes, respectively.
The securitization structures include certain features designed to protect investors. The primary feature relates to the availability and adequacy of cash flows in the securitized pool of assets to meet contractual requirements, the insufficiency of which triggers an early repayment of the notes. We refer to this as "early amortization", which may be based on, among other things, a debt service coverage ratio falling or remaining below certain levels. As of December 31, 2020, we have not had any early amortizations under any of our securitizations. In the event of an early amortization, the notes issuer would be required to repay the affected outstanding securitized borrowings using available collections received from the asset pool. However, the period of ultimate repayment would be determined based on the amount and timing of collections received and, in limited circumstances, early amortization may be cured prior to full repayment. An early amortization event would impair our liquidity and may require us to utilize our available non-securitization related contingent liquidity or rely on alternative funding sources, which may or may not be available at the time. The indentures of our securitizations also typically contain customary events of default for solar securitizations that may entitle the noteholders to take various actions, including the acceleration of amounts due under the related indenture and foreclosure on the issuer's assets.
Convertible Senior Notes
In December 2019, we issued and sold an aggregate principal amount of $55.0 million of our 7.75% convertible senior notes in a private placement at an issue price of 95%, for an aggregate purchase price of $52.3 million. In May 2020, we issued and sold an aggregate principal amount of $130.0 million of our 9.75% convertible senior notes in a private placement at an issue price of 95%, for an aggregate purchase price of $123.5 million. The 9.75% convertible senior notes mature in April 2025 unless earlier redeemed, repurchased or converted. We granted the investors of the 9.75% convertible senior notes an option to purchase up to an additional $60.0 million aggregate principal amount of 9.75% convertible senior notes on the same terms and conditions, and the investors exercised this option and completed the purchase of such additional 9.75% convertible senior notes in June 2020. In May 2020, we also entered into privately negotiated exchanges with a small number of institutional investors in our 7.75% convertible senior notes whereby such investors exchanged all $55.0 million aggregate principal amount outstanding of our 7.75% convertible senior notes for an equal principal amount of our 9.75% convertible senior notes.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, certain of the holders of our 9.75% convertible senior notes converted approximately $150.8 million aggregate principal amount, including accrued and unpaid interest to the date of each conversion, of our 9.75% convertible senior notes into 11,168,874 shares of our common stock. In January and February 2021, the remaining holders of our 9.75% convertible senior notes converted approximately $97.1 million aggregate principal amount, including accrued and unpaid interest to the date of each conversion, of our 9.75% convertible senior notes into 7,196,035 shares of our common stock. As of February 23, 2021, all of the holders of our 9.75% convertible senior notes have converted
their notes into common stock. As such, there are no longer any 9.75% convertible senior notes outstanding. See Note 13, Stockholders' Equity, to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Public Offerings
In July and August 2019, we sold 14,865,267 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $12.00 per share and on July 25, 2019 our common stock began trading on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol "NOVA". We received aggregate net proceeds from our IPO of approximately $162.3 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of approximately $10.7 million and offering expenses of approximately $5.4 million. We used the proceeds from our IPO to repay indebtedness and for working capital purposes.
In December 2020, we sold 4,025,000 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $37.00 per share. We received aggregate net proceeds of approximately $142.7 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of approximately $6.0 million and offering expenses of approximately $0.3 million. We used the net proceeds from the offering to acquire solar equipment, repay indebtedness and for working capital purposes.
Contractual Obligations
The following unaudited table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
(1)Does not include amounts related to the contingent obligation to purchase all of a tax equity investor's units upon exercise of their right to withdraw rights. The withdrawal price for the tax equity investors' interest in the respective fund is equal to the sum of: (a) any unpaid, accrued priority return and (b) the greater of: (i) a fixed price and (ii) the fair market value of such interest at the date the option is exercised. Due to uncertainties associated with estimating the timing and amount of the withdrawal price, we cannot determine the potential future payments that we could have to make under these withdrawal rights. For additional information regarding the withdrawal rights see Note 12, Redeemable Noncontrolling Interests and Noncontrolling Interests, to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(2)Interest payments related to long-term debt and interest rate swaps are calculated and estimated for the periods presented based on the amount of debt outstanding and the interest rates as of December 31, 2020.
(3)Includes reimbursements in 2021 of approximately $1.0 million for leasehold improvements.
(4)Other obligations relate to information technology services and licenses and distributions payable to redeemable noncontrolling interests.
Historical Cash Flows-Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities decreased by $38.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease is primarily a result of a decrease in purchases of inventory and prepaid inventory with net outflows of $41.5 million in 2020 compared to $118.5 million in 2019 and a decrease in payments to dealers for exclusivity and other bonus arrangements with net outflows of $25.8 million in 2020 compared to $31.7 million in 2019. This decrease was offset by an increase in net outflows of $57.3 million in 2020 compared to net outflows of $19.1 million in 2019 based on: (a) our net loss of $307.8 million in 2020 excluding non-cash operating items of $250.5 million, primarily from depreciation, impairments and losses on disposals, amortization of deferred financing costs and debt discounts, unrealized net gains on derivatives, unrealized net gains on fair value option securities, losses on extinguishment of long-term debt and equity-based compensation charges, which results in net outflows of $57.3 million and (b) our net loss of $133.4 million in 2019 excluding non-cash operating items of $114.4 million, primarily from depreciation, impairments and losses on disposals, amortization of deferred financing costs and debt discounts, unrealized net losses on derivatives, payment-in-kind interest on debt, unrealized net losses on fair value option securities, losses on extinguishment of long-term debt and equity-based compensation charges, which results in net outflows of $19.1 million. These net differences between the two periods result in a net change in operating cash flows of $38.2 million in 2020 compared to 2019.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities increased by $261.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase is primarily a result of increases in purchases of property and equipment, primarily solar energy systems, of $578.4 million in 2020 compared to $430.8 million in 2019 and payments for investments and customer notes receivable of $285.2 million in 2020 compared to $159.3 million in 2019. This increase is partially offset by proceeds from customer notes receivable of $35.5 million (of which $28.2 million was prepaid) in 2020 compared to $21.6 million (of which $18.2 million was prepaid) in 2019.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities increased by $386.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase is primarily a result of increases in net borrowings under our debt facilities of $682.9 million in 2020 compared to $494.9 million in 2019, net contributions from our redeemable noncontrolling interests and noncontrolling interests of $313.7 million in 2020 compared to $149.6 million in 2019 and net proceeds from the equity component of a convertible debt instrument of $73.7 million in 2020 compared to $14.0 million in 2019. This increase is partially offset by decreases in net proceeds from the issuance of common stock of $152.3 million in 2020 compared to $164.5 million in 2019 and payments of deferred financing costs and debt discounts of $27.5 million in 2020 compared to $13.2 million in 2019.
Historical Cash Flows-Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018
See "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Historical Cash Flows-Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC on February 25, 2020 pursuant to the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended.
Seasonality
See "Business-Seasonality".
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we did not have any off-balance-sheet arrangements. We consolidate all our securitization vehicles and tax equity funds.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated annual financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP which requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, cash flows and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. In many instances, we could have reasonably used different accounting estimates, and in other instances, changes in the accounting estimates are reasonably likely to occur from period-to-period. Actual results may differ from these estimates. Our future consolidated financial statements will be affected to the extent our actual results materially differ from these estimates.
We identify our most critical accounting policies as those that are the most pervasive and important to the portrayal of our financial position and results of operations, and that require the most difficult, subjective, and/or complex judgments by management regarding estimates about matters that are inherently uncertain. We believe the assumptions and estimates associated with our principles of consolidation, the estimated useful life of our solar energy systems, the valuation of the assumptions regarding AROs and the valuation of redeemable noncontrolling interests and noncontrolling interests have the greatest subjectivity and impact on our consolidated financial statements. Therefore, we consider these to be our critical accounting policies and estimates and these items are discussed below. See Note 2, Significant Accounting Policies, to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion of our accounting policies.
Principles of Consolidation
Our consolidated financial statements reflect our accounts and those of our subsidiaries in which we have a controlling financial interest. The typical condition for a controlling financial interest is holding a majority of the voting interests of an entity. However, a controlling financial interest may also exist in entities, such as variable interest entities ("VIEs"), through arrangements that do not involve holding a majority of the voting interests. We consolidate any VIE of which we are the primary beneficiary, which is defined as the party that has (a) the power to direct the activities of a VIE that most significantly impact the VIE's economic performance and (b) the obligation to absorb losses or receive benefits from the VIE that could potentially be significant to the VIE. We evaluate our relationships with our VIEs on an ongoing basis to determine whether we continue to be the primary beneficiary. We have eliminated all intercompany transactions in consolidation.
Useful Life of Solar Energy Systems
Our solar energy systems have an estimated useful life of 35 years. We considered both (a) available information related to the technology currently being employed in the solar energy systems and (b) the terms of the solar leases that have a 25 year term with two five-year renewal options to conclude a 35 year useful life is appropriate. In addition, we reviewed numerous published and online sources from academia, government institutions and private industry and held discussions with certain manufacturers of our solar energy systems to support our estimated useful life of 35 years for the crystalline silicone solar modules we use. We define the useful life of a solar module as the duration for which a solar module operates at or above 80% of its initial power output, which we understand to be the generally accepted standard used by government, academia and the solar industry.
Depreciation and amortization of solar energy systems are calculated using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the solar energy systems and are recorded in cost of revenue-depreciation. Depreciation begins when a solar energy system is placed in service. Costs associated with improvements to a solar energy system, which extend the life, increase the capacity or improve the efficiency of the solar energy systems, are capitalized and depreciated over the remaining life of the asset.
ARO
We have AROs arising from contractual or regulatory requirements to perform certain asset retirement activities at the time the solar energy systems are disposed. We recognize an ARO at the point an obligating event takes place, typically when the solar energy system is placed in service. An asset is considered retired when it is permanently taken out of service, such as through a sale or disposal.
The liability is initially measured at fair value based on the present value of estimated removal costs and subsequently adjusted for changes in the underlying assumptions and for accretion expense. We estimate approximately half of our solar energy systems will require removal at our expense in the future. The corresponding asset retirement costs are capitalized as part of the carrying amount of the solar energy system and depreciated over the solar energy system's remaining useful life. We may revise our estimated future liabilities based on recent actual experiences, changes in certain customer-specific estimates and other cost estimate changes. If there are changes in estimated future costs, those changes will be recorded as either a reduction or addition in the carrying amount of the remaining unamortized asset and the ARO and either decrease or increase depreciation and accretion expense amounts prospectively. Inherent in the calculation of the fair value of our AROs are numerous assumptions and judgments, including the ultimate settlement amounts, inflation factors, credit adjusted discount rates, timing of settlement and changes in the legal, regulatory, environmental and political environments. Due to the intrinsic uncertainties present when estimating asset retirement costs, as well as asset retirement dates, our ARO estimates are subject to ongoing volatility.
Redeemable Noncontrolling Interests and Noncontrolling Interests
Noncontrolling interests represent third-party interests in the net assets of certain consolidated subsidiaries (the "tax equity entities"). For these tax equity entities, we have determined the appropriate methodology for calculating the noncontrolling interest balances that reflects the substantive economic arrangements in the operating agreements is a balance sheet approach using the hypothetical liquidation at book value ("HLBV") method. Under the HLBV method, the amounts reported as noncontrolling interests in the consolidated balance sheets represent the amounts third-party investors would hypothetically receive at each balance sheet date under the liquidation provisions of the operating agreements, assuming the net assets of the subsidiaries were liquidated at amounts determined in accordance with GAAP and distributed to the investors. The noncontrolling interest balances in these subsidiaries are reported as a component of equity in the consolidated balance sheets. The amount of income or loss allocated to noncontrolling interests in the results of operations for the subsidiaries using HLBV are determined as the difference in the noncontrolling interest balances in the consolidated balance sheets at the start and end of each reporting period, after taking into account any capital transactions between the subsidiaries and the third-party investors. Factors used in the HLBV calculation include GAAP income (loss), taxable income (loss), capital contributions, investment tax credits, distributions and the stipulated targeted investor return specified in the subsidiaries' operating agreements. Changes in these factors could have a significant impact on the amounts that investors would receive upon a hypothetical liquidation. The use of the HLBV method to allocate income (loss) to the noncontrolling interest holders may create volatility in the consolidated statements of operations as the application of HLBV can drive changes in net income or loss attributable to noncontrolling interests from period to period. We classify certain noncontrolling interests with redemption features that are not solely within our control outside of permanent equity in the consolidated balance sheets. Redeemable noncontrolling interests are reported using the greater of the carrying value at each reporting date as determined by the HLBV method or the estimated redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Estimating the redemption value of the redeemable noncontrolling interests requires the use of significant assumptions and estimates, such as projected future cash flows at the time the redemption feature can be exercised.
Current Expected Credit Losses
Our allowance for current expected credit losses is deducted from the customer notes receivable amortized cost to present the net amount expected to be collected. It is measured on a collective (pool) basis when similar risk characteristics (such as financial asset type, customer credit rating, contractual term and vintage) exist. In determining the allowance for credit losses, we identify customers with potential disputes or collection issues and consider our historical level of credit losses and current economic trends that might impact the level of future credit losses. Adjustments to historical loss information are made for differences in current loan-specific risk characteristics, such as differences in underwriting standards. Expected credit losses are estimated over the contractual term of the loan agreements based on the best available data at the time, and adjusted for expected prepayments when appropriate. The contractual term excludes expected extensions, renewals and modifications unless either of the following applies: (a) we have a reasonable expectation at the reporting date that a troubled debt restructuring will be executed with an individual customer or (b) the extension or renewal options are included in the original or modified contract at the reporting date and are not unconditionally cancelable by us. We review the allowance quarterly for any significant macroeconomic trends that might be developing in the market but not yet impacting us. Assessments done
throughout the year include normal macroeconomic trends (e.g. delinquency and default and loss rates from leading credit bureaus by industry) as well as trends specifically related to the COVID-19 pandemic (e.g. forbearance and credit quality). While making adjustments to loss rates is ultimately a subjective action, we have created an internal and external data-based evaluation process to ensure any adjustments or updates to the model are informed and fact-based prior to executing such a change.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, Significant Accounting Policies, to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.