Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read with our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report. In addition to historical information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Where possible, we have tried to identify these forward-looking statements by using words such as “believe,” “contemplate,” “continue,” “due,” “goal,” “objective,” “plan,” “seek,” “target,” “expect,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “may,” “will,” “would,” “could,” “should,” “potential,” “predict,” “project,” or “estimate,” and similar expressions or variations. These statements are based on the beliefs and assumptions of our management based on information currently available to management. Forward-looking statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause our actual results, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. Except as may be required by law, we undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances after the date of such statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to numerous risks including, but not limited to, those set forth in the “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report.
Overview
We are a clinical development-stage biotechnology company focused on leveraging nitric oxide’s naturally occurring anti-viral, anti-bacterial, anti-fungal and immunomodulatory mechanisms of action and our proprietary nitric oxide-based technology platform, Nitricil, to generate macromolecular NCEs to treat a range of diseases with significant unmet needs. Nitric oxide plays a vital role in the natural immune system response against microbial pathogens and is a critical regulator of inflammation. Our ability to harness nitric oxide and its multiple mechanisms of action has enabled us to create a platform with the potential to generate differentiated product candidates. Our ability to deploy nitric oxide in a solid form, on demand and in localized formulations allows us the potential to improve patient outcomes in a variety of diseases.
We have clinical-stage dermatology drug candidates with multi-factorial (SB204), anti-viral (SB206), anti-fungal (SB208) and anti-inflammatory (SB414) mechanisms of action. We recently introduced SB207 as a possible product candidate for additional anti-viral programs. We are also conducting preclinical work on NCEs, including berdazimer sodium, and formulations for the potential treatment of (i) coronavirus indications, including SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19 (SB019); (ii) antimicrobial indications for the adjacent companion animal health market (NVN4100); (iii) CIN, caused by high-risk HPV in the men’s and women’s health field (WH504 and WH602); (iv) inflammatory disorders and (v) diseases in the GI field.
Please see additional details related to our “Priority Development Pipeline” and “Pipeline Expansion Opportunities”, as described in the section entitled “Business” in this Annual Report.
Business Updates
During 2020, our primary programmatic focus was on our molluscum contagiosum (SB206) program and we intend to focus our near term clinical-stage development efforts on this program. Following the receipt of verbal and minuted feedback from the Type-C meeting with the FDA on April 1, 2020, we sent the proposed protocol to the FDA, manufactured the clinical trial materials at our former large-scale manufacturing facility in Morrisville, North Carolina and began the planning and start-up phase for B-SIMPLE4, a pivotal Phase 3 trial for SB206 as a treatment for molluscum. We initiated the B-SIMPLE4 trial in August 2020, and the first patient was enrolled and dosed in September 2020. Completion of patient enrollment occurred during the first quarter of 2021, and, if the trial is not further impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, top-line efficacy results are targeted before the end of the second quarter of 2021. Depending on the results of the B-SIMPLE4 trial, we are targeting a potential NDA filing of SB206 for molluscum no later than the third quarter of 2022. We are also evaluating potential commercialization strategies for SB206, subject to the results of the B-SIMPLE4 trial, NDA submission timing and the regulatory approval process including, but not limited to, securing a commercialization partner, co-commercializing with a partner, or commercializing on our own. The preclinical work we are conducting, described above, including such work on our COVID-19 program, remains ongoing and, to date, has only required limited investment due to our ability to leverage current technology, experience and assets.
Further advancement of the molluscum contagiosum (SB206) program beyond the conduct and completion of the B-SIMPLE4 trial, or advancement of any other late-stage clinical program across our platform, has been and may be further impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and is subject to our ability to secure additional capital. Sources of additional capital may potentially include (i) equity or debt financings, including through sales under the July 2020 Aspire CSPA; or (ii) non-dilutive sources, such as partnerships, collaborations, licensing, grants or other strategic relationships. Any issuance of equity or debt that could be convertible into equity would result in significant dilution to our existing stockholders.
Working Capital and Additional Capital Needs
As of December 31, 2020, we had a total cash and cash equivalents balance of $35.9 million and positive working capital of $35.3 million. As of February 10, 2021, since December 31, 2020, we have (i) sold 4,081,633 shares of our common stock at an average price of $1.22 per share under the July 2020 Aspire CSPA, for total proceeds of $5.0 million; and (ii) received proceeds from the exercises of common stock warrants of approximately $0.4 million. As of February 10, 2021, we had $13.3 million in remaining availability for sales of our common stock under the July 2020 Aspire CSPA.
We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents balance, plus expected contractual payments to be received in connection with existing licensing agreements, will provide us with adequate liquidity to fund our planned operating needs into the first quarter of 2022. This operating forecast and related cash projection includes: (i) costs through the expected completion of our pivotal Phase 3 trial for SB206 as a treatment for molluscum, the B-SIMPLE4 trial, including supporting activities; (ii) preparatory costs associated with the anticipated continued regulatory progression of SB206; (iii) development activities in certain priority therapeutic areas, including infectious diseases and companion animal health; (iv) conducting drug manufacturing capability transfer activities to external third-party CMOs, including a drug delivery device technology enhancement project; and (v) certain build-out and manufacturing capability costs related to the infrastructure necessary to support small-scale drug substance and drug product manufacturing at our new corporate headquarters, but excludes any potential costs associated with other late-stage clinical development programs.
We will need significant additional funding to continue our operating activities and make further advancements in our product candidate development programs, as described in the section entitled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Liquidity and Capital Resources” in this Annual Report. Therefore, we will need to secure additional capital or financing and/or delay, defer or reduce our cash expenditures by the first quarter of 2022. There can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain additional capital or financing on terms acceptable to us, on a timely basis or at all. If we are not able to secure additional financing and are unable to reduce our expenditures sufficiently, we may be forced to terminate or eliminate our product development programs, wind down our operations, liquidate or seek bankruptcy protection. In that event, it is unclear to what extent we would be able to pay our obligations, and, accordingly, it is further unclear whether and to what extent any resources would be available for distributions to our stockholders. Alternatively, we may seek to engage in one or more potential transactions, such as the sale of the Company, or sale or divestiture of some of our assets, such as a sale of our dermatology platform assets, but there can be no assurance that we will be able to enter into such a transaction or transactions on a timely basis or at all or on terms that are favorable to us. As discussed in “Note 1-Organization and Significant Accounting Policies” of our accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report, these matters raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
We will need additional funding to continue our operating activities and make further advancements in our product candidate development programs. Please refer to the section entitled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Liquidity and Capital Resources” in this Annual Report for further discussion of our current liquidity and our future funding needs.
Manufacturing and Supplies
We have adopted a strategy of engaging with third parties through partnerships, collaborations, licensing or other strategic relationships that includes an increased utilization of and reliance upon third-party vendors and strategic partners for the performance of activities, processes and services that (i) do not result in the generation of significant new intellectual property and (ii) can leverage their existing robust infrastructure, systems and facilities as well as associated subject matter expertise. A parallel and inter-related strategic objective has been to reduce our own internal resources connected with our former large-scale manufacturing facility and our infrastructure capabilities that historically performed such activities, processes and services.
We currently rely on third-party suppliers to provide the raw materials that are used by us or our third-party manufacturers in the manufacture of our product candidates. There are a limited number of suppliers for raw materials, including nitric oxide, that we use to manufacture our product candidates.
At this stage, we intend to pursue a dual strategy of identifying and designating a partner to become the primary third-party external supplier of our proprietary berdazimer sodium (NVN1000) drug substance to support short-term and long-term manufacturing needs, while developing internal capabilities to provide optionality and support certain small-scale and short-term manufacturing needs, including potential manufacture of registration batches to support an SB206 NDA submission and initial commercialization inventory, as described in the section entitled “Business-Manufacturing and Supplies” in this Annual Report. As discussed in the section entitled “Business-Manufacturing and Supplies-Drug Product” in this Annual Report, we have executed a master contract manufacturing agreement with Orion to enable technology transfer and manufacturing of
clinical trial materials for future clinical trials with our topical product candidates. We are engaged in the transfer of technology for the manufacture of both SB204 and SB206, and upon completion, we intend for Orion to be able to manufacture the drug product, or the finished dosage form of the gel, in accordance with our established manufacturing processes, in compliance with applicable regulatory guidelines and as appropriate for clinical trials. A completed manufacturing technology transfer to Orion will enable the manufacture of multiple assets for supply of clinical trial materials and, potentially, commercial quantities if any of our product candidates are approved. As we move forward with these initiatives, we will need significant additional funding to continue our operating activities, including technical transfers to third party manufacturers, development and utilization of internal capabilities and cost structure changes, and to make further advancements in our product development programs, as described in the section entitled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Liquidity and Capital Resources” in this Annual Report.
Amended Sato Agreement
As described within the section entitled “Business-Collaboration and Licensing Agreements” in this Annual Report, In 2017, we entered into the Sato Agreement, whereby we licensed rights to develop, use, and sell SB204 in certain topical dosage forms in Japan for the treatment of acne vulgaris, and to manufacture the finished form of SB204 for sale in Japan. In October 2018, we entered into a second amendment to the Sato Agreement which expanded the Amended Sato Agreement to include SB206, our product candidate for the treatment of viral skin infections, including molluscum.
In April 2020, Sato informed us of its intention to progress the SB206 development program in Japan with a Phase 1 clinical trial given the observed treatment benefit and favorable safety profile in the B-SIMPLE program. In November of 2020, Sato determined its initial Japanese Phase 1 study for SB206 would require an amended design, including potential evaluation of lower dose strengths, to further refine dose tolerability in a subsequent Phase 1 study. Based upon (i) the need for an additional Phase 1 study; (ii) Sato’s current estimated comprehensive developmental schedule for SB206 including additional post-Phase 1 clinical trials; and (iii) current and future Japanese clinical trial material manufacturing and technical transfer considerations, the Company has concluded that a prospective delay in Sato’s overall SB206 development plan has occurred. The Company estimates the program timeline to be extended by 1.75 years from its previous estimate, and a corresponding extension of the performance period to 9.25 years, currently estimated to be completed in the second quarter of 2026.
The material terms of the Amended Sato Agreement and related revenue recognition are described in “Note 4-Licensing Arrangements” and “Note 5-Revenue Recognition” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
COVID-19 Overview
In December 2019, the novel strain of a virus named SARS-CoV-2 (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2), which causes novel coronavirus disease 2019, or COVID-19, was reported in China, and in March 2020, the World Health Organization declared it a pandemic. To date, COVID-19 has surfaced in nearly all regions around the world and resulted in federal, state and local governments around the world implementing measures to help control the spread of the virus, including quarantines, “shelter in place” and “stay at home” orders, travel restrictions or bans, business curtailments, school closures, and other protective measures. Such orders, restrictions and recommendations, and the perception that additional orders, restrictions or recommendations could occur, resulted and may result in additional closures of businesses, work stoppages, slowdowns and delays, work-from-home policies and travel restrictions, among other effects.
We have continued to closely monitor and rapidly respond to the ongoing impact of COVID-19 on our employees, our community and our business operations. We have worked to continue our critical business functions, including continued operation of our clinical development efforts, and we have adopted a series of precautionary measures and will continue to do so as the circumstances warrant, including increased sanitization of our facilities, use of personal protective equipment and physical distancing practices to help protect our employees’ health and safety as they continue to advance important research related to our product candidates.
The timetable for development of our product candidates has been impacted and may face further disruption and our business could be further adversely affected by the outbreak of COVID-19. In particular, COVID-19 impacted the timing of trial initiation of our B-SIMPLE4 Phase 3 trial for SB206, although we enrolled and dosed the first patient in the trial in September 2020 and completed enrollment in the first quarter of 2021. We plan to continue to assess any further impact of COVID-19 on the B-SIMPLE4 Phase 3 trial for SB206.
Despite disruptions to our business operations and the business operations of third parties on which we rely, the COVID-19 pandemic has not significantly impacted our operating results and financial condition to date. Although it is not possible at this time to estimate the entirety of the impact that the COVID-19 pandemic will have on our business, operations and employees,
our contract manufacturers, our clinical research contractors, and our collaborators in clinical research, any continued spread of COVID-19, measures taken by governments, actions taken to protect employees from this disease, and the broad impact of the pandemic on all business activities and financial markets, may materially and adversely affect our business, results of operations and financial condition and our stock price. These items are discussed in greater detail in the section entitled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Components of our Results of Operations” in this Annual Report. At this time, the full extent to which COVID-19 may impact our financial condition or results of operations in the future is uncertain. Due to numerous uncertainties surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic, we are unable to predict the nature and extent of the future impacts that the pandemic will have on our financial condition and operating results. These uncertainties include, among other things, the ultimate severity and duration of the pandemic, including the availability of a treatment or vaccine for COVID-19; governmental, business or other actions that have been, or will be, taken in response to the pandemic, including continued restrictions on travel and mobility, business closures and operating restrictions and imposition of social distancing measures; impacts of the pandemic on the conduct of our clinical trials, including with respect to availability of investigators, patients ability to complete the necessary visits and clinical trial site operations, and monitoring of data; impacts of the pandemic on regulatory authorities; and impacts of the pandemic on the United States and global economies more broadly. For additional information about risks and uncertainties related to the COVID-19 pandemic that may impact our business, our financial condition or our results of operations, see the section entitled “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report.
Corporate Updates
Facility Leasing Transactions
We previously operated out of our corporate headquarters in Morrisville, North Carolina, where we leased a 51,350 square foot facility under a lease with an initial term expiring in 2026. As part of our broader strategic plan to shift our operating cost structure characteristics from fixed to variable and to reduce or offset our remaining fixed lease obligation associated with a large-scale manufacturing site, on July 16, 2020, we entered into a lease termination agreement, which provided for the early termination of the previously existing lease, as amended. Pursuant to the terms of the lease termination agreement, our previous lease was terminated in connection with the landlord entering into a new lease with a new tenant for the premises in the building covered by our previous lease, which commenced on July 16, 2020.
In connection with the termination of our previous lease, we entered into a sublease agreement, which was effective upon the termination of our previous lease, through which we subleased from the new tenant approximately 12,000 square feet (which was reduced to approximately 10,000 square feet after August 31, 2020) in the building that was covered by our previous lease. The new tenant and the landlord entered into the new lease as a condition precedent to the effectiveness of the termination of our previous lease, and, in connection with the termination of our previous lease, the landlord consented to our sublease with the new tenant. Our current sublease will expire on March 31, 2021, if not earlier terminated, and is terminable, in part or in whole, by us upon 30 days’ written notice with no penalty.
The facility underlying our previous lease served as our corporate headquarters and our sole research, development and manufacturing facility. While we have operated our corporate headquarters, research and development laboratories and pilot scale cGMP manufacturing activities within portions of the facility pursuant to the sublease into the first quarter of 2021, we decommissioned the areas within the facility, as well as the associated equipment, that supported our large scale cGMP drug manufacturing capability in preparation for execution of the lease termination agreement.
On January 18, 2021, we entered into a new lease agreement at a new location, pursuant to which we will lease approximately 15,000 rentable square feet located in Durham, North Carolina. This site will serve as our new corporate headquarters. We are building out our new location to support various cGMP activities, including research and development and small-scale manufacturing capabilities, as described in the section entitled “Business-Manufacturing and Supplies” in this Annual Report.
See “Note 8-Commitments and Contingencies” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information regarding the previous facility lease transaction. For a further description of the terms of the new lease, see “Note 18-Subsequent Events” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Nasdaq Listing Matters
As previously disclosed, on February 19, 2020 we received notice from the Staff of Nasdaq notifying us that, for the previous 30 consecutive business days, the market value of our listed securities had been below the minimum $50.0 million requirement for continued inclusion on the Nasdaq Global Market pursuant to Nasdaq Listing Rule 5450(b)(2)(A), or the MVLS
Requirement. We were provided until August 16, 2020 to regain compliance with the MVLS Requirement. On July 9, 2020 we received notification from Nasdaq that we had regained compliance with the MVLS Requirement.
As also previously disclosed, on February 19, 2020, we received written notice from Nasdaq indicating that we were not in compliance with the Minimum Bid Price Requirement. On April 17, 2020, we received a letter from Nasdaq indicating that, due to extraordinary market conditions, Nasdaq tolled the compliance period for the Minimum Bid Price Requirement through June 30, 2020, or the tolling period, and that on April 16, 2020, Nasdaq filed an immediately effective rule change with the SEC to implement the tolling period. The letter indicated that upon expiration of the tolling period and beginning on July 1, 2020, we would receive the balance of days remaining under our currently pending compliance period in effect at the rule change date. Accordingly, we were provided 123 calendar days from July 1, 2020, or until November 2, 2020, to regain compliance with the Minimum Bid Price Requirement. To regain compliance, the closing bid price of our common stock was required to have met or exceeded $1.00 per share for a minimum of 10 consecutive business days prior to November 2, 2020.
In response, we filed an application to transfer the listing of our common stock from the Nasdaq Global Market to the Nasdaq Capital Market. On November 3, 2020, we received approval from the Staff of Nasdaq to transfer the listing of our common stock from the Nasdaq Global Market to the Nasdaq Capital Market. Our common stock was transferred to the Nasdaq Capital Market effective as of the open of business on November 5, 2020, and continues to trade under the symbol “NOVN.” The Nasdaq Capital Market operates in substantially the same manner as the Nasdaq Global Market, and listed companies must meet certain financial requirements and comply with Nasdaq’s corporate governance requirements.
As a result of the transfer to the Nasdaq Capital Market, we were granted an additional 180-day grace period, or until May 3, 2021, to regain compliance with the Minimum Bid Price Requirement. On January 29, 2021, we received written notice from Nasdaq notifying us that over the previous ten consecutive business days, the closing bid price for the Company’s common stock had closed at $1.00 per share or greater. Accordingly, Nasdaq confirmed that we had regained compliance with the Minimum Bid Price Requirement.
Strategic Alternative Analysis
In April 2020, we announced that we engaged H.C. Wainwright to assist us in evaluating a range of strategic and financial alternatives, intended to maximize stockholder value. This arrangement is set to expire in March 2021. The scope of the review conducted with H.C. Wainwright has been comprehensive and included evaluation of strategic and financial alternatives that could be utilized to advance SB206 for molluscum, the remainder of the dermatology platform, including but not limited to SB204 for acne vulgaris and SB414 for inflammatory skin diseases, and the business as a whole.
We believe that our clinical and preclinical data, technology platform and market potential provide for a range of opportunities in order to maximize stockholder value. As such, from time to time we may seek to engage in one or more potential transactions, such as the sale of the Company, or sale, divestiture or licensing of some of our assets, such as a sale of our dermatology platform assets, but there can be no assurance that we will be able to enter into or complete such a transaction or transactions or on terms that are favorable to us.
Financial Overview
Since our incorporation in 2006, we have devoted substantially all of our efforts to developing our nitric oxide platform technology and resulting product candidates, including conducting preclinical and clinical trials and providing general and administrative support for these operations. We conduct these activities in a single operating segment. To date, we have focused our funding activities primarily on equity and strategic relationships. However, other historical forms of funding have included payments received from licensing and supply arrangements, as well as government research contracts.
We have never generated revenue from product sales and have incurred net losses in each year since inception. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $249.3 million, and there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. We incurred net losses of $29.3 million and $30.4 million in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We expect to continue to incur substantial losses in the future as we conduct our planned operating activities. We do not expect to generate revenue from product sales unless and until we obtain regulatory approval from the FDA for our clinical-stage product candidates. If we obtain regulatory approval for any of our product candidates, we and/or our commercial partners would expect to incur significant expenses related to product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution.
Please refer to the section entitled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Liquidity and Capital Resources” in this Annual Report for further discussion of our current liquidity and our future funding needs.
Components of our Results of Operations
Revenue
License and collaboration revenue consists of the amortization of certain fixed and variable consideration under the Amended Sato Agreement, that (i) has been received to date in the form of upfront and milestone payments; or (ii) are future, non-contingent milestone payments that become payable upon the earlier occurrence of specified fixed dates in the future or the achievement of specified milestone events. This consideration is being recognized on a straight-line basis over the estimated performance period.
In November of 2020, Sato determined its initial Japanese Phase 1 study for SB206 would require an amended design, including potential evaluation of lower dose strengths, to further refine dose tolerability in a subsequent Phase 1 study. Based upon (i) the need for an additional Phase 1 study; (ii) Sato’s current estimated comprehensive developmental schedule for SB206 including additional post-Phase 1 clinical trials; and (iii) current and future Japanese clinical trial material manufacturing and technical transfer considerations, we have concluded that a prospective delay in Sato’s overall SB206 development plan has occurred. We estimate the program timeline to be extended by 1.75 years from its previous estimate, and a corresponding extension of the performance period to 9.25 years, currently estimated to be completed in the second quarter of 2026.
The material terms of the Amended Sato Agreement and related revenue recognition are described in “Note 4-Licensing Arrangements” and “Note 5-Revenue Recognition” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Government Contracts and Grants Revenue
Government research contracts and grant revenue relates to the research and development of our nitric oxide platform for preclinical advancement of NCEs and formulations related to potential treatments for illnesses in the women’s health field. Revenue related to conditional government contracts and grants is recognized when qualifying expenses are incurred.
Research and Development Expenses
Since our inception, we have focused our resources on our research and development activities, including conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials, manufacturing development efforts and activities related to regulatory filings for our product candidates. Research and development expenses, including those paid to third parties for which there is no alternative use, are expensed as they are incurred. Research and development expenses include:
•external research and development expenses incurred under agreements with CROs, investigative sites and consultants to conduct our clinical trials and preclinical studies;
•costs to acquire, develop and manufacture supplies for clinical trials and preclinical studies at our facilities;
•costs to establish drug substance and drug product manufacturing capabilities with external CMOs and to enhance drug delivery device technologies through partnerships with technology manufacturing vendors;
•legal and other professional fees related to compliance with FDA requirements;
•licensing fees and milestone payments incurred under license agreements;
•salaries and related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in our research and development functions; and
•facilities, depreciation and other allocated expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent, maintenance of facilities, utilities, equipment and other supplies.
From inception through December 31, 2020, we have incurred approximately $181.9 million in research and development expenses to develop, expand or otherwise improve our nitric oxide platform and resulting product candidates. This amount is net of $10.4 million of aggregate contra-research and development expense, including $2.2 million and $8.2 million of contra-research and development expense recorded for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, representing amortization of the liability related to the $12.0 million of funding received from Ligand to pursue the development and regulatory approval of SB206. For a description of the methodology and assumptions used to recognize the ratable amortization
of this liability, as well as other information about the Funding Agreement with Ligand, please see “Note 6-Research and Development Arrangements” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
The table below sets forth our research and development expenses incurred for external clinical programs and the related product candidates, and other research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. Other research and development expenses include: (i) all preclinical program and development costs, including WH504, WH602 and SB019, (ii) manufacturing capability and campaign costs, (iii) external costs to establish drug substance and drug product manufacturing capabilities at third-party CMOs, (iv) facility and infrastructure costs, and (v) costs related to all research and development salaries and related personnel costs.
(1)Amounts shown net of $2.2 million and $8.2 million of contra-research and development expense recorded for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, related to the Funding Agreement with Ligand described in the section entitled “Business-Research and Development Arrangements” in this Annual Report and in “Note 6-Research and Development Arrangements” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, our major clinical development activities were primarily associated with the continued conduct of our current SB206 Phase 3 clinical program activities. Our plan and timelines for further clinical development of SB206 have been and may be further impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect that for the foreseeable future, the substantial majority of our research and development efforts will be focused on: (i) the SB206 molluscum program, including the conduct and expected completion of the B-SIMPLE4 trial, including supporting activities; (ii) preparatory costs associated with the continued regulatory progression of SB206; (iii) drug manufacturing capability transfer activities to external third-party CMOs; (iv) a drug delivery device technology enhancement project with a technology manufacturing vendor; and (v) additional development activities in certain priority therapeutic areas, including infectious diseases and companion animal health. We also expect to incur substantial costs in 2021 associated with our research and development personnel, and certain manufacturing capability costs related to the infrastructure build-out necessary to support small-scale drug substance and drug product manufacturing at our new corporate headquarters, including capital costs subject to depreciation. We may decide to revise our development and operating plans or the related timing, depending on information we learn through our research and development activities, including the results of the B-SIMPLE4 trial, the impact of outside factors such as the COVID-19 pandemic, our ability to enter into strategic arrangements, our ability to access additional capital and our financial priorities.
The successful development of our product candidates is highly uncertain. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate the nature, timing or costs required to complete the remaining development of our current product candidates or any future product candidates. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development of product candidates. See the section entitled “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report for a discussion of the risks and uncertainties associated with our research and development projects.
General and Administrative Expenses
Our general and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs, including stock-based compensation expenses for personnel in our executive, finance, corporate development and other administrative functions. Other general and administrative expenses include allocated depreciation and facility-related costs, legal costs of pursuing patent protection of our intellectual property, insurance coverage and professional services fees for auditing, tax, general legal, business development, litigation defense and other corporate and administrative services.
We expect to continue to incur substantial general and administrative expenses in 2021 in support of our operating activities and as necessary to operate in a public company environment. Significant general and administrative expenses associated with operations in a public company environment include legal, accounting, regulatory and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with exchange listing and SEC requirements, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance premiums and investor relations activities.
Impairment loss on long-lived assets
As of June 29, 2020, we evaluated all of our long-lived assets for potential held for sale classification, and assessed our remaining long-lived assets classified as held and used for potential impairment pursuant to accounting policies described in “Note 1-Organization and Significant Accounting Policies” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. This evaluation and assessment was triggered by the decommissioning of our large scale drug manufacturing capability at our previous Morrisville, North Carolina, facility and by preparatory actions taken in connection with the planned lease termination transaction for the facility that was executed in July 2020. In connection with this evaluation and impairment assessment, which is described in the section entitled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Results of Operations-Impairment loss on long-lived assets” in this Annual Report and in “Note 16-Assets Held for Sale, Impairment Charges” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report, we recognized an impairment loss on long-lived assets that represent the carrying value in excess of fair value of assets held and used or the carrying value in excess of fair value less cost to sell for assets held for sale.
Loss on facility asset group disposition
In conjunction with the lease termination transaction executed in July 2020, all assets and liabilities within the related facility asset group were disposed of on July 16, 2020. As of the disposition date, the net aggregate carrying value of the assets and liabilities was written off, combined with certain other direct costs incurred in connection with the lease termination transaction, which resulted in a loss on disposition, which is described in “Note 17-Asset Group Disposition” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Other Income (Expense), net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of (i) foreign currency adjustments related to the contract asset and contract receivables related to the Amended Sato Agreement, (ii) interest income earned on cash and cash equivalents, and (iii) other miscellaneous income and expenses.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the periods indicated:
Revenue
License and collaboration revenue of $4.2 million and $4.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, was associated with our performance during the period and the related amortization of the non-refundable upfront and expected milestone payments under the Amended Sato Agreement.
Government research contracts and grants revenue totaled $0.7 million and $0.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized revenue of $0.5 million and $0.3 million, respectively, related to the $1.1 million grant we received in September 2019 from the DoD’s CDMRP as part of its Peer Reviewed Cancer Research Program. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized revenue of $0.2 million and $0.1 million, respectively, related to the $1.0 million grant we received in February 2020 from the NIH and to the $0.2 million grant received in September 2019 from the NIH. For additional information regarding our government research contracts and grants revenue, see “Note 5-Revenue Recognition” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses were $19.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $25.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The net decrease of $5.4 million, or 21% was primarily related to (i) a net $0.7 million increase in the SB206 program, (ii) a $4.3 million decrease in other research and development expenses, (iii) a $1.6 million decrease in our SB414 program and (iv) a $0.2 million decrease in our SB204 program.
In the SB206 program, we experienced a $5.3 million decrease in gross costs incurred primarily due to the relative timing of the B-SIMPLE4 trial’s enrollment initiation, which occurred late in the third quarter of 2020, compared to enrollment initiations for the previous Phase 3 trials (B-SIMPLE1 and B-SIMPLE2), which occurred late in the second quarter of 2019. We experienced a $6.0 million corresponding decrease in contra-research and development expense from the ratable amortization of the liability related to the Funding Agreement with Ligand, which represents Ligand’s contribution to the clinical development and regulatory approval of SB206 for the treatment of molluscum.
The $4.3 million decrease in other research and development expenses was primarily driven by (i) a $1.3 million net decrease in research and development personnel costs, (ii) a $1.6 million decrease in costs associated with our manufacturing technology transfer projects to third-party manufacturers, (iii) a $0.7 million decrease in depreciation expense and (iv) a $1.0 million decrease in manufacturing materials and support costs at our Morrisville, North Carolina facility, partially offset by $0.3 million of discrete Morrisville, North Carolina facility decommissioning costs incurred during the second and third quarters of 2020.
The $1.3 million net decrease in research and development personnel costs is primarily due to (i) a $1.2 million decrease in recurring salary and benefits costs due to a reduced number of research and development personnel between the two comparative periods, (ii) a $0.5 million decrease in salary, accrued bonuses and benefits costs associated with personnel who changed roles between the comparative periods and, as a result, changed from research and development expenses to general and administrative expenses between the comparative periods, and (iii) $0.5 million in discrete charges during the first quarter of 2019 primarily related to severance and one-time payments associated with the departure of our former chief scientific officer in January 2019. These decreases were partially offset by (i) $0.4 million in discrete severance charges and retention incentive compensation associated with business realignment and personnel reduction actions taken during the first quarter of 2020, (ii) a $0.4 million increase in accrued bonuses, and (iii) a $0.1 million increase in non-cash share based compensation, primarily related to the change in fair value of the Tangible Shareholder Return plan liability between the comparative periods.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses were $11.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $10.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of approximately $0.9 million, or 8% was primarily due to $1.7 million of aggregate non-cash expense related to the issuance of commitment shares as consideration for entering into a common stock purchase agreement with Aspire Capital on June 15, 2020, or the June 2020 Aspire CSPA, and later entering into the July 2020 Aspire CSPA, partially offset by (i) a $0.5 million decrease in general and administrative personnel and related costs and (ii) a $0.3 million decrease in other general and administrative expenses.
The $0.5 million net decrease in general and administrative personnel and related costs is primarily due to (i) a $0.4 million discrete charge in the first quarter of 2019 primarily related to severance and one-time payments associated with the departure of our former chief business officer in January 2019, (ii) a $0.6 million decrease in recurring salary and benefits costs due to a reduced number of general and administrative personnel between the two comparative periods and (iii) a $0.7 million decrease in non-cash stock-based compensation expenses primarily associated with stock appreciation rights, or SARs, awarded to our now-former Chief Executive Officer in 2018 that were expensed throughout the 2019 comparative period and until the award vested in full and expired unexercised in February 2020 following his resignation in February 2020. These decreases were partially offset by (i) a $0.9 million increase in salary, accrued bonuses and benefits costs associated with personnel who changed roles between the comparative periods and, as a result, changed from research and development expenses to general and administrative expenses between the comparative periods, (ii) a $0.2 million increase in accrued bonuses, and (iii) $0.1 million of discrete retention incentive compensation and severance charges associated with business realignment and personnel reductions occurring in the first quarter of 2020.
The $0.3 million net decrease in other general and administrative expenses is primarily due to (i) a $0.5 million decrease in market research and business development fees and expenses, and (ii) a $0.4 million decrease in allocated facility and depreciation expenses following the reduction of our footprint within our Morrisville, North Carolina facility after the lease termination completed in the third quarter of 2020. These decreases were partially offset by (i) a $0.5 million increase in insurance premium expenses associated with the renewal of our directors and officers’ liability policies in 2020 and (ii) a $0.1 million net increase in other administrative operating costs.
Impairment loss on long-lived assets
As of June 29, 2020, we evaluated all of our long-lived assets for potential held for sale classification, and assessed our remaining long-lived assets classified as held and used for potential impairment pursuant to accounting policies described in “Note 1-Organization and Significant Accounting Policies” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. Our evaluation resulted in a $2.4 million non-cash impairment loss on long-lived assets recognized during the quarterly period ended June 30, 2020, comprised of (i) a $0.9 million impairment charge recognized on the asset group associated with the Morrisville, North Carolina facility, including the right-of-use asset, leasehold improvements and other property affixed to the facility, (ii) a $0.2 million impairment charge recognized on furniture and equipment to be sold to our landlord’s new tenant pursuant to a bill of sale described in “Note 8-Commitments and Contingencies” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report, (iii) a $0.8 million impairment charge recognized on certain manufacturing and laboratory equipment that we intended to sell through a consignment seller, and (iv) a $0.5 million impairment charge recognized on equipment and other property not directly associated with our continuing research and development and pilot scale drug manufacturing capabilities.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, certain equipment assets we had previously classified as held for sale during the aforementioned June 29, 2020 evaluation were reclassified as held and used. The reclassification determination was based upon new facts and circumstances that enabled us to re-use the equipment in connection with our planned build-out of our newly leased facility in Durham, North Carolina. Upon reclassification to assets held and used, we avoided certain estimated selling costs that had been included in the previously recognized impairment charge during the quarterly period ended June 30, 2020 and, as a result, we recognized a $0.1 million favorable adjustment to the impairment charge during the quarterly period ended December 31, 2020.
For additional information regarding our impairment evaluation see “Note 16-Assets Held for Sale, Impairment Charges” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Loss on facility asset group disposition
In conjunction with the lease termination transaction as described in “Note 8-Commitments and Contingencies” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report, all assets and liabilities within the facility asset group were disposed of on July 16, 2020. As of the disposition date, the aggregate carrying value of the assets was $7.3 million and the aggregate carrying value of the associated lease liabilities was $6.0 million. The $1.3 million net charge resulting from the write-off of these assets and liabilities was combined with $0.5 million of other direct costs incurred in connection with the lease termination transaction to result in a $1.8 million total loss on disposition. This loss, which is in addition to the impairment loss recognized during the quarterly period ended June 30, 2020 and described in “Note 16-Assets Held for Sale, Impairment Charges” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements, was based upon Company-specific facts and circumstances associated with the July 2020 lease termination transaction, rather than the market participant valuation model that was required to be used during the impairment assessment as of June 29, 2020.
For additional information regarding our facility asset group disposition see “Note 17-Asset Group Disposition” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Other income (expense), net
Other (expense) income, net was $0.9 million income for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $0.3 million income for the year ended December 31, 2019. This change was primarily due to the impact of foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations for certain time-based milestones related to the Amended Sato Agreement.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $249.3 million. We incurred net losses of $29.3 million and $30.4 million in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. We anticipate that we will continue to generate losses for the foreseeable future, and we expect the losses to increase as we continue the development of, and seek regulatory approvals for, our product candidates and begin any commercialization activities. We are subject to all of the risks inherent in the development of new pharmaceutical products, and we may encounter unforeseen expenses, difficulties, complications, delays and other unknown factors that may adversely affect our business. We do not expect to generate revenue from product sales unless and until we obtain regulatory approval from the FDA for our clinical-stage product candidates. If we obtain regulatory approval for any of our product candidates, we and/or our commercial partners would expect to incur significant expenses related to product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution.
As of December 31, 2020, we had a total cash and cash equivalents balance of $35.9 million and positive working capital of $35.3 million. As of February 10, 2021, since December 31, 2020, we have (i) sold 4,081,633 shares of our common stock at an average price of $1.22 per share under the July 2020 Aspire CSPA, for total proceeds of $5.0 million; and (ii) received proceeds from the exercises of common stock warrants of approximately $0.4 million. As of February 10, 2021, we had $13.3 million in remaining availability for sales of our common stock under the July 2020 Aspire CSPA.
From January 1, 2019 through December 31, 2020, we have raised total equity and debt proceeds of $53.6 million to fund our operations, including (i) $5.2 million in net proceeds from the sale of common stock (or pre-funded warrants in lieu thereof) and accompanying common warrants in the March 2020 Public Offering (as defined below), (ii) $7.2 million in net proceeds from the sale of common stock (or pre-funded warrants in lieu thereof) in the March 2020 Registered Direct Offering (as defined below), (iii) an additional $5.5 million of proceeds associated with exercises through December 31, 2020 of common warrants issued as part of the March 2020 Public Offering, and (iv) $34.7 million in proceeds from the sale of common stock under our August 2019, June 2020 and July 2020 common stock purchase agreements with Aspire Capital, all of which are
described below. We also qualified for and accepted a loan under the PPP (as defined below) of approximately $1.0 million in April 2020 to support certain qualified expenses, including payroll and rental expense, which is described below.
To date, we have focused our funding activities on equity and strategic relationships. However, other historical forms of funding have included payments received from licensing and supply arrangements, as well as government research contracts. From inception through December 31, 2020, we have generated additional liquidity and capital through other sources including (i) governmental research contracts and grants totaling $12.9 million; (ii) our licensing and supply arrangements with Sato, totaling $24.2 million; and (iii) $25.0 million and $12.0 million in proceeds from two funding transactions during the second quarter of 2019 with Reedy Creek, and Ligand, respectively, as described below.
We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents balance, plus expected contractual payments to be received in connection with existing licensing agreements, will provide us with adequate liquidity to fund our planned operating needs into the first quarter of 2022. This operating forecast and related cash projection includes: (i) costs through the expected completion of our pivotal Phase 3 trial for SB206 as a treatment for molluscum, the B-SIMPLE4 trial, including supporting activities; (ii) preparatory costs associated with the anticipated continued regulatory progression of SB206; (iii) development activities in certain priority therapeutic areas, including infectious diseases and companion animal health; (iv) conducting drug manufacturing capability transfer activities to external third-party CMOs, including a drug delivery device technology enhancement project; and (v) certain build-out and manufacturing capability costs related to the infrastructure necessary to support small-scale drug substance and drug product manufacturing at our new corporate headquarters, but excludes any potential costs associated with other late-stage clinical development programs. We may decide to revise our development and operating plans or the related timing, depending on information we learn through our research and development activities, including the results of the B-SIMPLE4 trial, the impact of outside factors such as the COVID-19 pandemic, our ability to enter into strategic arrangements, our ability to access additional capital and our financial priorities.
We will need significant additional funding to continue our operating activities and make further advancements in our product candidate development programs and potentially commercialization activities. Therefore, we will need to secure additional capital or financing and/or delay, defer or reduce our cash expenditures by the first quarter of 2022. There can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain additional capital or financing on terms acceptable to us, on a timely basis or at all. If we are not able to secure additional financing and are unable to reduce our expenditures sufficiently, we may be forced to terminate or eliminate our product development programs, wind down our operations, liquidate or seek bankruptcy protection. In that event, it is unclear to what extent we would be able to pay our obligations, and, accordingly, it is further unclear whether and to what extent any resources would be available for distributions to our stockholders. Alternatively, we may seek to engage in one or more potential transactions, such as the sale of the Company, or sale or divestiture of some of our assets, such as a sale of our dermatology platform assets, but there can be no assurance that we will be able to enter into such a transaction or transactions on a timely basis or at all or on terms that are favorable to us. If we are forced to terminate or eliminate our product development programs or pursue other strategic alternatives or corporate transactions, there can be no assurance that such actions would result in any additional stockholder value.
Our cash and cash equivalents are held in a variety of interest-bearing instruments, including money market accounts. Cash in excess of immediate requirements is invested with a view toward liquidity and capital preservation, and we seek to minimize the potential effects of concentration and degrees of risk.
Purchase Agreements with Aspire Capital
Prior Aspire Common Stock Purchase Agreements
On August 30, 2019, we entered into a common stock purchase agreement with Aspire Capital, or the 2019 Aspire CSPA, and on June 15, 2020, we entered into the June 2020 Aspire CSPA, which provided that, upon the terms and subject to the conditions and limitations set forth therein, Aspire Capital was committed to purchase up to an aggregate of $25.0 million and $20.0 million, respectively, of shares of our common stock at our request from time to time during the 30-month term of each agreement. The June 2020 Aspire CSPA replaced the 2019 Aspire CSPA, which was terminated under the terms of the June 2020 Aspire CSPA.
As of December 31, 2020, we had sold 4,865,717 shares of our common stock at an average price of $0.62 per share under the 2019 Aspire CSPA. These amounts, combined with the 345,622 shares issued as part of the commitment fee related to the agreement’s execution, resulted in a total of 5,211,339 shares issued to Aspire Capital under the agreement as of December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, we had sold 37,764,280 shares of our common stock at an average price of $0.53 per share under the June 2020 Aspire CSPA. These amounts, combined with the 1,449,275 shares issued as part of the commitment fee related to the agreement’s execution, resulted in a total of 39,213,555 shares issued to Aspire Capital under the agreement as of
December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, there was no remaining availability for sales of common stock under the June 2020 Aspire CSPA, as it was fully utilized prior to entry into the July 2020 Aspire CSPA described below. The 2019 Aspire CSPA and June 2020 Aspire CSPA had substantially similar terms to the July 2020 Aspire CSPA described below.
See “Note 10-Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information regarding the 2019 Aspire CSPA and the June 2020 Aspire CSPA.
July 2020 Aspire Common Stock Purchase Agreement
On July 21, 2020, we entered into the July 2020 Aspire CSPA which provides that, upon the terms and subject to the conditions and limitations set forth therein, Aspire Capital is committed to purchase up to an aggregate of $30.0 million of shares of our common stock at our request from time to time during the 30-month term of the July 2020 Aspire CSPA. Upon execution of the July 2020 Aspire CSPA, we agreed to sell to Aspire Capital 5,555,555 shares of our common stock at $0.90 per share for proceeds of $5.0 million. In addition, as consideration for entering into the July 2020 Aspire CSPA, we issued to Aspire Capital 1,000,000 shares of our common stock as a commitment fee. The July 2020 Aspire CSPA replaced the June 2020 Aspire CSPA described above.
Concurrently with entering into the July 2020 Aspire CSPA, we also entered into a registration rights agreement with Aspire Capital, in which we agreed to file one or more registration statements, as permissible and necessary to register under the Securities Act, registering the sale of the shares of our common stock that have been and may be issued to Aspire Capital under the July 2020 Aspire CSPA. On July 23, 2020, we filed with the SEC a prospectus supplement to our effective shelf Registration Statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-236583) registering all of the shares of common stock that may be offered to Aspire Capital from time to time under the July 2020 Aspire CSPA.
Under the terms of the July 2020 Aspire CSPA, on any trading day we select, we have the right, in our sole discretion, to present Aspire Capital with a purchase notice, or the Purchase Notice, directing Aspire Capital (as principal) to purchase up to 300,000 shares of our common stock per business day, up to an aggregate of $30.0 million of our common stock, at a per share price equal to the lesser of (i) the lowest sale price of our common stock on the purchase date; or (ii) the arithmetic average of the three lowest closing sale prices for our common stock during the ten consecutive trading days ending on the trading day immediately preceding the purchase date. The aggregate purchase price payable by Aspire Capital on any one purchase date may not exceed $0.5 million, unless otherwise mutually agreed. The parties may mutually agree to increase the number of shares of our common stock that may be purchased per trading day pursuant to the terms of the July 2020 Aspire CSPA to up to 2,000,000 shares.
In addition, on any date on which we submit a Purchase Notice in an amount equal to 300,000 shares, we can also, in our sole discretion, present Aspire Capital with a volume-weighted average price purchase notice, or a VWAP Purchase Notice, directing Aspire Capital to purchase an amount of our common stock equal to up to 30% of the aggregate shares of our common stock traded on our principal market on the next trading day, or the VWAP Purchase Date, subject to a maximum number of shares determined by us. The purchase price per share pursuant to such VWAP Purchase Notice is generally 97% of the volume-weighted average price for our common stock traded on our principal market on the VWAP Purchase Date.
Under the terms of the July 2020 Aspire CSPA, the number of shares that may be sold to Aspire Capital is limited to 25,433,642 shares, or the Exchange Cap, which represents 19.99% of our outstanding shares of common stock on July 21, 2020, unless stockholder approval or an exception pursuant to the rules of our principal market, currently the Nasdaq Capital Market, is obtained to issue more than 19.99%. This limitation will not apply if, at any time the Exchange Cap is reached and at all times thereafter, the average price paid for all shares issued under the July 2020 Aspire CSPA is equal to or greater than $0.5907, which is the arithmetic average of the five closing sale prices of our common stock immediately preceding the execution of the July 2020 Aspire CSPA. The July 2020 Aspire CSPA provides that we and Aspire Capital shall not effect any sales under the July 2020 Aspire CSPA on any purchase date where the closing sale price of our common stock is less than $0.15.
There are no trading volume requirements or restrictions under the July 2020 Aspire CSPA, and we control the timing and amount of sales of our common stock to Aspire Capital. Aspire Capital has no right to require any sales by us, but is obligated to make purchases from us as we may direct in accordance with the July 2020 Aspire CSPA. There are no limitations on use of proceeds, financial or business covenants, restrictions on future financing transactions, rights of first refusal, participation rights, penalties or liquidated damages in the July 2020 Aspire CSPA. The July 2020 Aspire CSPA may be terminated by us at any time, at our discretion, without any penalty or additional cost to us. Any proceeds we receive under the July 2020 Aspire CSPA are expected to be used for the advancement of our research and development programs and for general corporate purposes, capital expenditures and working capital.
As of December 31, 2020, we have sold 17,278,764 shares of our common stock at an average price of $0.67 per share under the July 2020 Aspire CSPA. These amounts, combined with the 1,000,000 shares issued as part of the commitment fee related to the agreement’s execution, resulted in a total of 18,278,764 shares issued to Aspire Capital under the agreement as of December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, there was $18.3 million of remaining availability for sales of common stock under the July 2020 Aspire CSPA. As of February 10, 2021, since December 31, 2020, we have sold 4,081,633 shares of our common stock at an average price of $1.22 per share under the July 2020 Aspire CSPA. As of February 10, 2021, we had $13.3 million in remaining availability for sales of our common stock under the July 2020 Aspire CSPA.
See “Note 10-Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information regarding the July 2020 Aspire CSPA.
Paycheck Protection Program
On April 22, 2020, we entered into a promissory note, which was subsequently amended, or the Note, for an unsecured loan in the amount of approximately $1.0 million, or the Loan, under the Paycheck Protection Program, or the PPP. The PPP was established under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or the CARES Act, and is administered by the United States Small Business Administration, or the SBA. The Loan to us was made through PNC Bank, National Association. Subject to the terms of the Note, the Loan bears interest at a fixed rate of one percent (1%) per annum. Principal and interest on unforgiven amounts are payable monthly commencing on the fifteenth day of the month following the First Payment Date, as defined within the Note. The Note provides that the Loan may be prepaid by us at any time prior to the April 22, 2022 maturity date without penalty. Under the terms of the CARES Act, PPP loan recipients can apply for and be granted forgiveness for all or a portion of loans granted under the PPP, with such forgiveness to be determined, subject to limitations, based on the use of loan proceeds for payment of permitted and program-eligible expenses. Interest payable on the Note may be forgiven only if the SBA agrees to pay such interest on the forgiven principal amount of the Note. We have applied for forgiveness of the Loan, and no assurance is provided that we will obtain such forgiveness in whole or in part. We will be obligated to repay any portion of the principal amount of the Loan that is not forgiven, together with interest accrued and accruing thereon at the rate set forth above, until such unforgiven portion is paid in full.
See “Note 9-Paycheck Protection Program” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information regarding the Loan.
Equity Offerings
March 2020 Registered Direct Offering
On March 24, 2020, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with several institutional and accredited investors, pursuant to which we agreed to sell and issue in a registered direct offering priced at-the-market under Nasdaq rules, or the March 2020 Registered Direct Offering, an aggregate of 10,550,000 shares of our common stock and pre-funded warrants to purchase 8,054,652 shares of common stock. The March 2020 Registered Direct Offering closed on March 26, 2020. At closing, we also issued to H.C. Wainwright, as placement agent, warrants to purchase an aggregate of up to 558,140 shares of common stock representing 3.0% of the aggregate number of shares of common stock and shares of common stock underlying the pre-funded warrants sold in this offering.
Net proceeds from the March 2020 Registered Direct Offering were approximately $7.2 million after deducting the fees and commissions and offering expenses of approximately $0.8 million.
See “Note 10-Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information regarding the March 2020 Registered Direct Offering.
March 2020 Public Offering
On February 27, 2020, we entered into an underwriting agreement with H.C. Wainwright relating to the offering, issuance and sale of 14,000,000 shares of common stock, pre-funded warrants to purchase 4,333,334 shares of common stock, and accompanying common warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 18,333,334 shares of common stock, or, collectively, the March 2020 Public Offering. We also granted H.C. Wainwright, as underwriter, a 30-day option to purchase up to 2,750,000 additional shares of common stock and/or common warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 2,750,000 shares of common stock, which H.C. Wainwright partially exercised on March 2, 2020 to purchase 1,498,602 shares of common stock and common warrants to purchase 2,750,000 shares of common stock. The March 2020 Public Offering closed on March 3, 2020. At closing, we also issued to designees of H.C. Wainwright, as underwriter, warrants to purchase an aggregate of up to 594,958
shares of common stock representing 3.0% of the aggregate number of shares of common stock sold and shares of common stock underlying the pre-funded warrants sold in this offering.
Net proceeds from the March 2020 Public Offering were approximately $5.2 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses of approximately $0.8 million. As of December 31, 2020, 18,459,167 common warrants issued as part of the March 2020 Public Offering have been exercised for an additional $5.5 million of proceeds associated with this offering.
See “Note 10-Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information regarding the March 2020 Public Offering.
Research and Development Arrangements
Royalty and Milestone Payments Purchase Agreement with Reedy Creek Investments LLC
On April 29, 2019, we entered into the Purchase Agreement with Reedy Creek, pursuant to which Reedy Creek provided us funding in an initial amount of $25.0 million, for us to use primarily to pursue the development, regulatory approval and commercialization (including through out-license agreements and other third-party arrangements) activities for SB206, for the treatment of molluscum, and advancing programmatically other activities with respect to SB414, for atopic dermatitis, and SB204, for acne.
Pursuant to the Purchase Agreement, we will pay Reedy Creek ongoing quarterly payments, calculated based on an applicable percentage per product of any upfront fees, milestone payments, royalty payments or equivalent payments received by us pursuant to any out-license agreement for the products in the United States, Mexico or Canada, net of any upfront fees, milestone payments, royalty payments or equivalent payments paid by us to third parties pursuant to any agreements under which we have in-licensed intellectual property with respect to the products.
The applicable percentage used for determining the ongoing quarterly payments, applied to amounts received directly by us pursuant to any out-license agreement for each product, ranges from 10% for SB206 to 20% for SB414 and SB204. However, the agreement provides that the applicable percentage for each product will be 25% for fees or milestone payments received by us (but not royalty payments received by us) until Reedy Creek has received payments under the Purchase Agreement equal to the total funding amount provided by Reedy Creek under the Purchase Agreement. If we decide to commercialize any product on our own following regulatory approval, as opposed to commercializing through an out-license agreement or other third-party arrangement, we will be obligated to pay Reedy Creek a low single digits royalty on net sales of the products.
See “Note 6-Research and Development Arrangements” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information related to the Purchase Agreement.
Development Funding and Royalties Agreement with Ligand Pharmaceuticals Incorporated
On May 4, 2019, we entered into the Funding Agreement with Ligand, pursuant to which Ligand provided us funding of $12.0 million, which we used to pursue the development and regulatory approval of SB206, for the treatment of molluscum.
Pursuant to the Funding Agreement, we will pay Ligand up to $20.0 million in milestone payments upon the achievement by us of certain regulatory and commercial milestones associated with SB206 or any product that incorporates or uses NVN1000, the API for our clinical stage product candidates, for the treatment of molluscum. In addition to the milestone payments, we will pay Ligand tiered royalties ranging from 7% to 10% based on annual aggregate net sales of the products in the United States, Mexico or Canada.
See “Note 6-Research and Development Arrangements” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information related to the Funding Agreement.
Licensing Arrangements
Expansion of Partnership with Sato in Japanese Territory
On October 5, 2018, we and Sato entered into the Sato Amendment. The Sato Agreement had focused on the development and commercialization of SB204 for the treatment of acne vulgaris in Japan. The Sato Amendment also provides Sato with the exclusive rights to develop and commercialize SB206 and related dosage forms for the treatment of viral skin infections, including but not limited to molluscum contagiosum and external genital warts, in Japan. We have received approximately $24.2 million from Sato beginning January 2017 through December 31, 2020 under the Amended Sato Agreement, including (i)
a $10.8 million upfront payment received following the execution of the Sato Agreement in January 2017; (ii) a $2.2 million payment related to the initiation of a Phase 1 trial in Japan in the third quarter of 2018; and (iii) $11.2 million of installment payments received following execution of the Sato Amendment. In addition to the upfront payment paid in three installments in 2018 and 2019, we received from Sato under the terms of the Sato Amendment, the Sato Amendment also provides for an aggregate of 1.0 billion JPY in additional non-contingent milestone payments that become payable upon the earlier occurrence of specified fixed dates in the future or the achievement of specified milestone events.
See “Note 3-Licensing Arrangements” and “Note 5-Revenue Recognition” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information regarding the Amended Sato Agreement.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $31.1 million and consisted primarily of a net loss of $29.3 million, with adjustments for non-cash amounts related primarily to (i) depreciation expense of $1.2 million, (ii) impairment of long-lived assets of $2.3 million, (iii) loss on facility asset group disposition of $0.8 million, (iv) stock-based compensation expense of $1.3 million, (v) fees of $1.7 million related to commitment shares for the June 2020 Aspire CSPA and July 2020 Aspire CSPA, (vi) a loss on disposal of equipment of $0.1 million, and (vii) a $9.1 million net decrease in cash related to changes in other operating assets and liabilities. The net decrease in cash related to changes in assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $0.3 million decrease in deferred revenue, a $2.2 million decrease in research and development service obligation liabilities related to the amortization of the liability in connection with the Funding Agreement with Ligand, a $1.5 million increase in prepaid insurance, prepaid expenses and other current assets primarily related to an increase in prepaid service contracts and insurance, a $0.4 million decrease in accrued legal and professional fees, a $0.4 million decrease in accounts payable, a $0.3 million decrease in other long-term assets and liabilities primarily related to the change in the fair value of our Performance Plan liability, a $4.4 million increase in contracts and grants receivable, and a $0.1 million decrease in accrued outside research and development services. These decreases were partially offset by a $0.7 million increase in accrued compensation. The decrease in deferred revenue and increase in contracts and grants receivable relate to the Amended Sato Agreement and included (i) the recognition of license and collaboration revenue of $4.2 million associated with the Company’s performance during the period; (ii) the impact of foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations of approximately $0.9 million; and (iii) a time-based developmental milestone payment that became due and payable as of December 31, 2020 of $4.8 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in operating activities was $19.9 million and consisted primarily of a net loss of $30.4 million, with adjustments for non-cash amounts related primarily to depreciation expense of $2.0 million, stock-based compensation expense of $1.8 million and a favorable change in other operating assets and liabilities of $6.6 million. The favorable net change in assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $12.0 million increase related to the advanced payment for the research and development service obligation associated with the Funding Agreement with Ligand, offset by a $8.2 million decrease in research and development service obligation liabilities related to the amortization of the liability associated with Ligand, a $4.5 million increase in deferred revenue following the receipt of an additional upfront installment payment under the Amended Sato Agreement during the first quarter of 2019, a $0.4 million increase in accounts payable and a $0.5 million increase in accrued outside research and development services. The increase in accounts payable and accruals was primarily related to the Phase 3 development program for molluscum and timing of payments related to our operating activities. These favorable changes were partially offset by a $1.0 million decrease in accrued compensation following the Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors’ determination that the associated corporate performance objectives were not achieved during 2019, and a decrease in other operating assets and liabilities totaling $1.5 million. The decrease in other operating assets and liabilities include an increase in prepaid expenses and contracts and grants receivable and a decrease in other long-term liabilities, primarily related to amortization of lease liabilities.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the $0.1 million of net cash used in investing activities included purchases of property and equipment totaling $0.6 million primarily related to (i) goods and services associated with the planning and design of our new facility in Durham, North Carolina of $0.2 million and (ii) installment payments made to a drug delivery device technology manufacturing vendor in connection with an ongoing drug delivery device technology enhancement project of $0.4 million. These purchases were partially offset by $0.5 million of proceeds from the sale of equipment.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in investing activities was $0.4 million, which primarily related to purchases of laboratory equipment and leasehold improvements at our facility in Morrisville, North Carolina.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $52.8 million and consisted primarily of $5.3 million of proceeds, net of underwriting fees, from the closing of our March 2020 Public Offering, $5.5 million of proceeds from the exercise of common warrants associated with the March 2020 Public Offering, $7.3 million of proceeds, net of placement agent fees, from our March 2020 Registered Direct Offering, $1.0 million from the entry into the Note relating to the Loan under the PPP, and $33.9 million of proceeds from the sale of our common stock pursuant to the 2019 Aspire CSPA, the June 2020 Aspire CSPA and the July 2020 Aspire CSPA. These financing cash inflows were partially offset by $0.2 million of other offering costs, including legal and professional fees, directly associated with the March 2020 Public Offering, March 2020 Registered Direct Offering and the February 2020 shelf registration statement filing.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities was $25.8 million and consisted of $25.0 million of funding received pursuant to the Purchase Agreement with Reedy Creek, $0.7 million of proceeds from the sale of our common stock pursuant to the 2019 Aspire CSPA and $0.1 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options.
Capital Requirements
As of December 31, 2020, we had a total cash and cash equivalents balance of $35.9 million and positive working capital of $35.3 million. To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales. We do not know when, or if, we will generate any revenue from product sales. We do not expect to generate revenue from product sales unless, and until, we obtain regulatory approval of one of our current or future product candidates and achieve successful commercialization by a strategic partner or by ourselves. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $249.3 million, and there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
We will need significant additional funding to support our planned and future operating activities and make further advancements in our product development programs beyond those currently included in our operating forecast and related cash projection. We do not currently have sufficient funds to complete development and commercialization of any of our product candidates. Our ability to continue to operate our business, including our ability to advance development programs unrelated to the B-SIMPLE4 trial, as well as our ability to progress SB206 for molluscum to an NDA filing, which would occur, if at all, following completion of the B-SIMPLE4 trial, is dependent upon our ability to access additional sources of capital, including, but not limited to (i) equity or debt financings, including through potential sales using the remaining availability under the July 2020 Aspire CSPA; or (ii) non-dilutive sources, such as partnerships, collaborations, licensing, grants or other strategic relationships.
Our equity issuances during the year ended December 31, 2020, have resulted in significant dilution to our existing stockholders. Any future additional issuances of equity, or debt that could be convertible into equity, would result in further significant dilution to our existing stockholders. Alternatively, we may seek to engage in one or more potential transactions, such as the sale of the Company, or sale or divestiture of some of our assets, such as a sale of our dermatology platform assets, but there can be no assurance that we will be able to enter into such a transaction or transactions on a timely basis or at all or on terms that are favorable to us. If we are forced to terminate or eliminate our product development programs or pursue other strategic alternatives or corporate transactions, there can be no assurance that such actions would result in any additional stockholder value.
As of December 31, 2020 we had 145,700,091 shares of common stock outstanding. In addition, as of December 31, 2020, we had reserved 16,903,031 shares of common stock for future issuance related to (i) outstanding warrants to purchase common stock, (ii) outstanding stock options and stock appreciation rights, and (iii) future issuance under the 2016 Incentive Award Plan. As of December 31, 2019, we had 26,734,800 shares of our common stock outstanding, with an additional 13,177,766 reserved for future issuance. Our common stock consists of 200,000,000 authorized shares as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. Under our certificate of incorporation, increasing the number of shares authorized under our certificate of incorporation would
require the approval of our stockholders, and there can be no assurance that our stockholders would provide such approval, as additional issuances pursuant to such authorization would result in additional dilution to existing stockholders. Without such approval, or without implementing a reverse stock split that would reduce the number of outstanding shares of our common stock and thereby increase the shares available for issuance, we may not have the ability to raise additional capital as needed to support development, regulatory approval and potential commercialization of our product candidates.
As we continue to endeavor to raise additional capital, there can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain new funding on terms acceptable to us, on a timely basis, or at all. Our failure to obtain sufficient additional funds on acceptable terms as and when needed could cause us to alter or reduce our planned operating activities, including but not limited to delaying, reducing, terminating or eliminating planned product candidate development activities, to conserve our cash and cash equivalents. Such actions could delay development timelines and have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition and market valuation. If we are not able to secure additional financing and are unable to reduce our expenditures sufficiently, we may be forced to terminate or eliminate our product development programs, wind down our operations, liquidate or seek bankruptcy protection. In that event, it is unclear to what extent we would be able to pay our obligations, and, accordingly, it is further unclear whether and to what extent any resources would be available for distributions to our stockholders. A failure to obtain sufficient funds on acceptable terms when needed, including the inability to utilize the amount available under the July 2020 Aspire CSPA, could cause us to alter or reduce our planned operating activities, including but not limited to delaying planned activities directly related to or in support of product candidate development, to conserve our cash and cash equivalents. Our anticipated expenditure levels may change if we adjust our current operating plan. Such actions could delay development timelines and have a material adverse effect on our results of operations, financial condition and market valuation.
We have based our projections of operating capital requirements on assumptions that may prove to be incorrect and we may use all of our available capital resources sooner than we expect. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of pharmaceutical products, we are unable to estimate the exact amount or timing of our operating capital requirements. Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to:
•the initiation, progress, timing, costs, results, and evaluation of results of trials for our clinical-stage product candidates, including trials conducted by us or potential future partners;
•the progress, timing, costs and results of development and preclinical study activities relating to other potential applications of our nitric oxide platform;
•the number and characteristics of product candidates that we pursue;
•our ability to enter into strategic relationships to support the continued development of certain product candidates and the success of those arrangements;
•our success in optimizing the size and capability of our new manufacturing facility and related processes to meet our strategic objectives;
•our success in the technical transfer of methods and processes related to our drug substance and drug product manufacturing with our current and/or potential future contract manufacturing partners;
•the outcome, timing and costs of seeking regulatory approvals;
•the occurrence and timing of potential development and regulatory milestones achieved by Sato, our licensee for SB204 and SB206 in Japan;
•the terms and timing of any future collaborations, licensing, consulting, financing or other arrangements that we may enter into;
•the amount and timing of any payments we may be required to make, or that we may receive, in connection with the licensing, filing, prosecution, defense and enforcement of any patents or other intellectual property rights;
•the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and protecting our intellectual property rights;
•defending against intellectual property related claims;
•the costs associated with any potential future securities litigation, and the outcome of that litigation;
•the extent to which we in-license or acquire other products and technologies; and
•subject to receipt of marketing approval, revenue received from commercial sales or out licensing of our product candidates.
Contractual Obligations and Contingent Liabilities
Facility Leasing Transactions
In July 2020 we entered into a lease termination agreement, which provided for the early termination of the previously existing lease, as amended, for our corporate headquarters in Morrisville, North Carolina. In connection with the termination of our lease, we entered into a sublease agreement, which was effective upon the termination of our previous lease agreement, through which we subleased from the new tenant space in the building that was covered by our previous lease. Our current sublease will expire on March 31, 2021, if not earlier terminated. In January 2021 we entered into a new lease agreement, pursuant to which we will lease space located in Durham, North Carolina to serve as the Company’s new corporate headquarters and support various cGMP activities, as described in the section entitled “Business-Manufacturing and Supplies” in this Annual Report.
See the section entitled “Properties” in this Annual Report and “Note 8-Commitments and Contingencies” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information regarding the previous facility lease transaction, including the lease termination and sublease. For a further description of the terms of the new lease, see “Note 18-Subsequent Events” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Amended Sato Agreement
Pursuant to the Amended Sato Agreement, we are obligated to supply Sato with all quantities of licensed products required by Sato for their development activities in Japan. As part of the Amended Sato Agreement, we and Sato also agreed to negotiate a commercial supply agreement pursuant to which we or a third-party contract manufacturer would be the exclusive supplier to Sato of the API of licensed products for the commercial manufacture of licensed products in the licensed territory. Additionally, we have agreed to perform certain oversight, review and supporting activities for Sato, including: (i) using commercially reasonable efforts to obtain marketing approval of SB204 and SB206 in the U.S, (ii) sharing all future scientific information we may obtain during the term of the Amended Sato Agreement pertaining to SB204 and SB206, (iii) performing certain additional preclinical studies if such studies are deemed necessary by the Japanese regulatory authority, up to and not to exceed a total cost of $1.0 million, and (iv) participating in a joint committee that oversees, reviews, and approves Sato’s development and commercialization activities under the Amended Sato Agreement. Additionally, we have granted Sato the option to use our trademarks in connection with the commercialization of licensed products in the licensed territory for no additional consideration, subject to our approval of such use. We cannot estimate if, when or in what amounts such payments will become due under the Amended Sato Agreement.
The intellectual property rights granted to Sato under the Amended Sato Agreement include certain intellectual property rights which we have licensed from UNC. Under our license agreement with UNC described in “Note 3-Research and Development Licenses” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report, we are obligated to pay UNC a running royalty percentage in the low single digits on net sales of licensed products, including net sales that may be generated by Sato. Additionally, we are obligated to make payments to UNC that represent the portion of the Sato upfront and milestone payments that were estimated to be directly attributable to the UNC intellectual property rights included in the license to Sato.
We had also previously entered into an agreement with a third party to assist us in exploring the licensing opportunity which led to the execution of the Sato Agreement. We are obligated to pay the third party a low-single-digit percentage of all upfront and milestone payments the Company receives from Sato under the Amended Sato Agreement.
We have accrued certain fees that we will pay to UNC and a third party in the future upon receipt of non-contingent installment and milestone payments from Sato. As of December 31, 2020, we had recorded capitalized contract acquisition costs of $0.4 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets and other assets and had accrued $0.2 million in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 we paid fees totaling zero and $0.2 million, respectively.
See “Note 5-Revenue Recognition” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information on the Amended Sato Agreement.
Amendments to Sublicense Agreements with KNOW Bio
Pursuant to the terms of the amendments to the KNOW Bio Agreements that we entered in October 2017, we re-acquired from KNOW Bio exclusive, worldwide rights under certain United States and foreign patents and patent applications controlled by us
as of the execution date of the KNOW Bio Agreements, and patents and patent applications which became controlled by us during the three years immediately following the execution date of the KNOW Bio Agreements, directed towards nitric oxide-releasing compositions and methods of manufacturing thereof, including methods of manufacturing Nitricil compounds, and other nitric oxide-based therapeutics, to develop and commercialize products for all diagnostic, therapeutic, prophylactic and palliative uses for any disease, condition or disorder caused by certain oncoviruses, or the Oncovirus Field. KNOW Bio also granted to us an exclusive license, with the right to sublicense, under any patents and patent applications which became controlled by KNOW Bio during the three years immediately following the execution date of the KNOW Bio Agreements and directed towards nitric oxide-releasing compositions and methods of manufacturing thereof, including methods of manufacturing Nitricil compounds, and other nitric oxide-based therapeutics, but not towards medical devices, to develop and commercialize products for use in the Oncovirus Field. Additionally, KNOW Bio agreed that KNOW Bio would not commercialize any products in the Oncovirus Field during the first three years following the execution date of the KNOW Bio Agreements. The three-year period in which new patents and patent applications are added to the exclusive license and the three-year term of the commercialization non-compete both expired on December 29, 2018.
In addition to the $0.3 million non-refundable upfront payment we made upon execution of the KNOW Bio Amendments, we are obligated to make the following contingent payments in exchange for the rights granted to us in the Oncovirus Field:
For products that incorporate a certain nitric oxide-releasing composition specified in the KNOW Bio Amendments and (i) are covered by KNOW Bio patents or (ii) materially use or incorporate know-how of KNOW Bio or us related to such composition that is created during the three years immediately following the execution date of the KNOW Bio Agreements, or the Covered Products, we must make the following payments to KNOW Bio:
o A milestone payment upon the first time each Covered Product is approved by the FDA for marketing in the Oncovirus Field;
o A royalty in the low single digits on net sales of Covered Products in the Oncovirus Field until the later of the expiration of the KNOW Bio patents covering the applicable Covered Product or the expiration of regulatory exclusivity on the applicable Covered Product; and
o In the event we sublicense the rights to a Covered Product to a third party in the Oncovirus Field, the Company must pay KNOW Bio a low double-digit percentage of any clinical development or NDA approval milestones we receive from the sublicensee for the Covered Product in the Oncovirus Field.
Nitricil is not the nitric oxide-releasing composition specified in the KNOW Bio Amendments as the subject of the foregoing payments. As such, products based on Nitricil are not subject to the foregoing milestone, royalty and sublicensing payment obligations.
The rights granted to us in the Oncovirus Field in the KNOW Bio Amendments continue for so long as there is a valid patent claim under the KNOW Bio Agreements, and upon expiration continue on a perpetual non-exclusive basis, and are subject to the termination rights of KNOW Bio and us that are set forth in the KNOW Bio Agreements. In addition, under the KNOW Bio Amendments, KNOW Bio may terminate the rights granted to the Company in the Oncovirus Field without terminating the Original KNOW Bio Agreements.
See “Note 2-KNOW Bio, LLC” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information on the sublicense agreement and our assessment of KNOW Bio under the variable interest consolidation model pursuant to Financial Accounting Standards Board, or FASB, Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, 810, Consolidation.
Royalty and Milestone Payments Purchase Agreement with Reedy Creek Investments LLC
In April 2019, we entered into the Purchase Agreement with Reedy Creek pursuant to which Reedy Creek provided us funding and we are obligated to pay Reedy Creek certain ongoing quarterly payments. See the section entitled “Management’s Discussion & Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Liquidity and Capital Resources” in this Annual Report and “Note 6-Research and Development Arrangements” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information related to the Purchase Agreement.
Development Funding and Royalties Agreement with Ligand Pharmaceuticals Incorporated
In 2019, we entered into the Funding Agreement with Ligand, pursuant to which Ligand provided us funding and we are obligated to pay Ligand up to $20.0 million in milestone payments. See the section entitled “Management’s Discussion & Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Liquidity and Capital Resources” in this Annual Report and “Note
6-Research and Development Arrangements” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information related to the Funding Agreement.
Tangible Stockholder Return Plan, or the Performance Plan
In August 2018, our board of directors approved and established the Performance Plan. We believe that the Performance Plan will help us attract, retain and incentivize the highly qualified resources that are and will be necessary to execute on our operating strategy. Executive management and the board of directors believe this plan clearly and directly ties long-term employee incentive compensation to specific, significant increases in our underlying common stock price and thus directly aligns employee and stockholder objectives. Unlike our historical practice of providing long-term incentives to our employees through annual stock option grants under the 2016 Plan at the then-current market price of our common stock, the Performance Plan only provides for employees to receive long-term incentive compensation payments if the established stock price targets ($11.17 per share and $25.45 per share, subject to adjustment) are achieved.
The Performance Plan is tiered, with two separate tranches, each of which has a distinct share price target (measured as the average publicly traded share price of our common stock on the Nasdaq stock exchange for a thirty consecutive trading day period) that will trigger a distinct fixed bonus pool. The share price target for the first tranche is $11.17 per share. The share price target for the second tranche is $25.45 per share. The related contingent bonus pools for the first and second tranches are $25.0 million and $50.0 million, respectively. The compensation committee has discretion to distribute the bonus pool related to each tranche among eligible participants by establishing individual minimum bonus amounts before, as well as by distributing the remainder of the applicable pool after, the achievement of each tranche specific share price target. Otherwise, if we do not achieve one or both related share price targets, as defined, no portion of the bonus pools will be paid.
The Performance Plan provides for the bonus pool to generally be paid in the form of cash. However, the compensation committee has discretion to pay any bonus award under the Performance Plan in the form of cash, shares of our common stock or a combination thereof, provided that our board and stockholders have approved the reservation of such shares of our common stock for such payment. The share price targets will be adjusted in the event of any stock splits, cash dividends, stock dividends, combinations, reorganizations, reclassifications, or similar events. In addition, in the event of a change in control, the plan provides that a bonus pool will become due and payable to participants on a pro rata basis, as calculated and determined by the compensation committee based upon our progress toward the share price target as of the date of the change in control and subject to adjustment by the compensation committee as permitted under the plan.
The Performance Plan was effective immediately upon approval, expires on March 1, 2022, and covers all employees, including our executive officers, consultants and other persons deemed eligible by our compensation committee. The Performance Plan was subsequently amended and restated to reflect minor changes in the timing for establishing minimum bonus amounts.
See “Note 12-Tangible Stockholder Return Plan” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information on the Performance Plan.
Paycheck Protection Program
On April 22, 2020, we entered into the Note for the Loan under the PPP of approximately $1.0 million. The PPP was established under the CARES Act, and is administered by the SBA. The Loan was made through PNC Bank, National Association. Subject to the terms of the Note, the Loan bears interest at a fixed rate of one percent (1%) per annum. Principal and interest on unforgiven amounts are payable monthly commencing on the fifteenth day of the month following the First Payment Date, as defined within the Note. The Note provides that the Loan may be prepaid by the Company at any time prior to the April 22, 2022 maturity date without penalty. We have applied for forgiveness of the Loan, and no assurance is provided that we will obtain such forgiveness in whole or in part. For discussion of the Note we entered into for the Loan under the PPP, please refer to the section entitled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Paycheck Protection Program” in this Annual Report. See “Note 9-Paycheck Protection Program” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information on the Loan.
Warrants
In our March 2020 Public Offering, March 2020 Registered Direct Offering, and January 2018 public offering, we issued warrants to purchase shares of our common stock. The warrants provide each warrant holder with the right to require net cash settlement of the warrants upon the occurrence of certain fundamental transactions, provided that such transactions are within our control. For any fundamental transaction that is not within our control, including a fundamental transaction not approved by our board of directors, the warrant holder will only be entitled to receive from us or any successor entity the same type or form
of consideration (and in the same proportion) that is being offered and paid to our common stockholders in connection with the fundamental transaction, whether that consideration be in the form of cash, stock or any combination thereof. In the event of any fundamental transaction, and regardless of whether it is within our control, the settlement amount of the warrants (whether in cash, stock or a combination thereof) is determined based upon a Black-Scholes value that is calculated using inputs as specified in the warrants, including a defined volatility input equal to the greater of our 100-day historical volatility or 100%.
See the section entitled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis-Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates-Classification of Warrants and Pre-Funded Warrants Issued in Connection with Offerings of Common Stock” in this Annual Report and “Note 10-Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional discussion regarding the terms of the warrants.
Other
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with clinical research organizations for clinical trials and clinical supply manufacturing and with vendors for preclinical research studies, research supplies and other services and products for operating purposes. These contracts generally provide for termination on notice, and, therefore, we believe that our non-cancelable obligations under these agreements are not material.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under SEC rules.
Net Operating Loss and Research and Development Tax Credit Carryforwards
As of December 31, 2020, we had federal and state net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $187.3 million and $186.8 million, respectively. The net operating loss carryforwards begin to expire in 2028 and 2023 for federal and state tax purposes, respectively. We have research and development tax credits of approximately $10.5 million to offset future federal taxes. These credits begin to expire in 2028.
We record a valuation allowance to offset any net deferred tax assets if, based upon the available evidence, it is more likely than not that we will not recognize some or all of the deferred tax assets. We have had a history of net losses since inception, and, as a result, we have established a 100% valuation allowance of $62.8 million for our net deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2020. If circumstances change and we determine that we will be able to realize some or all of these net deferred tax assets in the future, we will record an adjustment to the valuation allowance.
The Tax Reform Act of 1986 contains provisions which limit the ability to utilize the net operating loss carryforwards in the case of certain events including significant changes in ownership interests. In accordance with Section 382 of the Code, a change in equity ownership of greater than 50% within a three-year period results in an annual limitation on our ability to utilize our NOL carryforwards created during the tax periods prior to the change in ownership. We have not determined whether ownership changes exceeding this threshold, including our IPO and subsequent equity offerings, have occurred. If a change in equity ownership has occurred which exceeds the Section 382 threshold, a portion of our NOL carryforwards may be limited. If our net operating loss carryforwards are limited, and we have taxable income which exceeds the permissible yearly net operating loss carryforwards, we would incur a federal income tax liability even though net operating loss carryforwards would be available in future years.
Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (JOBS Act)
In April 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, reduce certain reporting requirements for an “emerging growth company.” As an “emerging growth company,” we are electing not to take advantage of the extended transition period afforded by the JOBS Act for the implementation of new or revised accounting standards, and, as a result, we will comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth public companies. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that our decision not to take advantage of the extended transition period is irrevocable. We have chosen to rely on the other exemptions and reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, as an “emerging growth company” we are not required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Act, and (iii) disclose certain executive compensation-related items, such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the Chief Executive Officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. We may remain an emerging growth company until the last day of 2021. However, if certain events occur prior to such date, including if we become a “large accelerated filer,” our annual gross revenue equals or exceeds $1.07 billion or we issue more than $1.0 billion of non-convertible debt in any three-year period, we will cease to be an emerging growth company prior to such date.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Recently issued accounting pronouncements that we have adopted or are currently evaluating are described in detail within “Note 1-Organization and Significant Accounting Policies” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
There were no changes in or disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosures.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenue and expenses during the reporting periods. These items are monitored and analyzed by us for changes in facts and circumstances, and material changes in these estimates could occur in the future. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Changes in estimates are reflected in reported results for the period in which they become known. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the notes to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report, we believe that the following accounting policies are critical to the process of making significant judgments and estimates in the preparation of our financial statements and understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Assessment of Long-Lived Assets for Held-for-Sale Classification and Potential Impairment; Assets and Liabilities Measured at Fair Value on a Non-Recurring Basis
As described in “Note 16-Assets Held for Sale, Impairment Charges” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report, we evaluated all of our long-lived assets for potential held for sale classification and potential impairment as of June 29, 2020. This evaluation, which included the conduct of nonrecurring fair value measurements pursuant to FASB ASC 820, Fair Value Measurements, required the use of significant judgments and estimates.
The carrying values of long-lived assets within disposal groups that met the criteria to be classified as held for sale were adjusted to equal the disposal groups’ fair value less cost to sell. Quoted or estimated selling prices were used to estimate the fair value of the disposal group assets, which were determined to be Level 2 or Level 3 inputs within the fair value measurement hierarchy in ASC 820, respectively.
Long-lived assets in certain asset groups that remained classified as held and used were assessed for potential impairment. For those asset groups that had indicators of impairment and failed a test of recoverability, their carrying value was adjusted to equal their estimated fair value. For the asset group consisting of a right-of-use lease asset, leasehold improvements and other
property affixed to the Morrisville, North Carolina, facility, we determined that the lease terms established in the new tenant’s prime lease of the Morrisville, North Carolina, facility were representative of the asset group’s highest and best use and were consistent with market terms; therefore, such terms were considered to be the best available valuation inputs for the fair value estimate, and such inputs were determined to be Level 3 inputs within the fair value measurement hierarchy. For the asset group consisting of other property and equipment not directly associated with our continuing research, development and pilot scale drug manufacturing capabilities, we determined that a market participant was unlikely to pay any material value for such assets, and, therefore, we determined that their fair value was zero. The inputs used to estimate fair value of this asset group were determined to be Level 3 inputs within the fair value measurement hierarchy. Given the impairment recorded among our long-lived assets, it is reasonably possible that changes in judgments and assumptions we used to estimate the fair value of such assets or other circumstances, including changes in our intended use of such assets, could cause us to consider some portion or all of the remaining long-lived assets to become impaired.
Leases
We lease office space and certain equipment under non-cancelable lease agreements. Prior to January 1, 2019, we applied the accounting guidance in ASC 840, Leases, to our lease agreements. The leases were reviewed for classification as operating or capital leases. For operating leases, rent was recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease period. For capital leases, we recorded the leased asset with a corresponding liability and amortized the asset over the lease term. Payments were recorded as reductions to the liability with an appropriate interest charge recorded based on the then-outstanding remaining liability.
Effective January 1, 2019, we adopted Accounting Standards Update No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842) using the modified retrospective transition method and established our lease accounting policy pursuant to this new standard. We initially applied the transition provisions at January 1, 2019, which allowed us to continue to apply the legacy guidance in ASC 840 for periods prior to 2019. Based on the new guidance, we assess all arrangements, that convey the right to control the use of property, plant and equipment, at inception, to determine if it is, or contains, a lease based on the unique facts and circumstances present in that arrangement. For those leases identified, we determine the lease classification, recognition, and measurement at the lease commencement date. For arrangements that contain a lease we: (i) identify lease and non-lease components; (ii) determine the consideration in the contract; (iii) determine whether the lease is an operating or financing lease; and (iv) recognize lease Right of Use, or ROU, assets and corresponding lease liabilities. Lease liabilities are recorded based on the present value of lease payments over the expected lease term. The corresponding ROU asset is measured from the initial lease liability, adjusted by (i) accrued or prepaid rents; (ii) remaining unamortized initial direct costs and lease incentives; and (iii) any impairments of the ROU asset. The interest rate implicit in our lease contracts is typically not readily determinable and as such, we use our incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at the lease commencement date, which represents an internally developed rate that would be incurred to borrow, on a collateralized basis, over a similar term, an amount equal to the lease payments in a similar economic environment.
See “Note 1-Organization and Significant Accounting Policies” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information regarding our accounting policies for our lease agreements.
Revenue Recognition
Beginning in 2017, we began to generate revenue from (i) non-refundable upfront fees, milestone payments and royalties earned under license agreements and (ii) providing research and development services.
Effective January 1, 2018, we adopted ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, using the full retrospective adoption method and established our revenue recognition accounting policy pursuant to this new standard. See “Note 1-Organization and Significant Accounting Policies” and “Note 5-Revenue Recognition” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for further information and accounting considerations related to revenue recognition, including revenue recognition pertaining to licensing arrangements.
Licensing Arrangements
We entered into the Sato Agreement in the first quarter of 2017, and the Sato Amendment in October 2018, and may enter into additional licensing arrangements in the future, in exchange for non-refundable upfront payments and potential future milestone and royalty payments.
If the license of our Company’s intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the arrangement, we recognize revenues from non-refundable, upfront fees allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the customer and the customer is able to use and benefit from the license. For licenses that are bundled with other promises, we utilize judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the
combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the estimated performance period and the appropriate method of measuring progress during the performance period for purposes of recognizing revenue. We re-evaluate the estimated performance period and measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjust related revenue recognition accordingly.
At the inception of each arrangement that includes development milestone payments, we evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable of being reached and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. The transaction price is then allocated to each performance obligation on a relative stand-alone selling price basis, for which we recognize revenue as or when the performance obligations under the contract are satisfied. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we re-evaluate the probability of achievement of such development milestones and any related constraint, and if necessary, adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect license and collaboration revenue and earnings in the period of adjustment.
Amounts received prior to satisfying all revenue recognition criteria are recorded as deferred revenue in the accompanying balance sheets.
Specifically related to the Sato Agreement, as amended, we recognize revenue using a time-based input method that results in straight-line recognition over the Company’s performance period. We monitor and reassess the estimated performance period for purposes of revenue recognition during each reporting period. Therefore, if the duration of the combined SB204 and SB206 development program timeline is affected by the establishment or subsequent adjustments to a mutually agreed upon SB204 and SB206 development plan in the Japan territory, we will adjust its estimated performance period for revenue recognition purposes accordingly, as needed. For further information regarding such timeline, see “Note 5-Revenue Recognition” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Government research contracts and grants revenue.
Under the terms of the contracts and grants awarded, we are entitled to receive reimbursement of our allowable direct expenses, allocated overhead, general and administrative expenses and payment of other specified amounts. Revenues from development and support activities under government research contracts and grants are recorded in the period in which the related costs are incurred. Associated expenses are recognized when incurred as research and development expense. Revenue recognized in excess of amounts collected are recorded as contracts and grants receivable. Any of the funding sources may, at their discretion, request reimbursement for expenses or return of funds, or both, as a result of noncompliance by us with the terms of the grants. No reimbursement of expenses or return of funds has been requested or made since inception of the contracts and grants. See “Note 5-Revenue Recognition” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information regarding government grants.
Research and Development Expenses
Accrued Expenses
As part of the process of preparing financial statements, we are required to estimate accrued expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with applicable vendor personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued expenses include fees incurred by CROs in connection with clinical trials, fees paid to investigative sites in connection with clinical trials, professional service fees and unpaid salaries, wages and benefits.
We accrue our expenses related to clinical trials based on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with multiple research institutions and CROs that conduct and manage clinical trials on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of patients and the completion of clinical trial milestones. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we will adjust the accrual accordingly. If we do not identify costs that we have begun to incur or if we underestimate or overestimate the level of services performed or the costs of these services, our actual expenses could differ from our estimates. We do not anticipate the future settlement of existing accruals to differ materially from our estimates.
Reedy Creek Purchase Agreement
We have determined that the Purchase Agreement with Reedy Creek is within the scope of ASC 730-20, Research and Development Arrangements. We concluded that there has not been a substantive and genuine transfer of risk related to the Purchase Agreement as (i) Reedy Creek has the opportunity to recover its investment regardless of the outcome of the research and development programs within the scope of the agreement (prior to commercialization of any in scope assets through potential out-licensing agreements and related potential future milestone payments); and (ii) there is a presumption that we are obligated to pay Reedy Creek amounts equal to its investment based on the related party relationship at the time the parties entered into the Purchase Agreement. The Purchase Agreement is a broad funding arrangement, due to (i) the multi-asset, or portfolio approach including three developmental assets that are within the scope of the arrangement; and (ii) Reedy Creek’s approximate 5% ownership of our outstanding shares of common stock at the time of entry into the Purchase Agreement.
As such, we have determined that the appropriate accounting treatment under ASC 730-20 was to record the initial proceeds of $25.0 million as cash and cash equivalents, as we had the ability to direct the usage of funds, and a long-term liability within our classified balance sheet. The long-term liability will remain until we receive future milestones from other potential third parties, as defined within the Purchase Agreement, of which 25% will be contractually owed to Reedy Creek. If potential future milestones are received by us, and become partly due to Reedy Creek, the corresponding partial repayment to Reedy Creek will result in a ratable reduction of the total long-term obligation to repay the initial purchase price.
See “Note 6-Research and Development Arrangements” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional discussion regarding the applicable accounting treatment of the Purchase Agreement.
Ligand Funding Agreement
We have determined that the Ligand transaction is within the scope of ASC 730-20 as it represents an obligation to perform contractual services for the development of SB206 using commercially reasonable efforts. In addition, the Funding Agreement also states that if all development of SB206 is ceased prior to the first regulatory approval, we must pay to Ligand an amount equal to the purchase price less the amount spent in accordance with the development budget on development activities conducted prior to such cessation. As such, we concluded that the appropriate accounting treatment under ASC 730-20 was to record the initial proceeds of $12.0 million, as a liability and as restricted cash on our consolidated balance sheet, as the funds could only be used for the progression of SB206.
We amortize the liability ratably during each reporting period, based on the Ligand funding as a percentage of the total direct costs we incur during the reporting period related to the estimated total cost to progress the SB206 program to a regulatory approval in the United States. The ratable Ligand funding is presented within the accompanying consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss as an offset to research and development expenses associated with the SB206 program.
The initial restricted cash balance was also reduced ratably during interim reporting periods in 2019 in a manner consistent with the amortization method for the Ligand funding liability balance. As of December 31, 2019, the aggregate amount spent in accordance with the SB206 development budget on SB206 development activities had exceeded the $12.0 million purchase price, causing the aforementioned repayment provision provided for in the Funding Agreement to no longer be enforceable. Therefore, we reported no restricted cash balance related to the Funding Agreement, as of December 31, 2019 in our consolidated balance sheet.
See “Note 6-Research and Development Arrangements” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional discussion regarding the applicable accounting treatment of the Funding Agreement.
Classification of Warrants and Pre-Funded Warrants Issued in Connection with Offerings of Common Stock
Warrants
In our March 2020 Public Offering, March 2020 Registered Direct Offering, and January 2018 public offering we issued warrants to purchase shares of our common stock. The warrants provide each warrant holder with the right to require net cash settlement of the warrants upon the occurrence of certain fundamental transactions, provided that such transactions are within our control. For any fundamental transaction that is not within our control, including a fundamental transaction not approved by our board of directors, the warrant holder will only be entitled to receive from us or any successor entity the same type or form of consideration (and in the same proportion) that is being offered and paid to our common stockholders in connection with the fundamental transaction, whether that consideration be in the form of cash, stock or any combination thereof. In the event of any fundamental transaction, and regardless of whether it is within our control, the settlement amount of the warrants (whether in cash, stock or a combination thereof) is determined based upon a Black-Scholes value that is calculated using inputs as specified in the warrants, including a defined volatility input equal to the greater of our 100-day historical volatility or 100%.
We assessed the warrants for appropriate equity or liability classification pursuant to our accounting policy described in “Note 1-Organization and Significant Accounting Policies” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. During this assessment, we determined that (i) the warrants do not constitute a liability under ASC 480; (ii) the warrants meet the definition of a derivative under ASC 815; (iii) the warrant holder’s option to receive a net cash settlement payment only becomes exercisable upon the occurrence of certain specified fundamental transactions that are within our control; (iv) upon the occurrence of a fundamental transaction that is not within our control, the warrant holder would receive the same type or form of consideration offered and paid to common stockholders; (v) the warrants are indexed to our common stock; and (vi) the warrants meet all other conditions for equity classification under ASC 480 and ASC 815. Based on the results of this assessment, we concluded that the warrants are freestanding equity-linked derivative instruments that meet the criteria for the own-equity scope exception to derivative accounting under ASC 815. Accordingly, the warrants are classified as equity and are accounted for as a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of issuance.
See “Note 10-Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional discussion regarding the terms of the warrants and the applicable accounting treatment.
Pre-Funded Warrants
In the March 2020 Public Offering and March 2020 Registered Direct Offering, we also issued pre-funded warrants to purchase shares of our common stock. The pre-funded warrants do not provide each warrant holder with the option to settle any unexercised warrants for cash in the event of any fundamental transactions. In all fundamental transaction scenarios, the warrant holder will only be entitled to receive from us or any successor entity the same type or form of consideration (and in the same proportion) that is being offered and paid to our stockholders in connection with the fundamental transaction, whether that consideration be in the form of cash, stock or any combination thereof. The pre-funded warrants also include a separate provision whereby the exercisability of the warrants may be limited if, upon exercise, the warrant holder or any of its affiliates would beneficially own more than 4.99% (or an amount up to 9.99% if the holder so elects) of our common stock.
We assessed the pre-funded warrants for appropriate equity or liability classification pursuant to our accounting policy described in “Note 1-Organization and Significant Accounting Policies” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. During this assessment, we determined the pre-funded warrants are freestanding instruments that do not meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480 and do not meet the definition of a derivative pursuant to ASC 815. The pre-funded warrants are indexed to our common stock and meet all other conditions for equity classification under ASC 480 and ASC 815. Based on the results of this assessment, we concluded that the pre-funded warrants are freestanding equity-linked financial instruments that meet the criteria for equity classification under ASC 480 and ASC 815. Accordingly, the pre-funded warrants are classified as equity and are accounted for as a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of issuance.
See “Note 10-Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional discussion regarding the terms of the pre-funded warrants and the applicable accounting treatment.
Stock-Based Compensation
Determination of the Fair Value of Stock-based Compensation Grants
We record the fair value of stock options, and other stock-based compensation issued to employees and non-employees as of the grant date as stock-based compensation expense. We typically recognize compensation expense over the requisite service period, which is typically the vesting period.
We estimate the fair value of our stock-based awards to employees and non-employees using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which requires the input of assumptions, some of which are highly subjective, including (i) the fair value of our common stock on the date of grant, (ii) the expected volatility of our stock, (iii) the expected term of the award, (iv) the risk-free interest rate and (v) expected dividends. In applying these assumptions, we considered the following factors:
•Due to the lack of company-specific historical and implied volatility data, we have based our estimate of expected volatility on the historical volatility of a group of similar companies that are publicly traded. We also considered characteristics such as industry, stage of life cycle, financial leverage, enterprise value, risk profiles and position within the industry, along with historical share price information sufficient to meet the expected life of the stock-based awards. We compute the historical volatility data using the daily closing prices for the selected companies’ shares during the equivalent period of the calculated expected term of our stock-based awards. We will continue to apply this process until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of our own stock price becomes available.
•We have estimated the expected term of our employee stock options using the “simplified” method, whereby, the expected life equals the average of the vesting term and the original contractual term of the option.
•The risk-free interest rate is based on the yields of United States Treasury securities with maturities similar to the expected term of granted stock-based awards.
•We have never declared or paid any cash dividends to common stockholders and do not presently plan to pay cash dividends in the foreseeable future. Consequently, we use an expected dividend yield of zero.
See “Note 11-Stock-Based Compensation” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional detail including the weighted average assumptions used in the Black-Scholes option-pricing model for awards granted in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
We are also required to estimate forfeitures at the time of grant, and to revise those estimates in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from estimates. We use historical data to estimate pre-vesting option forfeitures and record stock-based compensation expense only for those awards that are expected to vest. To the extent that actual forfeitures differ from our estimates, the difference is recorded as a cumulative adjustment in the period the estimates were revised. Stock-based compensation expense recognized in the financial statements is based on awards that are ultimately expected to vest.
Tangible Stockholder Return Plan, or Performance Plan
On August 2, 2018, our board of directors approved and established the Tangible Stockholder Return Plan, which is a performance-based long-term incentive plan. The Performance Plan is tiered, with two separate tranches, each of which has a distinct share price target (measured as the average publicly traded share price of our common stock on the Nasdaq stock exchange for a 30 consecutive trading day period) that will, if achieved, trigger a distinct fixed bonus pool. The share price target for the first tranche and related bonus pool are $11.17 per share and $25.0 million, respectively. The share price target for the second tranche and related bonus pool are $25.45 per share and $50.0 million, respectively.
We have concluded that the Performance Plan is within the scope of ASC Topic 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation as the underlying plan obligations are based on the potential attainment of certain market share price targets of our common stock. Any awards under the Performance Plan would be payable, at the discretion of our compensation committee following the achievement of the applicable share price target, in cash, shares of our common stock, or a combination thereof, provided that, prior to any payment in common stock, our stockholders have approved the reservation of shares of our common stock for such payment.
ASC 718 requires that a liability-based award should be classified as a liability on our consolidated balance sheets and the amount of compensation cost recognized should be based on the fair value of the liability. When a liability-based award includes both a service and market condition, the market condition is taken into account when determining the appropriate method to estimate fair value and the compensation cost is amortized over the estimated service period. Therefore, the liability associated with the Performance Plan obligation is recorded within other long-term liabilities on the accompanying consolidated balance sheets included in this Annual Report at the estimated fair value on the date of issuance and is re-valued each subsequent reporting period end with adjustments to the fair value recognized as stock-based compensation expense within operating expenses in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations included in this Annual Report.
The fair value of obligations under the Performance Plan are estimated using a Monte Carlo simulation approach. Our common stock price is simulated under the Geometric Brownian Motion framework under each simulation path. The other assumptions for the Monte Carlo simulation include the risk-free interest rate, estimated volatility and the expected term. Expected stock price volatility is based on our actual historical volatility over a historical period equal to the expected remaining life of the plan, adjusted for certain market considerations and other factors. The fair value of the underlying common stock is the published closing market price by Nasdaq as of each reporting date, as adjusted for significant events, as necessary. The risk-free interest rate is based on the United States Treasury yield curve in effect on the date of valuation equal to the remaining expected life of the plan. The dividend yield percentage is zero because we do not currently pay dividends, nor do we intend to do so during the expected term of the plan. The expected life of bonus awards under the Performance Plan is assumed to be equivalent to the remaining contractual term based on the estimated service period including the service inception date of the plan participants and the contractual end of the Performance Plan.
Our estimates underlying the assumptions used in the Monte Carlo simulation valuation model are subject to risks and uncertainties and may change over time. Such changes could have a significant effect on our reported net losses in future periods.
See “Note 12-Tangible Stockholder Return Plan” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for the significant assumptions used in estimating the fair value of the Performance Plan and see “Note 1-Organization and Significant Accounting Policies” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for our accounting policy pertaining to the fair value of financial instruments.
Stock Appreciation Rights
SARs that include cash settlement features are accounted for as liability-based awards pursuant to ASC 718 Compensation-Stock Compensation. The fair value of such SARs is estimated using a Black-Scholes option-pricing model on each financial reporting date using expected volatility, risk-free interest rate, expected life and fair value per share assumptions.
The fair value of each liability award is estimated with a valuation model that uses certain assumptions, such as the award date, expected volatility, risk-free interest rate, expected life of the award and fair value per share assumptions. Due to limited historical data, we estimate stock price volatility based on the actual volatility of comparable publicly traded companies over the expected term. In evaluating similarity, we considered factors such as industry, stage of life cycle, financial leverage, size and risk profile. The expected term for liability-based awards is the estimated contractual life. The risk-free rate is based on the United States Treasury yield curve during the expected life of the award.
See “Note 11-Stock-Based Compensation” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for the significant assumptions used in estimating the fair value of SARs.