Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
In preparing the consolidated financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (U.S. GAAP), we have adopted various accounting policies. Our most significant accounting policies are disclosed in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements.
The preparation of the consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Our estimates and assumptions, including those related to the ability to continue as going concern, the recoverability of inventory and long-lived assets, the fair value of stock-based compensation, the fair value of debt, the fair value of derivative liabilities, recognition of loss contingencies and deferred tax valuation allowances are updated as appropriate, which in most cases is at least quarterly. We base our estimates on historical experience, or various assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances and the results form the basis for making judgments about the reported values of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. Actual results may materially differ from these estimates.
Estimates are considered to be critical if they meet both of the following criteria: (1) the estimate requires assumptions about material matters that are uncertain at the time the accounting estimates are made, and (2) other materially different estimates could have been reasonably made or material changes in the estimates are reasonably likely to occur from period to period. Our critical accounting estimates include the following:
Revenue Recognition:
On January 1, 2018, we adopted Financial Accounting Standard Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standard Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers” (“ASC Topic 606”) using the modified retrospective method applied to those contracts which were not completed as of January 1, 2018. The cumulative impact of adopting ASC Topic 606 resulted in no changes to retained earnings at January 1, 2018. The impact to revenue for the year ended December 31, 2018 was an increase of $4,403 as a result of applying ASC 606 to certain revenues generated through online distributors which are now presented gross as we have control over providing the products related to such revenues. This new revenue recognition standard (new guidance) has a five-step process: a) Determine whether a contract exists; b) Identify the performance obligations; c) Determine the transaction price; d) Allocate the transaction price; and e) Recognize revenue when (or as) performance obligations are satisfied. The Company has evaluated the impact of ASC Topic 606 and determined that there is no change to the Company’s accounting policies, except for the recording of certain product sales to a distributor, in which a portion of the cash proceeds received is remitted back to the distributor. Under ASC Topic 606, the Company determined that these sales should be recorded on a gross basis.
Our revenues are primarily derived from customer orders for the purchase of our products. We recognize revenues as performance obligations are fulfilled when control passes to our customers. We record revenues net of promotions and discounts. For certain product sales to a distributor, we record revenue including a portion of the cash proceeds that is remitted back to the distributor.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts: We grant credit without collateral to our customers based on our evaluation of a particular customer’s credit worthiness. Accounts receivable are due 30 days after the issuance of the invoice. In addition, allowances for doubtful accounts are maintained for potential credit losses based on the age of the accounts receivable and the results of periodic credit evaluations of our customers’ financial condition. Accounts receivable are written off after collection efforts have been deemed to be unsuccessful. Accounts written off as uncollectible are deducted from the allowance for doubtful accounts, while subsequent recoveries are netted against the provision for doubtful accounts expense. We generally do not charge interest on accounts receivable. We use third party payment processors and are required to maintain reserve balances, which are included in accounts receivable.
Our accounts receivable are stated at estimated net realizable value. Accounts receivable are comprised of balances due from customers net of estimated allowances for uncollectible accounts. In determining collectability, historical trends are evaluated and specific customer issues are reviewed to arrive at appropriate allowances.
Inventory Obsolescence: Inventories are valued at the lower of average cost or market value. We periodically perform an evaluation of inventory for excess, impairments and obsolete items. At December 31, 2019, our inventory consisted entirely of raw materials and finished goods that are utilized in the manufacturing of finished goods. These raw materials generally have expiration dates in excess of 10 years. Commencing on October 1, 2019, we classify inventory as short-term or long-term inventory based on timing of when it is expected to be consumed.
Long-Lived Assets: The carrying value of long-lived assets is reviewed annually and on a regular basis for the existence of facts and circumstances that may suggest impairment. If indicators of impairment are present, we determine whether the sum of the estimated undiscounted future cash flows attributable to the long-lived asset in question is less than its carrying amount. If less, we measure the amount of the impairment based on the amount that the carrying value of the impaired asset exceeds the discounted cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposal of the impaired assets.
Derivative Financial Instrument: Management evaluates all of its financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives. For derivative financial instruments that are accounted for as liabilities, the derivative instrument is initially recorded at its fair value and is then re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported as charges or credits to income. For option-based simple derivative financial instruments, the Company uses the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to value the derivative instruments at inception and subsequent valuation dates. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period. Derivative instrument liabilities are classified in the balance sheet as current or non-current based on whether or not net-cash settlement of the derivative instrument could be required within 12 months of the balance sheet date.
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks.
Convertible Debt: For convertible debt that does not contain an embedded derivative that requires bifurcation, the conversion feature is evaluated to determine if the rate of conversion is below market value and should be categorized as a beneficial conversion feature (“BCF”). A BCF related to debt is recorded by the Company as a debt discount and with the offset recorded to equity. The related convertible debt is recorded net of the discount for the BCF. The discount is amortized as additional interest expense over the term of the debt with the resulting debt discount being accreted over the term of the note.
The Fair Value Measurement Option: We have elected the fair value measurement option for convertible debt with embedded derivatives that require bifurcation, and record the entire hybrid financing instrument at fair value under the guidance of ASC Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC Topic 815”). The Company reports interest expense, including accrued interest, related to this convertible debt under the fair value option, within the change in fair value of convertible notes and derivatives in the accompanying consolidated statement of operations.
Derivative Accounting for Convertible Debt and Options and Warrants: The Company evaluated the terms and conditions of the convertible debt under the guidance of ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging. The conversion terms of some of the convertible notes are variable based on certain factors, such as the future price of the Company’s common stock. The number of shares of common stock to be issued is based on the future price of the Company’s common stock. The number of shares of common stock issuable upon conversion of the debt is indeterminate. Due to the fact that the number of shares of common stock issuable could exceed the Company’s authorized share limit, the equity environment is tainted, and all additional convertible debt and options and warrants are included in the value of the derivative liabilities. Pursuant to ASC 815-15, Embedded Derivatives, the fair values of the convertible debt, options and warrants and shares to be issued were recorded as derivative liabilities on the issuance date and revalued at each reporting period.
Share-Based Compensation: We record share-based compensation in accordance with FASB ASC 718, Stock Compensation. FASB ASC 718 requires that the cost resulting from all share-based transactions are recorded in the financial statements over the respective service periods. It establishes fair value as the measurement objective in accounting for share-based payment arrangements and requires all entities to apply a fair-value-based measurement in accounting for share-based payment transactions with employees. FASB ASC 718 also establishes fair value as the measurement objective for transactions in which an entity acquires goods or services from non-employees in share-based payment transactions.
Accomplishments during 2019 & Subsequent Accomplishments
On April 10, 2019, we announced that we had responded to an FDA warning letter that was issued on March 11, 2019 regarding our website and social media sites for the sales and marketing of our Nyloxin® products. In response to the FDA’s letter, we explained the basis of each of our claims as they relate to the concerns identified in the Warning Letter and made any and all necessary changes to the marketing materials for the Nyloxin Products to properly and legally continue to market and distribute its products.
On May 30, 2019, we announced that the iRemedy Healthcare Companies added the entire Nyloxin product line to their marketplace at www.IRemedy.com.
On September 22, 2020, Dr. Dale VanderPutten, our Chief Scientific Officer was invited by the Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA) to present our nerve agent countermeasure technology in a Tech Watch talk to an audience of military and civilian experts in chem/bio defense. The talk titled “A Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptor (nAChR) Directed Organophosphate Countermeasure” was presented in a virtual internet meeting to a select expert audience invited by DTRA. The consensus of the comments and questions on the presentation supported the idea that despite past efforts, there remains an unmet need for nAChR directed defenses and that our demonstration of human safety in the clinic and pre-clinical proof of concept deserves aggressive follow up.
On November 4, 2020, we announced the elimination of toxic institutional debt as the last institutional note was purchased by a long-term individual investor.
On November 11, 2020, we announced that Nyloxin has been accepted to be listed on the Walmart Marketplace and is now available there for purchase on www.Walmart.com.
On February 12, 2021, we announced that we are focusing on our intellectual property portfolio and have engaged new IP attorneys at Christopher & Weisberg P.A.
On February 23, 2021, we provided updates on our work in improving our existing facilities for manufacturing and validation of our drug products. This included the renewal of our lease for our current lab space and bringing all of manufacturing in-house.
On March 11, 2021, we announced that we had engaged AccuReg, Inc. as outside Regulatory and Quality Assurance consultants as part of our work in improving our existing facilities for manufacturing and validation of our drug products.
On March 16, 2021, we announced our plans for the marketing and distribution of Luxury Feet; an over-the-counter pain reliever and anti-inflammatory product that is designed for women who experience pain or discomfort due to high heels and stilettos.
On April 15, 2021, we announced that our newest product, Luxury Feet, was available for purchase on Amazon.com.
On May 24, 2021, we announced today plans for expanding the marketing of our over-the-counter pain relievers and anti-inflammatory products by working with influencers on several social media platforms. These will include celebrities as well as professional and Olympic athletes that have benefitted from our products.
On May 27, 2021, we provided updates on increasing our manufacturing capabilities for the production of our line of over-the-counter pain relievers and anti-inflammatory drugs. As part of this process, we have completed the design and purchase for a new liquid filling line that includes automatic filling, capping, coding, labeling and heat shrinking for most of our products. The new equipment will allow production of up to 40 bottles per minute, which greatly increases our manufacturing capacity. The equipment is expected to be validated, certified and in production by early July of 2021.
On June 2, 2021, we announced that we had signed an agreement with professional snowboarder Jake Vedder as a celebrity endorser of Nyloxin for Chronic Pain relief. Mr. Vedder will provide marketing content, videos and testimonials on the use of our product and as a social media influencer.
On June 4, 2021, we announced our plans for increasing sales of our over-the-counter pain relievers through private label agreements that will rebrand Nyloxin. The first private label distributor contract has been executed with sales expected to start within the next 4-6 weeks. Their marketing plan includes direct sales, targeted landing pages and aggressive marketing through social media.
Results of Operations
Status of Operations
In November 2014, we announced the recertification of our laboratory facility as the first step in re-engaging our drug development activities. In September, 2015 we received Orphan designation from the FDA for our lead drug candidate, RPI-78M for the treatment of Pediatric Multiple Sclerosis. This will allow us to shorten the timeline on clinical studies and may allow an eventual Fast Track through the approval process. We are currently working with our consultants to prepare a pre-IND meeting with the FDA in order to gain approval of a protocol for a Phase I/II clinical study in Pediatric MS. Our goal is to begin the study by the end of 2021.
We estimate that we will require approximately $600,000 to fund our existing operations and the operations of our subsidiary ReceptoPharm over the next twelve months. These costs include: (i) compensation for four (4) full-time employees; (ii) compensation for various consultants who we deem critical to our business; (iii) general office expenses including rent and utilities; (iv) product liability insurance; and (v) outside legal and accounting services. These costs reflected in (i) - (v) do not include research and development costs or other costs associated with clinical studies.
We began generating revenues from the sale of Cobroxin® in the fourth quarter of 2009 and from the sale of Nyloxin® and Nyloxin® Extra Strength in January of 2011. We began sales of Pet Pain-Away in December 2014. While sales have decreased year over year, they have been limited and inconsistent. Our ability to meet our future operating expenses is highly dependent on the amount of such future revenues. If future revenues from the sale of Nyloxin® and Pet Pain-Away are insufficient to cover our operating expenses we may need to raise additional equity capital, which could result in substantial dilution to existing shareholders. There can be no assurance that we will be able to raise sufficient equity capital to fund our working capital requirements on terms acceptable to us, or at all. We may also seek additional loans from our officers and directors; however, there can be no assurance that we will be successful in securing such additional loans.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Sales for the year ended December 31, 2019 were $104,393 compared to $130,596 for the comparable period in 2018. All of the sales in 2019 and 2018 were related to product sales. On January 1, 2018, we adopted ASC 606 using the modified retrospective method applied to those contracts which were not completed as of January 1, 2018. Results for reporting periods beginning January 1, 2018 are presented under ASC 606, while prior period amounts are not adjusted and continue to be reported in accordance with our historic revenue recognition methodology under ASC 605, Revenue Recognition. The impact to revenue for the year ended December 31, 2018 was an increase of $4,403 as a result of applying ASC 606 to certain revenues generated through online distributors which are now presented gross as we have control over providing the products related to such revenues. The decrease in sales is primarily attributable to an overall decrease in sales of Nyloxin®.
Cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 was $45,730 and $68,777. Cost of sales includes the direct costs associated with manufacturing, shipping and handling costs. Our gross profit margin for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $58,663 or 56.19% compared to $61,819 or 47.3% for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in our profit margin is primarily due to decrease in the manufacturing cost. In addition, we had an impairment of prepaid inventory of $23,948 and $47,757 for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, due to slow-moving inventory.
Selling, general and administrative expenses (“SG&A”) decreased $184,635 or 13.31% from $1,387,454 for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $1,202,819 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is due to the overall decrease in professional fees.
Bad debt expense decreased $443,681 or 87.78% from $505,470 for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $61,789 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Interest expense, including related party interest expense, decreased $328,081 or 55.60%, from $590,106 for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $262,025 for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily due to decrease of amortization of loan discount in the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018.
We carry certain of our debentures and common stock warrants at fair value. For the year ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, the liability related to these hybrid instruments fluctuated, resulting in a loss of $5,184,445 and $2,146,950, respectively. Interest expense on these debentures is included in the fair value loss in the statements of operations.
Gain on settlement of debts, accounts payable, and accrued expenses decreased $813,137 or 89.77%, from $905,758 for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $92,621 for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease in gain was due to the increase in loss on settlement of debts and accounts payable through issuance of stocks, offset by a gain of $280,000 from adjusting the settlement accrual for a litigation matter. Stock issued for loan modification decreased $166,835 or 95.59% from $174,535 for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $7,700 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Our net loss increased by $2,706,747 or 69.68%, from $3,884,695 for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $6,591,442 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
During December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, we had negative cash from operations of approximately $0.70 million and $1.00 million. Our lack of cash, significant losses and working capital and stockholders’ deficits raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. For the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, we have experienced significant losses totaling $6,591,442 and $3,884,695, respectively and had an accumulated deficit of $67,864,284 for the period from our inception to December 31, 2019. In addition, we had working capital and stockholders’ deficits at December 31, 2019 of $10,931,827 and $11,701,035, respectively.
Our ability to continue as a going concern is contingent upon our ability to secure additional financing, increase ownership equity and attain profitable operations. In addition, our ability to continue as a going concern must be considered in light of the problems, expenses and complications frequently encountered in established markets and the competitive environment in which we operate.
As of December 31, 2019, we had $0 in cash and owed approximately $2.73 million in vendor payables and accrued expenses. We currently do not have sufficient cash to sustain our operations for the next 12 months and will require additional financing or an increase in sales in order to execute our operating plan and continue as a going concern. Our plan is to continue to increase sales of our products and attempt to secure adequate funding to bridge the commercialization of our Nyloxin® and Pet Pain-Away products. We cannot predict whether additional financing will be in the form of equity, debt, or another form and we may be unable to obtain the necessary additional capital on a timely basis, on acceptable terms, or at all. In the event that these financing sources do not materialize, or that we are unsuccessful in increasing our revenues and profits, we may be unable to implement our current plans for expansion, repay our obligations as they become due or continue as a going concern, any of which circumstances would have a material adverse effect on our business prospects, financial condition and results of operations.
Historically, we have relied upon loans from our Chief Executive Officer Rik J Deitsch, to fund costs associated with our operations. These loans are unsecured, accrue interest at a rate of 4.0% per annum and are due on demand. At December 31, 2019, the balance due to our President and CEO, Rik Deitsch, is $122,812, which is an unsecured demand loan that bears interest at 4%. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we advanced $134,015 to and collected $5,000 from Mr. Deitsch and the Companies owned by him. Additionally, accrued interest on the demand loan was $6,330 and is included in the due to officer account. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded a bad debt expense of $59,000. The Company has fully reserved receivables from companies owned by the Company’s CEO. The reserve was $564,470 as of December 31, 2019, which represents a full valuation allowance for amounts owed by these Companies.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we raised net cash proceeds of $782,374 through the issuance of convertible notes. Current operations are being funded through a combination of product sales, loans from our CEO and convertible notes.
Impact of COVID-19 on our Operations
The ramifications of the outbreak of the novel strain of COVID-19, reported to have started in December 2019 and spread globally, are filled with uncertainty and changing quickly. Our operations have continued during the COVID-19 pandemic and we have not had significant disruption. Beginning in June 2020, the Company experienced a delay in retail rollout as a downstream implication of the slowing economy. We also closed our Coral Springs office in effort to save money. During May 2020, we received approval from SBA to fund our request for a PPP loan for $64,895. We intended to use the proceeds primarily for payroll costs. During April and June 2020, we obtained the loan in the amount of $154,900 from SBA under its Economic Injury Disaster Loan assistance program. We intended to use the proceeds primarily for working capital purpose.
The Company is operating in a rapidly changing environment so the extent to which COVID-19 impacts its business, operations and financial results from this point forward will depend on numerous evolving factors that the Company cannot accurately predict. Those factors include the following: the duration and scope of the pandemic; governmental, business and individuals’ actions that have been and continue to be taken in response to the pandemic; and the distribution of testing and a vaccine.
Uncertainties and Trends
Our operations and possible revenues are dependent now and in the future upon the following factors:
● Whether we successfully develop and commercialize products from our research and development activities.
● If we fail to compete effectively in the intensely competitive biotechnology area, our operations and market position will be negatively impacted.
● If we fail to successfully execute our planned partnering and out-licensing of products or technologies, our future performance will be adversely affected.
● The recent economic downturn and related credit and financial market crisis may adversely affect our ability to obtain financing, conduct our operations and realize opportunities to successfully bring our technologies to market.
● Biotechnology industry related litigation is substantial and may continue to rise, leading to greater costs and unpredictable litigation.
● If we fail to comply with extensive legal/regulatory requirements affecting the healthcare industry, we will face increased costs, and possibly penalties and business losses.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not entered into any transaction, agreement or other contractual arrangement with an entity unconsolidated with us under whom we have:
● An obligation under a guarantee contract.
● A retained or contingent interest in assets transferred to the unconsolidated entity or similar arrangement that serves as credit, liquidity or market risk support to such entity for such assets.
● Any obligation, including a contingent obligation, under a contract that would be accounted for as a derivative instrument.
● Any obligation, including a contingent obligation, arising out of a variable interest in an unconsolidated entity that is held by us and material to us where such entity provides financing, liquidity, market risk or credit risk support to, or engages in leasing, hedging or research and development services with us.
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements or commitments that have a current or future effect on its financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources that is material, other than those which may be disclosed in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and the audited Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes.