Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
In preparing the consolidated financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (U.S. GAAP), we have adopted various accounting policies. Our most significant accounting policies are disclosed in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements.
The preparation of the consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Our estimates and assumptions, including those related to the ability to continue as going concern, legal proceedings, the recoverability of inventory, long-lived assets, the fair value of stock-based compensation, the fair value of debt, and the fair value of warrant liabilities are updated as appropriate, which in most cases is at least quarterly. We base our estimates on historical experience, or various assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances and the results form the basis for making judgments about the reported values of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. Actual results may materially differ from these estimates.
Estimates are considered to be critical if they meet both of the following criteria: (1) the estimate requires assumptions about material matters that are uncertain at the time the accounting estimates are made, and (2) other materially different estimates could have been reasonably made or material changes in the estimates are reasonably likely to occur from period to period. Our critical accounting estimates include the following:
Revenue Recognition:
In May 2014, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, Revenue From Contracts With Customers, originally effective for public business entities with annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2016. On August 12, 2015, the FASB issued an Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”), Revenue From Contracts With Customers (Topic 606): Deferral of the Effective Date, which deferred the effective date of ASC 606 for one year. ASC 606 provides accounting guidance related to revenue from contracts with customers. For public business entities, ASC 606 is effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2017. This new revenue recognition standard (new guidance) has a five-step process: a) Determine whether a contract exists; b) Identify the performance obligations; c) Determine the transaction price; d) Allocate the transaction price; and e) Recognize revenue when (or as) performance obligations are satisfied. The Company has evaluated the impact of ASC 606 and determined that there is no change to the Company's accounting policies, except for the recording of certain product sales to a distributor, in which a portion of the cash proceeds received is remitted back to the distributor. Under ASC 606, the Company determined that these sales should be recorded on a gross basis.
Our revenues are primarily derived from customer orders for the purchase of our products. We recognize revenues as performance obligations are fulfilled when control passes to our customers. We record revenues net of promotions and discounts. For certain product sales to a distributor, we record revenue including a portion of the cash proceeds that is remitted back to the distributor.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts: Our accounts receivable are stated at estimated net realizable value. Accounts receivable are comprised of balances due from customers net of estimated allowances for uncollectible accounts. In determining collectability, historical trends are evaluated and specific customer issues are reviewed to arrive at appropriate allowances.
Inventory Obsolescence: Inventories are valued at the lower of average cost or market value. We periodically perform an evaluation of inventory for excess, impairments and obsolete items. At December 31, 2018, our inventory consisted entirely of raw materials and finished goods that are utilized in the manufacturing of finished goods. These raw materials generally have expiration dates in excess of 10 years.
Long-Lived Assets: The carrying value of long-lived assets is reviewed annually and on a regular basis for the existence of facts and circumstances that may suggest impairment. If indicators of impairment are present, we determine whether the sum of the estimated undiscounted future cash flows attributable to the long-lived asset in question is less than its carrying amount. If less, we measure the amount of the impairment based on the amount that the carrying value of the impaired asset exceeds the discounted cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposal of the impaired assets.
Derivative Financial Instrument: Management evaluates all of its financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives. For derivative financial instruments that are accounted for as liabilities, the derivative instrument is initially recorded at its fair value and is then re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported as charges or credits to income. For option-based simple derivative financial instruments, the Company uses the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to value the derivative instruments at inception and subsequent valuation dates. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period. Derivative instrument liabilities are classified in the balance sheet as current or non-current based on whether or not net-cash settlement of the derivative instrument could be required within 12 months of the balance sheet date.
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks.
Share-Based Compensation: We record share-based compensation in accordance with FASB ASC 718, Stock Compensation. FASB ASC 718 requires that the cost resulting from all share-based transactions are recorded in the financial statements over the respective service periods. It establishes fair value as the measurement objective in accounting for share-based payment arrangements and requires all entities to apply a fair-value-based measurement in accounting for share-based payment transactions with employees. FASB ASC 718 also establishes fair value as the measurement objective for transactions in which an entity acquires goods or services from non-employees in share-based payment transactions.
Accomplishments during 2018 & Subsequent Accomplishments
On January 18, 2018 we announced that we have partnered with EuroAmerican IP, LLC to distribute our Over-the-Counter (OTC) pain reliever, Nyloxin® Topical Gel, to governmental buyers. They are working on registrations with government contracts through the US - General Services Administration (GSA Advantage) website at www.gsaadvantage.gov.
On January 25, 2018 we announced an updated corporate website at www.nutrapharma.com as well as an updated product website at www.nyloxin.com. The newly redesigned websites offer quick and easy access to essential information and features that offer a more comprehensive understanding of the Company's products and services. The website also has a comprehensive investor section with updated company news and events, financial and stock information, SEC filings and corporate governance information.
On February 1, 2018 we announced that we had signed a definitive Distribution Agreement with the Australian company, Pharmachal PTY LTD to market and distribute Nyloxin® in Australia and New Zealand. Once they receive regulatory approval through the TGA (Therapeutics Goods Administration), they will be able to warehouse, market and distribute Nyloxin throughout their territories. We believe this will allow for broad distribution and marketing in that region by the end of this year.
On February 21, 2018 we announced that we had filed a new provisional patent to protect our intellectual property surrounding the development of nerve agent counter measures. Nerve agents are identified as a class of phosphorus-containing organic chemicals (organophosphates) that may disrupt the transfer of messages to organs through the nerves. This disruption is caused by the over-stimulation of certain receptors on the surface of the neurons. These same receptors are the target of our drugs, which may block the action of the nerve agents or minimize the damage that they may cause.
On April 10, 2018 we announced that we had filed a new provisional patent to protect our intellectual property surrounding the development of a drug to treat Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS or “Lou Gehrig’s Disease”). The new drug entity relies on the predicate research on our existing drug, RPI-78M with modification specific to the treatment of ALS.
On April 19, 2018 we announced that we have partnered with NxGen Brands, LLC; a company specializing in the sales and marketing of innovative healthcare products and service solutions, to market and distribute Nyloxin® through their various distribution platforms.
On June 28, 2018 we announced that we had signed a definitive Letter of Intent for a $4 Million financing that will fund a subsidiary joint venture. JAH Neal Holdings LLC will act as the minority Joint Venture (JV) partner with a 49% stake in the subsidiary for their $4 million investment. Nutra Pharma will maintain a 51% stake in the venture and will contribute an exclusive license for all of our Over-the-Counter (OTC) products, which currently includes: Nyloxin®, Pet Pain-Away™ and Luxury Feet. The stakeholders will jointly manage the JV. In January of 2019, the LOI expired. We are continuing to work with the potential JV partners.
On July 3, 2018 we announced that DEG Productions had signed an exclusive distribution deal with one of the nation’s leading direct mail marketers to launch a private label version of Pet Pain-Away™. The product will be marketed nationally to a proven list of pet product buyers through a stand-alone custom mailer. The direct mail campaign is complimentary to the ongoing television campaign in that it is designed to acquire new customers and convert them into the monthly auto-ship program.
On July 17, 2018 we announced that we had executed an agreement with American Marketing Technologies (“AMT”) to launch an integrated Internet marketing campaign combined with a program to target a number of national retail chains. AMT’s approach to market the products is to create more awareness through social media and online marketing while trying to have these products available on shelves across the country. As they build brand awareness online; they will provide the pull-through to put the products on store shelves throughout the US.
On September 25, 2018 we announced that our work with EuroAmerican IP, LLC had resulted in a listing of the Nyloxin® product line on the website, www.GoVets.com. GoVETS, is the online marketplace under the National Veteran Small Business Coalition (NVSBC) to buy from VA-verified Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Businesses (SDVOSBs). EuroAmerican has teamed with BioArmor, LLC as the SDVOSB Company who established a Vendor Marketplace Agreement with the GoVets Program. Thus providing the capability to market and sell the Nyloxin product Line in the GoVets Program.
On April 10, 2019 we announced that we had responded to an FDA warning letter that was issued on March 11, 2019 regarding our website and social media sites for the sales and marketing of our Nyloxin® products. In response to the FDA’s letter, we explained the basis of each of our claims as they relate to the concerns identified in the Warning Letter and made any and all necessary changes to the marketing materials for the Nyloxin Products to properly and legally continue to market and distribute its products.
On May 30, 2019 we announced that the iRemedy Healthcare Companies added the entire Nyloxin product line to their marketplace at www.IRemedy.com.
On September 22, 2020, Dr. Dale VanderPutten, our Chief Scientific Officer was invited by the Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA) to present our nerve agent countermeasure technology in a Tech Watch talk to an audience of military and civilian experts in chem/bio defense. The talk titled “A Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptor (nAChR) Directed Organophosphate Countermeasure” was presented in a virtual internet meeting to a select expert audience invited by DTRA. The consensus of the comments and questions on the presentation supported the idea that despite past efforts, there remains an unmet need for nAChR directed defenses and that our demonstration of human safety in the clinic and pre-clinical proof of concept deserves aggressive follow up.
On November 4, 2020 we announced the elimination of toxic institutional debt as the last institutional note was purchased by a long-term individual investor.
On November 11, 2020 we announced that Nyloxin has been accepted to be listed on the Walmart Marketplace and is now available there for purchase on www.Walmart.com.
Results of Operations
Status of Operations
In November, 2014 we announced the recertification of our laboratory facility as the first step in re-engaging our drug development activities. In September, 2015 we received Orphan designation from the FDA for our lead drug candidate, RPI-78M for the treatment of Pediatric Multiple Sclerosis. This will allow us to shorten the timeline on clinical studies and may allow an eventual Fast Track through the approval process. We are currently working with our consultants to prepare a pre-IND meeting with the FDA in order to gain approval of a protocol for a Phase I/II clinical study in Pediatric MS. Our goal is to begin the study by the end of 2019.
We estimate that we will require approximately $600,000 to fund our existing operations and the operations of our subsidiary ReceptoPharm over the next twelve months. These costs include: (i) compensation for four (4) full-time employees; (ii) compensation for various consultants who we deem critical to our business; (iii) general office expenses including rent and utilities; (iv) product liability insurance; and (v) outside legal and accounting services. These costs reflected in (i) - (v) do not include research and development costs or other costs associated with clinical studies.
We began generating revenues from the sale of Cobroxin® in the fourth quarter of 2009 and from the sale of Nyloxin® and Nyloxin® Extra Strength in January of 2011. We began sales of Pet Pain-Away in December 2014. While sales have decreased year over year, they have been limited and inconsistent. Our ability to meet our future operating expenses is highly dependent on the amount of such future revenues. If future revenues from the sale of Nyloxin® and Pet Pain-Away are insufficient to cover our operating expenses we may need to raise additional equity capital, which could result in substantial dilution to existing shareholders. There can be no assurance that we will be able to raise sufficient equity capital to fund our working capital requirements on terms acceptable to us, or at all. We may also seek additional loans from our officers and directors; however, there can be no assurance that we will be successful in securing such additional loans.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2018 and 2017
Sales for the year ended December 31, 2018 were $130,596 compared to $120,979 for the comparable period in 2017. All of the sales in 2018 and 2017 were related to product sales. On January 1, 2018, we adopted ASC 606 using the modified retrospective method applied to those contracts which were not completed as of January 1, 2018. Results for reporting periods beginning January 1, 2018 are presented under ASC 606, while prior period amounts are not adjusted and continue to be reported in accordance with our historic revenue recognition methodology under ASC 605, Revenue Recognition. The impact to revenue for the year ended December 31, 2017 would be an increase of $56,162 as a result of applying ASC 606 to certain revenues generated through online distributors which are now presented gross as we have control over providing the products related to such revenues. The decrease in sales is primarily attributable to an overall decrease in sales of Nyloxin®.
Cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2018 and 2017 was $68,777 and $26,903. Cost of sales includes the direct costs associated with manufacturing, shipping and handling costs. Our gross profit margin for the year ended December 31, 2018 was $61,819 or 47.3% compared to $94,076 or 77.8% for the year ended December 31, 2017. The decrease in our profit margin is primarily due to increase in the credit card processing fees and manufacturing cost. In addition, we had an impairment of prepaid inventory of $47,757 and $0 for the years ended December 31 2018 and 2017, respectively, due to slow-moving inventory.
Selling, general and administrative expenses (“SG&A”) increased $416,908 or 28.3% from $1,476,016 for the year ended December 31, 2017 to $1,892,924 for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase is generally due to the increase in bad debt expense - officer loans of $505,470, offset by the overall decrease of $88,562 in professional fees.
Interest expense, including related party interest expense, increased $231,455 or 64.53%, from $358,651 for the year ended December 31, 2017 to $590,106 for the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase was primarily due to amortization of loan discount in the year ended December 31, 2018 compared to the year ended December 31, 2017.
We carry certain of our debentures and common stock warrants at fair value. For the year ended December 31, 2018 and 2017, the liability related to these hybrid instruments fluctuated, resulting in a loss of $2,146,950 and $2,273,968, respectively. Interest expense on these debentures is included in the fair value loss in the statements of operations.
Gain on settlement of debts and accounts payable increased $919,947 or 6,483.5%, from a loss of $14,189 for the year ended December 31, 2017 to a gain of $905,758 for the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase was due to the increase in settlement of debts and accounts payable through issuance of stocks. Stock issued for loan modification increased $174,535 or 100% from $0 for the year ended December 31 2017 to $174,535 for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Our net loss decreased by $14,053 or 3.58%, from $4,028,748 for the year ended December 31, 2017 to $3,884,695 for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
During December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively, we have negative cash from operations of approximately $1.00 million and $1.14 million. Our lack of cash, significant losses and working capital and stockholders’ deficits raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. For the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017, we have experienced significant losses totaling $3,884,695 and $4,028,748, respectively and had an accumulated deficit of $61,272,842 for the period from our inception to December 31, 2018. In addition, we had working capital and stockholders’ deficits at December 31, 2018 of $5,911,233 and $5,936,593, respectively.
Our ability to continue as a going concern is contingent upon our ability to secure additional financing, increase ownership equity and attain profitable operations. In addition, our ability to continue as a going concern must be considered in light of the problems, expenses and complications frequently encountered in established markets and the competitive environment in which we operate.
As of December 31, 2018, we had $0 in cash and owed approximately $2.36 million in vendor payables and accrued expenses. We currently do not have sufficient cash to sustain our operations for the next 12 months and will require additional financing or an increase in sales in order to execute our operating plan and continue as a going concern. Our plan is to continue to increase sales of our products and attempt to secure adequate funding to bridge the commercialization of our Nyloxin® and Pet Pain-Away products. We cannot predict whether additional financing will be in the form of equity, debt, or another form and we may be unable to obtain the necessary additional capital on a timely basis, on acceptable terms, or at all. In the event that these financing sources do not materialize, or that we are unsuccessful in increasing our revenues and profits, we may be unable to implement our current plans for expansion, repay our obligations as they become due or continue as a going concern, any of which circumstances would have a material adverse effect on our business prospects, financial condition and results of operations.
Historically, we have relied upon loans from our Chief Executive Officer Rik J Deitsch, to fund costs associated with our operations. These loans are unsecured, accrue interest at a rate of 4.0% per annum and are due on demand. At December 31, 2018, the balance due to our officer is $186,497. During the year ended December 31, 2018, we advanced $162,775 to and collected $105,900 from Mr. Deitsch and the Companies owned by him. As of December 31, 2018, we recorded a bad debt expense of $505,470 which represents a full valuation allowance for amounts owed by these Companies.
During the year ended December 31, 2018, we raised net cash proceeds of $1,101,800 through the issuance of convertible notes.
Impact of COVID-19 on our Operations
The ramifications of the outbreak of the novel strain of COVID-19, reported to have started in December 2019 and spread globally, are filled with uncertainty and changing quickly. Our operations have continued during the COVID-19 pandemic and we have not had significant disruption. Beginning in June 2020, the Company experienced a delay in retail rollout as a downstream implication of the slowing economy. We also closed our Coral Springs office in effort to save money. During May 2020, we received approval from SBA to fund our request for a PPP loan for $64,895. We intended to use the proceeds primarily for payroll costs. During April and June 2020, we obtained the loan in the amount of $154,900 from SBA under its Economic Injury Disaster Loan assistance program. We intended to use the proceeds primarily for working capital purpose.
The Company is operating in a rapidly changing environment so the extent to which COVID-19 impacts its business, operations and financial results from this point forward will depend on numerous evolving factors that the Company cannot accurately predict. Those factors include the following: the duration and scope of the pandemic; governmental, business and individuals’ actions that have been and continue to be taken in response to the pandemic; and the development of widespread testing or a vaccine.
Uncertainties and Trends
Our operations and possible revenues are dependent now and in the future upon the following factors:
· Whether we successfully develop and commercialize products from our research and development activities.
· If we fail to compete effectively in the intensely competitive biotechnology area, our operations and market position will be negatively impacted.
· If we fail to successfully execute our planned partnering and out-licensing of products or technologies, our future performance will be adversely affected.
· The recent economic downturn and related credit and financial market crisis may adversely affect our ability to obtain financing, conduct our operations and realize opportunities to successfully bring our technologies to market.
· Biotechnology industry related litigation is substantial and may continue to rise, leading to greater costs and unpredictable litigation.
· If we fail to comply with extensive legal/regulatory requirements affecting the healthcare industry, we will face increased costs, and possibly penalties and business losses.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not entered into any transaction, agreement or other contractual arrangement with an entity unconsolidated with us under whom we have:
· An obligation under a guarantee contract.
· A retained or contingent interest in assets transferred to the unconsolidated entity or similar arrangement that serves as credit, liquidity or market risk support to such entity for such assets.
· Any obligation, including a contingent obligation, under a contract that would be accounted for as a derivative instrument.
· Any obligation, including a contingent obligation, arising out of a variable interest in an unconsolidated entity that is held by us and material to us where such entity provides financing, liquidity, market risk or credit risk support to, or engages in leasing, hedging or research and development services with us.
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements or commitments that have a current or future effect on its financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources that is material, other than those which may be disclosed in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and the audited Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes.