ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
This discussion contains forward-looking statements about our business and operations. Our actual results may differ materially from those we currently anticipate as a result of many factors, including those we described under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this prospectus. Certain statements contained in this discussion, including, without limitation, statements containing the words “believes,” “anticipates,” “expects” and the like, constitute “forward-looking statements.” However, as we will issue “penny stock,” as such term is defined in Rule 3a51-1 promulgated under the Exchange Act, we are ineligible to rely on these safe harbor provisions. Such forward-looking statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause our actual results, performance or achievements to be materially different from any of the future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Given these uncertainties, readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on such forward-looking statements. We disclaim any obligation to update any of such factors or to announce publicly the results of revision of any of the forward-looking statements contained herein to reflect future events or developments. For information regarding risk factors that could have a material adverse effect on our business, refer to the “Risk Factors” section of this prospectus beginning on page 3.
Overview
GJ Culture Group US, Inc. (“GJ Culture” “the Company”, “we”, “us” or “our”) is an emerging company incorporated in Nevada and is qualified and authorized to transact intestate business in California. We are dedicated to providing educational services based on classical Chinese studies and culture. We aim to serve as a cultural and educational meeting point between China and the U.S. Our business is providing education and training courses based on classical Chinese studies both in Chinese and English, organizing China-U.S. international study tour activities for participants of all ages, and organizing and promoting China-U.S. cultural events, art fairs, and exhibitions and other relevant activities related to educating the public about Chinese culture.
Our executive office is located in Danville, the State of California, U.S. Additionally; we have cooperative agencies in California and China. We have established a cooperative relationship with Shaanxi Guojiang Cultural Industry Group Co. Ltd (“Guojiang China”), which is an affiliated company of GJ Culture based in Shaanxi, China and also engages in business related to Chinese classical education. We intend through our cooperative partners to enter into contracts for cooperation with experts in various fields of traditional Chinese culture and art; to offer a diverse and systematic array of services related to Chinese classical studies, that cover the demand of the American market. We will focus on education and the cultural exchange between China and the U.S. relying on our experience in the field of Chinese classical culture and art. We intend to capitalize on the growing interest in China and on its increasing global influence. We will do this by offering a curated and systematized curriculum of classical Chinese studies, and contribute to the exchange and development of cultural education and art between China and the U.S.
GJ Culture is committed to becoming a professional service institution of education, specifically in classical Chinese studies, culture and art. Classical studies and art are at the core of our services. We will offer international study tours, online and offline, in classical Chinese studies through classes, lectures, cultural, and artistic events. All of these will enrich, elevate and complement each other, forming a vertically integrated set of products and services with growth potential.
There is a growing global interest in China, and an increasing demand to learn more about the Chinese culture and language. We believe it is because the market for classical Chinese studies education and training in the U.S. exists, but it is still in an early stage of development. Based on the market search results by Zero Power Intelligence Research Institute as described in previous chapter, we estimate that this industry presents large training needs, many business opportunities and potential profit margins.
We plan to generate most of the revenue through provision of classical studies lectures, international study tour services, classical studies education and training, and organizing cultural and artistic events. All of these services will be paid for by our students or participants in advance.
General
Revenues are comprised of providing promotions and consulting services to our partner who gives international study tour services and, commission to be received from partner enrollment services.
Our general and administrative expenses consist of costs related to marketing, selling, personnel cost, and professional fee to law firm and accounting firm, etc.
Results of Operations
Year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table sets forth key components of our results of operations for the periods indicated:
Revenues
We report $15,000 in revenue for the period of year ended December 31, 2020. Revenues are comprised of promotion and consulting service rendered to our partner who provides international study tour services.
Our revenues decreased by US$28,000, or 65%, from US$43,000 for the period of year ended December 31, 2019, to US$15,000 for the same period in 2020. We signed one consulting service agreement with contract amount of US$15,000 and rendered the service to our customer in this reporting period.
The Company’s result of operations were negatively impacted by the global COVID 19 pandemic.
Cost of Revenues
There is no cost of revenue occurred during the period.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
We recorded $146,091 in selling, general and administrative expenses during the reporting period, and it mainly consisted of impairment of intangible asset, professional service from our law firm, auditor, and accountant etc.
Our selling and marketing expenses decreased by US$5,768 or 3.8% from $151,859 during the year ended December 31, 2019 to $146,091 for the same period in 2020. The decrease was primarily attributable to the decrease of service fee from our law firm and accounting firm since the listing of our shares to OTCQB was completed in 2019. In addition, we recorded $5,597 impairment of intangible assets in this year due to continuous operating loss.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We plan to fund operations of the Company through the proceeds from public offerings, private placements of restricted securities, or the issuance of stock in lieu of cash for payment of services until profitable operations are achieved. If we do not raise all of the money we need from public offerings or through private placements, we will have to find alternative sources, such as loans or advances from our officers, directors or others. Such additional financing may not become available on acceptable terms and there can be no assurance that any additional financing that the Company obtains will be sufficient to meet its needs in the long term. There are no written agreements in place for such funding or issuance of securities and there can be no assurance that such will be available in the future. We believe that this plan provides an opportunity for the Company to continue as a going concern.
The failure to achieve the necessary levels of profitability or obtain the additional funding would be detrimental to the Company.
Cash Flows
The following table presents the major components of net cash flows used in and provided by operating, investing and financing activities for the periods presented:
For the Years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Operating Activities
Operating activities consisted primarily of net income/(loss) adjusted for certain non-cash items. In addition, operating cash flows included the effect of changes in operating assets and liabilities.
The cash used in the reporting period increased by $11,229 from $113,093 for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $124,322 in same period of 2020. The increase in cash used from operating activities was due to the decreased net cash flows from operating assets and liabilities of $11,009 and increase of net loss of $22,238. The Company had limited operating activities as result of the COVID 19 pandemic which hindered the Company’s ability to generate positive cash flows.
Investing Activities
There was no investing activity in the reporting period.
Financing Activities
There was no financing activity in the reporting period.
Significant Accounting Policies
Basis of Presentation
The Financial Statements and related disclosures have been prepared pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”). The Financial Statements have been prepared using the accrual basis of accounting in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”) and presented in US dollars.
Use of Estimates and Assumptions
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Due to the limited level of operations, the Company has not needed to make material assumptions or estimates other than the assumption that the Company is a going concern.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company considers all highly liquid investments with an original maturity of three months or less when purchased to be cash equivalents.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
ASC 825, “Disclosures about Fair Value of Financial Instruments”, requires disclosure of fair value information about financial instruments. ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurements” defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value in generally accepted accounting principles, and expands disclosures about fair value measurements. Fair value estimates discussed herein are based upon certain market assumptions and pertinent information available to management at the time of this report.
The respective carrying values of certain on-balance-sheet financial instruments approximate their fair values. These financial instruments include cash, accrued liabilities and notes payable. Fair values were assumed to approximate carrying values for these financial instruments since they are short term in nature and their carrying amounts approximate fair value.
Revenue Recognition
The Company will recognize revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification No. 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers” (“ASC-606”). ASC-606 requires that the criteria must be met before revenue can be recognized:
1. The parties to the contract have approved the contract (in writing, orally, or in accordance with other customary business practices) and are committed to perform their respective obligations.
2. The Company can identify each party’s rights regarding the goods or services to be transferred.
3. The Company can identify the payment terms for the goods or services to be transferred.
4. The contract has commercial substance (that is, the risk, timing, or amount of the entity’s future cash flows is expected to change as a result of the contract).
5. It is probable that the Company will collect substantially all of the consideration to which it will be entitled in exchange for the goods or services that will be transferred to the customer. In evaluating whether collectability of an amount of consideration is probable, an entity shall consider only the customer’s ability and intention to pay that amount of consideration when it is due. The amount of consideration to which the entity will be entitled may be less than the price stated in the contract if the consideration is variable because the entity may offer the customer a price concession.
There were no outstanding unfulfilled revenue contracts as of December 31, 2020.
Basic and Diluted Net Loss Per Share
Our computation of earnings per share (“EPS”) includes basic and diluted EPS. Basic EPS is measured as the income (loss) available to common stockholders divided by the weighted average common shares outstanding for the period. Diluted income (loss) per share reflects the potential dilution, using the treasury stock method, that could occur if securities or other contracts to issue common stock were exercised or converted into common stock or resulted in the issuance of common stock that then shared in the income (loss) of the Company as if they had been converted at the beginning of the periods presented, or issuance date, if later. In computing diluted income (loss) per share, the treasury stock method assumes that outstanding options and warrants are exercised and the proceeds are used to purchase common stock at the average market price during the period. Options and warrants may have a dilutive effect under the treasury stock method only when the average market price of the common stock during the period exceeds the exercise price of the options and warrants. Potential common shares that have an anti-dilutive effect (i.e., those that increase income per share or decrease loss per share) are excluded from the calculation of diluted EPS.
Income (loss) per common share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the respective periods. Basic and diluted (loss) per common share is the same for periods in which the company reported an operating loss because all warrants and stock options outstanding are anti-dilutive. There were no adjustments to net loss required for purposes of computing diluted earnings per share.
The Company has no potentially dilutive securities, such as options or warrants, currently issued and outstanding.
Comprehensive income (loss)
The Company follows the provisions of the Financial Accounting Standards Board (the “FASB”) ASC 220 Reporting Comprehensive Income and establishes standards for the reporting and display of comprehensive income, its components and accumulated balances in a full set of general purpose financial statements. The Company’s comprehensive loss consists of net loss and foreign currency translation adjustments.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In February 2018, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update No. 2018-02 Reclassification of Certain Tax Effects from Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (ASU 2018-02). The standard provides financial statement preparers with an option to reclassify stranded tax effects within Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (AOCI) to retained earnings in each period in which the effect of the change in the U.S. federal corporate income tax rate in the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (or portion thereof) is recorded. ASU 2018-02 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2018, and interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted.
In December 2018, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update No. 2018-05, Income Taxes (Topic 740), Amendments to SEC Paragraphs Pursuant to SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 118 (ASU 2018-05). The ASU adds various Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) paragraphs pursuant to the issuance of the December 2017 SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 118, Income Tax Accounting Implications of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (“SAB 118”), which was effective immediately. The SEC issued SAB 118 to address concerns about reporting entities’ ability to timely comply with the accounting requirements to recognize all of the effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act in the period of enactment. SAB 118 allows disclosure that timely determination of some or all of the income tax effects from the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act are incomplete by the due date of the financial statements and if possible, to provide a reasonable estimate.
As of December 31, 2019, except for the above, there are no recently issued accounting standards not yet adopted that would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.