ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following is management’s discussion and analysis of certain significant factors that have affected our consolidated financial condition and operating results during the periods included in the accompanying audited Consolidated Financial Statements and the related notes. You should read the following discussion in conjunction with our audited Consolidated Financial Statements and the related notes, included elsewhere in this annual report.
Forward-Looking Statements
This report contains certain statements that are “forward-looking statements” as that term is defined under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 (the “Act”) and releases issued by the SEC. The words “may,” “hope,” “will,” “should,” “could,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “believe,” “estimate,” “predict,” “potential,” “continue,” and other expressions which are predictions of or indicate future events and trends and which do not relate to historical matters identify forward-looking statements. We believe that it is important to communicate our future expectations to our shareholders, and we therefore make forward-looking statements in reliance upon the safe harbor provisions of the Act. However, there may be events in the future that we are not able to accurately predict or control, and our actual results may differ materially from the expectations we describe in our forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors, which may cause our actual results, performance or achievements to differ materially from anticipated future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. These risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to: impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic and governmental responses to limit the further spread of COVID-19, including impacts on our operations, and the operations and businesses of our customers and vendors, including whether our operations and those of our customers and vendors will continue to be treated as “essential” operations under government orders restricting business activities or, even if so treated, whether site-specific health and safety concerns might otherwise require certain of our company’s operations to be halted for some period of time; uncertainty with respect to the duration and severity of these impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic, including impacts on the general economy and the markets served by our customers; the extent to which the impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic could result in a reduction in demand for our products and services; general economic conditions in the markets served by our businesses and those of our customers, some of which are cyclical and experience periodic downturns, such as recent disruptions in the pricing of oil and gas, prices and availability of its raw materials; uncertainties with respect to our ability to achieve anticipated growth within the semiconductor, life sciences and other technology-enabled markets; the impact of fluctuations in relevant foreign currency exchange rates; unanticipated delays or problems in introducing new products; announcements by competitors of new products, services or technological innovations; changes in pricing policies or the pricing policies of competitors; and the amount of any payments required to satisfy contingent liabilities related to discontinued operations and discontinued operations of our predecessors, including liabilities for certain products, environmental matters, employee benefit obligations and other matters. We advise you to read further about certain of these and other risk factors set forth in Item 1A of this annual report, entitled “Risk Factors.” We undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statement, either as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as may be required by law. Whenever you read or hear any subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributed to us or any person acting on our behalf, you should keep in mind the cautionary statements contained or referred to in this section.
Overview and Outlook
Overview. We design, develop, manufacture, service and market proprietary engineered industrial products. We have 45 primary manufacturing and service facilities located in 13 countries, including the United States. Over the past year and a half, we have executed several strategic initiatives to change the portfolio of businesses that we operate to focus on materials science-based businesses with leading technologies, compelling margins, strong cash flow, and high levels of recurring revenue that serve markets with favorable secular tailwinds. These initiatives, which are described below, have increased our ability to provide solutions to the semiconductor, life sciences, and other technology industries.
We manage our business as three segments: a Sealing Technologies segment, an Advanced Surface Technologies segment, and an Engineered Materials segment.
Our Sealing Technologies segment designs, manufactures and sells sealing products, including: metallic, non-metallic and composite material gaskets, dynamic seals, compression packing, resilient metal seals, elastomeric seals, custom-engineered mechanical seals for applications in the aerospace industry and other markets, hydraulic components, expansion joints, sanitary gaskets, hoses and fittings for the hygienic process industries, fluid transfer products for the pharmaceutical and biopharmaceutical industries, hole forming products, bellows and bellows assemblies, PTFE products, and heavy-duty
commercial vehicle parts used in wheel-end and suspension components. These products are used in a variety of industries, including chemical and petrochemical processing, pulp and paper processing, power generation, food and pharmaceutical processing, primary metal manufacturing, mining, water and waste treatment, heavy-duty trucking, aerospace, medical, filtration and semiconductor fabrication. In many of these industries, performance and durability are vital for safety and environmental protection. Many of our products are used in highly demanding applications, e.g., where extreme temperatures, extreme pressures, corrosive environments, strict tolerances, and/or worn equipment make product performance difficult.
Our Advanced Surface Technologies segment applies proprietary technologies, processes, and capabilities to deliver highly differentiated suites of products and services for the most challenging applications in high growth markets. The segment’s products and services are used in highly demanding environments requiring performance, precision and repeatability, with a low tolerance for failure. The segment’s services include cleaning, coating, testing, refurbishment and verification services for critical components and assemblies used in state-of-the-art advanced node semiconductor manufacturing equipment. The segment also designs, manufactures and sells specialized optical filters and thin-film coatings for the most challenging applications in the industrial technology, life sciences, and semiconductor markets and complex front-end wafer processing sub-systems, new and refurbished electrostatic chuck pedestals, thin film coatings, and edge-welded metal bellows for the semiconductor equipment industry and for critical applications in the space, aerospace and defense markets.
Our Engineered Materials segment includes operations that design, manufacture and sell self-lubricating, non-rolling metal-polymer, engineered plastics, and fiber reinforced composite bearing products, precision engineered components and lubrication systems for reciprocating compressors and engines, critical service flange gaskets, seals and electrical flange isolation kits used in high-pressure wellhead equipment, flow lines, water injection lines, sour hydrocarbon process applications, and crude oil and natural gas pipeline/transmission line applications. These products are used in a wide range of applications, including the automotive, aerospace, pharmaceutical, pulp and paper, natural gas, health, power generation, machine tools, air treatment, refining, petrochemical and general industrial markets.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, we evaluated our internal reporting and determined to have a new segment as the result of internal reorganizations and the acquisition of Alluxa. Our new segment, Advanced Surface Technologies, is composed of Alluxa and our semiconductor businesses, which includes our LeanTeq and Technetics Semiconductor businesses, previously reported in our Sealing Technologies segment within our Technetics reporting unit. The change involved the transfer of $180.1 million of goodwill from the Sealing Technologies segment to our Advanced Surface Technologies segment.
As a result of this transition, our Technetics reporting unit was tested for impairment both before and after the allocation of goodwill and the newly formed Semiconductor reporting unit (composed of LeanTeq and Technetics Semiconductor businesses) was tested after the allocation. We determined that the Technetics reporting unit was not impaired prior to the transfer of goodwill. After the transfer, the Technetics Sealing reporting unit was allocated $67.7 million of goodwill and, as of our allocation date of December 1, 2020, we determined it was not impaired as its fair value exceeded its carrying value by 26%. We also determined that our Semiconductor reporting unit, allocated $180.1 million of goodwill as of our allocation date of December 1, 2020, was not impaired and its fair value exceeded its carrying value by 2%. Any change in assumptions, including forecasted performance or external market information used in our fair value calculation, including the determination of our discount rate, could result in a future impairment of the goodwill allocated to the Semiconductor reporting unit.
We determined our weighted average cost of capital ("WACC") for our Semiconductor reporting unit, used in our discounted cash flow analysis, to be 12.0% at our allocation date of December 1, 2020. If the WACC used in this assessment would increase by one percentage point, we estimate that the carrying value of the Semiconductor reporting unit would exceed the fair value by approximately $20.0 million and would result in a corresponding impairment.
To estimate the fair value of our reporting units, we use both a discounted cash flow and market valuation approach. The discounted cash flow approach uses cash flow projections to calculate the fair value of each reporting unit while the market approach relies on market multiples of similar companies. The key assumptions used for the discounted cash flow approach include projected revenues and profit margins, projected capital expenditures, changes in working capital, discount rates and tax rates. The discount rate we use is based on its weighted average cost of capital. For the market approach, we choose a group of peer companies we believe is best representative of each reporting unit. We used a 75% weighting for the discounted cash flow valuation approach and a 25% weighting for the market valuation approach, reflecting our belief that the discounted cash flow valuation approach provides a better indicator of a reporting unit's value since it reflects the specific cash flows anticipated to be generated in the future by the business.
We will continue to monitor its performance as well as other market factors and test for impairment if we determine a triggering event has occurred. All other reporting units were tested at our annual test date of October 1, 2020 and their fair value exceeded their carrying value by at least 20%. We will test all reporting units again at our next test date of October 1, 2021 or earlier as circumstances may require.
In the second quarter of 2020 we reclassified the oil and gas component of our Garlock Pipeline Technologies ("GPT") business from the Sealing Technologies segment to the Engineered Materials segment. This reclassification allowed us to group our two oil and gas businesses, GPT and Compressor Products International, together to be managed as one business unit. The change also involved the transfer of $5.8 million of goodwill from the Sealing Technologies segment to the Engineered Materials segment. As a result of the transition of this component of the GPT business, an interim goodwill impairment test was performed in the second quarter of 2020 for all reporting units. We determined that the carrying amount of our goodwill was not impaired either before or after the reclassification.
These changes are reflected in all periods presented in Note 19, "Business Segment Information". The goodwill transfer is reflected in all periods presented in Note 9, "Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets"
In connection with the decision in the fourth quarter of 2020 to realign our reporting segments, we determined that the primary metric used by management to allocate resources and assess segment performance had shifted from segment profit to Adjusted Segment EBITDA, which is segment profit excluding acquisition and divestiture expenses, restructuring and impairment costs, non-controlling interest compensation, and depreciation and amortization.
Acquisitions
On October 26, 2020, a subsidiary of EnPro formed for this purpose (the "Alluxa Acquisition Subsidiary") acquired all of the equity securities of Alluxa, Inc. ("Alluxa"), a privately held, California-based company. Alluxa is an industrial technology company that provides specialized optical filters and thin-film coatings for the most challenging applications in the industrial technology, life sciences, and semiconductor markets. Alluxa's products are developed through a proprietary coating process using state-of-the-art advanced equipment. Alluxa is included as part of the Advanced Surface Technologies segment.
Alluxa works in collaboration with customers across major end markets to provide customized, complex precision coating solutions through its specialized technology platform and proprietary processes. Alluxa has long-standing customer relationships across its diversified customer base, serving customers across the Americas, Europe, and Asia. Founded in 2007, Alluxa has two locations in California and is headquartered in Santa Rosa, California.
The cash purchase price of Alluxa was $238.4 million, net of cash acquired. We funded the purchase with available cash and rollover equity from Alluxa executives. In connection with the completion of the transaction, we entered into a limited liability operating agreement with respect to the Alluxa Acquisition Subsidiary in connection with the rollover transaction, with three equity owners of Alluxa, who were also executives of Alluxa (the "Alluxa Executives"), receiving approximately 7% of the equity interests of the Alluxa Acquisition Subsidiary in return for their contribution of the rollover shares of Alluxa.
In connection with the consummation of the Alluxa acquisition, the Alluxa Executives entered into a limited liability operating agreement (the “Alluxa LLC Agreement”) with respect to Alluxa Subsidiary. Under the LLC Agreement, the Alluxa Executives have certain governance and information rights with respect to the Alluxa Acquisition Subsidiary and are subject to transfer restrictions with respect to their equity interests in the Alluxa Acquisition Subsidiary. Each Alluxa Executive also has the right to sell to the Company, and the Company has the right to purchase from each Alluxa Executive (collectively, the “Alluxa Put and Call Rights”), one-third of the Alluxa Executive’s equity interests in Alluxa Acquisition Subsidiary during each of three exercise periods commencing on January 1 and ending on June 30 of each of 2024, 2025 and 2026, with any amount not sold or purchased in a prior exercise period being carried forward to the subsequent exercise periods. The Alluxa LLC Agreement also provides for the purchase by the Company of all of an Alluxa Executive’s equity interests in the Alluxa Acquisition Subsidiary in connection with the termination of employment of the Alluxa Executive under specified circumstances, with payments in certain circumstances to be made in annual installments. In connection with a Alluxa Executive’s death, disability, or incapacity at any time prior to December 31, 2023 or a separation from employment for cause, including the Alluxa Executive’s breach of the non-competition and non-solicitation agreement, or a voluntary separation from employment without good reason, the consideration payable under the Alluxa LLC Agreement in connection with any such purchase by the Company of an Alluxa Executive’s equity interests in the Alluxa Acquisition Subsidiary is equal to the fixed value of the equity interests as set forth in the Alluxa LLC Agreement. In all other cases, including upon any exercise of the Alluxa Put and Call Rights, the consideration payable under the Alluxa LLC Agreement in connection with any such purchase by the Company of an Alluxa Executive’s equity interests in the Alluxa Acquisition Subsidiary is equal to the greater of the fixed value of the equity interests as set forth in the Alluxa LLC Agreement or a price based upon a multiple of twelve-month adjusted EBITDA based upon certain financial metrics of the Alluxa Acquisition Subsidiary, plus cash and less indebtedness of the Alluxa Acquisition Subsidiary prior to the relevant payment, and subject to certain adjustments dependent upon the circumstances of the purchase and sale.
On July 2, 2019, we acquired The Aseptic Group (comprising Aseptic Process Equipment SAS and Aseptic Services SARL). Headquartered in Limonest, France, The Aseptic Group distributes, designs, and manufactures aseptic fluid transfer
products for the pharmaceutical and biopharmaceutical industries. The Aseptic Group has been included as part of EnPro’s Garlock division within the Sealing Technologies segment.
On September 25, 2019, we acquired the outstanding equity securities of LeanTeq, LLC and LeanTeq Co., Ltd. (collectively "LeanTeq"), a privately-held, Taiwan-based company. LeanTeq provides refurbishment services for critical components and assemblies used in state-of-the-art semiconductor equipment. The equipment is used to produce the latest and most technologically advanced microchips for smartphones, autonomous vehicles, high-speed wireless connectivity (5G), artificial intelligence, and other leading-edge applications.
LeanTeq was founded in 2011, is headquartered in Taoyuan City, Taiwan, and has two locations in Taiwan and one in the United States (Silicon Valley). LeanTeq partners closely with original equipment manufacturers throughout the development and production lifecycle to achieve Process of Record qualifications, enabling long-term, recurring aftermarket revenue. Aftermarket refurbishment services have historically represented approximately 65% of LeanTeq's total sales. LeanTeq’s suite of services includes cleaning, coating, analytical testing, inspection and verification, kit assembly, failure analysis, and other value-added services. LeanTeq is included as part of EnPro's Advanced Surface Technologies segment.
In connection with the consummation of the LeanTeq acquisition, two LeanTeq equity holders who are managers of LeanTeq (the “LeanTeq Executives”) applied approximately 10% of the total transaction consideration paid in the acquisition to purchase equity interests of our subsidiary (the “LeanTeq Acquisition Subsidiary”) acquiring LeanTeq pursuant to an agreement (the “LeanTeq LLC Agreement”) entered into upon the closing of the LeanTeq acquisition (the “LeanTeq Closing”). Under the LeanTeq LLC Agreement, each of the LeanTeq Executives will also have the right to sell to us, and we will have the right to purchase from each of the LeanTeq Executives, the LeanTeq Executive’s equity interests in the LeanTeq Acquisition Subsidiary, following the third anniversary of the Closing, a change-of-control of the LeanTeq Acquisition Subsidiary or EnPro, dissolution of the LeanTeq Acquisition Subsidiary, termination of employment, death or disability of the LeanTeq Executive, and certain other circumstances such as a dispute regarding our performance of the LeanTeq LLC Agreement. The consideration, which is payable in two installments, in such purchase and sale arrangements is generally to be based upon a multiple of twelve-month adjusted EBITDA based upon certain financial metrics of the LeanTeq Acquisition Subsidiary, plus cash and less indebtedness of the LeanTeq Acquisition Subsidiary prior to the relevant installment payment, subject to certain adjustments dependent upon the circumstances of the purchase and sale.
The combined purchase price of the LeanTeq and The Aseptic Group acquisitions was approximately $338.5 million, net of cash acquired and including the equity rollover from the LeanTeq Executives.
Dispositions
On December 31, 2020, we sold the shares of Technetics Group UK Limited ("Technetics Group UK") for a nominal cash purchase price. As part of the agreement with the buyer, we delivered to the buyer £148,000 of cash to fund value added tax ("VAT") payments due for VAT liabilities already incurred and £50,000 for working capital. We incurred a loss upon the sale of approximately £976,000 ($1.3 million).
On November 30, 2020, we closed on the sale of our bushing block business in our the Engineered Materials segment principally located in Dieuze, France. Prior to finalizing the sale of the business, we determined it to be impaired and recorded a $6.2 million impairment charge that consisted of $1.8 million of non-cash impairments of long-lived assets and $4.4 million of cash payments due to the buyer at closing. The impairment charge was recorded in other operating expenses on our consolidated statement of operations. Upon closing of the business, we recorded a $0.1 million gain on the sale of business in other non-operating expense on our consolidated statement of operations. Total charges related to the exit of our bushing block business were $6.1 million.
On November 20, 2020, we completed the sale of the Air Springs portion of our heavy-duty trucking business for $23.1 million in cash, net of an estimated working capital adjustment and fees, and a long-term promissory note with a fair-value of $6.4 million (face value of $7.5 million). As part of the agreement with the buyer, we retained the U.S. accounts receivable for the business, which created a large working capital adjustment at closing. The amount of retained accounts receivable in the U.S. was approximately $8.6 million. The purchase price is subject to final working capital adjustments. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we recorded a $0.1 million non-cash loss on sale of business to in the fourth quarter of 2020.
In August of 2020, subsequent to announcing the exit of our Motor Wheel® brake drum and Crewson® brake adjuster brands in the second quarter of 2020, we identified a buyer and entered into a definitive agreement to sell the assets related to the businesses. On September 2, 2020, we completed the sale for $8.9 million, net of transaction fees. This transaction resulted in a $3.1 million loss on sale of the business in other non-operating expense on our consolidated statements of operations, composed of a $3.0 million non-cash loss on the sales of assets and a $0.1 million loss on other expenses. Prior to finding a buyer of the brands, we determined the assets were impaired and recorded restructuring and impairment charges of $7.4 million
in other operating expenses on our consolidated statements of operations. Total losses on the exit of our Motor Wheel® brake drum and Crewson® brake adjuster brands recorded in 2020 were $10.5 million.
In the second quarter of 2020 we entered into an agreement to sell the Lunar® air disc brake business located in both the U.S. and in Shanghai, China. The sale of the U.S. assets of the business closed in the third quarter of 2020 for $0.3 million, resulting in a gain of $0.2 million recorded in non-operating income on our consolidated statement of operations. The sale of the Lunar® manufacturing facility located in Shanghai, China closed in the fourth quarter of 2020 for $0.9 million, resulting in no gain or loss. Prior to closing on the sale of the business, we determined the assets to be impaired and recorded a $2.1 million impairment charge, of which $1.6 million was related to impairment of long-lived assets and $0.5 million related to the impairment of inventory. The impairment of long-lived assets was recorded in other operating expense and the impairment of inventory was recorded in cost of sales on our consolidated statement of operations. Total net loss related to the exit of the Lunar® air disc brake business was $1.9 million.
On December 12, 2019, certain of our subsidiaries entered into a Membership Interest Purchase Agreement with Arcline FM Holdings, LLC (“Arcline FM Holdings”), an affiliate of Arcline Investment Management, LP, pursuant to which we agreed to transfer all of the outstanding equity interests in our indirect subsidiary, Fairbanks Morse, LLC (“Fairbanks Morse”), to Arcline FM Holdings and to cause one of our subsidiaries to sell certain related Canadian assets to an affiliate of Arcline FM Holdings, for an aggregate purchase price of $450 million. This divestiture transaction was completed on January 21, 2020. Fairbanks Morse manufactured heavy-duty, medium-speed reciprocating engines used primarily in marine and power generation applications and comprised our entire Power Systems segment. In light of the entry into the definitive agreement in December 2019 to divest Fairbanks Morse, we classified the Power Systems segment as a discontinued operation for the fourth quarter and full year 2019, and all prior quarterly and annual financial results of EnPro have been recast to reflect the Power Systems segment as a discontinued operation. Unless otherwise indicated, amounts discussed in this Item 8 pertain to continuing operations only (see Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Form 10-K for information on discontinued operations and the disposition of Fairbanks Morse).
In September 2019, we sold certain assets and certain liabilities of our brake products business unit located in Rome, Georgia, which was included in our Sealing Technologies segment. The aggregate sales price for the transaction was $6.8 million, of which we received $3.6 million in September 2019 at the closing of the sale of the business and $0.1 million in the fourth quarter of 2019 that was applied to the sale of the building, which closed in February 2020. On the closing of the sale of the building, we received $2.9 million and received the balance of $0.2 million in the fourth quarter of 2020.
After attempts to sell the ATDynamics business during the fourth quarter of 2019, in January 2020, we decided to shut down the ATDynamics business (an asset group in the Stemco division of our Sealing Technologies segment). As a result of the unsuccessful sales process, we reviewed the carrying amounts of long-lived assets at December 31, 2019 and determined the carrying amounts were not recoverable. As a result of this assessment, we recorded a $2.6 million impairment loss in the fourth quarter of 2019. In connection with the decision to shut down the business, we decided to not complete and sell the inventory we had on hand and recognized a $1.5 million inventory impairment.
We review the carrying amounts of long-lived assets when certain events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amounts may not be recoverable. In 2020, sales declines by businesses utilizing two of the indefinite-lived trademarks within our Sealing Technologies segment were determined to be triggering events for an impairment analysis. Based on the results of this analysis, we recorded a $16.1 million impairment of indefinite-lived trademarks in the third quarter.
In the fourth quarter of 2019, in consideration of the financial performance of the Motorwheel business, an asset group in the Stemco division of our Sealing Technologies segment, we determined that a test of Motorwheel's recoverability was required. As a result of this test, all long-lived assets of Motorwheel were determined to be impaired, resulting in an impairment loss of $21.0 million, which equaled the excess of these assets' net book value at December 31, 2019 over their fair value.
COVID-19 Response.
As COVID-19 has spread, it has significantly impacted the health and economic environment around the world. Our customers are principally global manufacturers and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on general economic conditions, and more deleterious effects on certain markets, such as oil and gas and automotive, are having and will continue to have negative implications on demand for their goods and consequently on their demand for our products and services. Because of uncertainties with respect to the continuing severity and duration of the COVID-19 outbreak, the duration and terms of related governmental orders restricting activities, and the timing and pace of any economic recovery as COVID-19 impacts ultimately abate, we cannot predict with precision the extent and duration of any future decreased demand for our products and services and the consequent impact on our business and financial results.
In March 2020, we established a COVID-19 Response and Support Team (the "Support Team"), which is made up of our global executive leadership team with representatives from each functional area within the organization. The Support Team is working diligently to manage our business continuity plans and coordinated response. We have planned for several contingency scenarios and have taken decisive, informed action to limit the spread of COVID-19 while ensuring the continuity of our businesses. We are leveraging direction from our internal safety protocols, international health organizations, such as the WHO and the Centers for Disease Control, as well as local governments. We have local response teams at each of our facilities who are available to respond to changes as they occur.
With respect to business operations and the protection of our employees, we have taken numerous actions including:
•Suspension of all non-essential travel;
•Implementation of mandatory work from home, where feasible;
•Expansion of information technology infrastructure to enable working remotely and holding virtual meetings;
•Implementation of employee testing and contact tracing;
•Restrictions on visitors to EnPro facilities;
•Training of employees in enhanced cleaning and disinfecting protocols and providing
supplemental personal protective equipment at each of our facilities;
•Safe operating procedures such as temperature scanning and the use of masks;
•Establishing social distancing protocols in our manufacturing sites;
•Implementation of quarantining policies and practices with respect to any infected employee;
•Creation of a dedicated communications platform and internal website to address questions from employees
and provide frequent updates; and,
•Development of a virtual sales platform.
Although most of our businesses are granted "essential" business status under local government safety orders around the world, we had to temporarily close several of our facilities during 2020. All of our primary manufacturing facilities are currently open and have not experienced significant supply chain disruptions. Additionally, each of our businesses has developed continuity and contingency plans, based on various scenarios in preparation for potential operational disruptions, to permit us to adjust production levels to demand. We cannot predict if and when further closures or production changes may arise as a result of implications related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
To help protect the strength of our financial position, we have implemented several measures including:
•Aggressive cost management initiatives;
•Discretionary spending reductions;
•Capital expenditure prioritization;
•Headcount optimization plans, as needed; and
•Increased working capital monitoring to ensure timely accounts receivable collections and inventory level
optimization.
Refinancing
On October 17, 2018, we issued $350.0 million of aggregate principal amount of 5.75% Senior Notes due 2026 (the "Senior Notes"). We applied the net proceeds of that offering, together with borrowings under our revolving credit facility, to redeem the outstanding $450 million of aggregate principal amount of our 5.875% Senior Notes due 2022 (the "Old Notes"). The Old Notes were redeemed at a price equal to 102.938% of the aggregate principal amount thereof plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but not including, the redemption date. We recorded a loss on the redemption of the Old Notes of approximately $18.1 million in the fourth quarter of 2018.
Pension Settlement
On June 26, 2018, we entered into an agreement to purchase a group annuity contract to transfer approximately $68 million of our outstanding pension projected benefit obligations related to certain U.S. retirees or beneficiaries. The transaction closed on July 3, 2018 and was funded with pension plan assets with a value of $70.9 million. As a result of this transaction a pretax pension settlement charge of approximately $12.8 million was recognized in the third quarter of 2018.
Global Sales
Please refer to Item 1, "Business-Background" for information with respect to our sales by geographic region in 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Outlook
Financial highlights for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 are as follows
1 Reconciliation of these non-GAAP measures to their respective GAAP measure are located in the "- Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measure to the Comparable GAAP Measure" at the end of this section.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, our end markets saw varied demand changes as a result of the economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. Despite the impact of COVID-19 on the broader global economy, we had a strong financial performance in the fourth quarter and were able to achieve a number of important milestones as we continued to transform our business, including completion of the Alluxa acquisition and the sale of STEMCO’s Air Springs and GGB’s bushing block businesses. Full-year sales growth in semiconductor, food and pharmaceuticals, and power generation markets, including the contributions from the acquisitions of LeanTeq, the Aseptic Group, and Alluxa, was more than offset by sales weakness within the general industrial, oil and gas, heavy-duty truck, aerospace, and automotive markets resulting from the impact of the global COVID-19 pandemic. The decline in sales was also driven by the divestitures of businesses in connection with our portfolio reshaping strategy.
Our year-to-date adjusted segment EBITDA was slightly up compared to the prior year, mainly due to contributions by our acquisitions of Alluxa, LeanTeq, and Aseptic. Excluding the impact of acquisitions and divestitures and the impact foreign exchange had on our results, we saw approximately a 14.1% decrease in adjusted segment EBITDA from the prior year. This was mainly attributable to decreased sales due to the challenging conditions of COVID-19. While these challenging conditions have continued to date and some of our businesses continue to experience reduced order levels compared to prior-year levels, we will stay focused on cost management and the achieving the benefits of our portfolio reshaping to help us obtain anticipated increased adjusted segment EBITDA in 2021.
In connection with changes to our segmentation in the fourth quarter of 2020, we aligned the businesses in our Sealing Technologies segment under common leadership and are implementing a shared-services structure. The new structure will allow us to reduce complexity, while increasing efficiency and providing cost savings to the Sealing Technologies segment. We expect to incur restructuring charges in 2021 as we continue to refine the structure of the organization.
The net proceeds from the divestiture of Fairbanks Morse on January 21, 2020 have allowed us to deleverage our balance sheet. We believe our cash balance of approximately $230 million at December 31, 2020 and the availability of $389 million for future borrowings on our revolving credit facility will provide us with ample liquidity to continue the reshaping of the EnPro portfolio. We remain committed to maintaining a strong balance sheet, focusing on aftermarket exposure and recurring revenue opportunities, and leveraging the EnPro Capability Center for continuous improvement and increased value. The EnPro Capability Center is our enterprise-wide program to deploy capabilities across the company to improve productivity, efficiency, and innovation. It is based on lean manufacturing concepts to create value by maintaining world class standards, increasing cash
flow and margins, empowering employees with a learning and ownership-based mentality and instilling a desire to learn from others, contribute to others, and ensure company-wide commitment and accountability.
While the merger and acquisition environment has been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, in connection with our growth strategy, we will continue to evaluate making additional acquisitions to take advantage of opportunities that arise. We may consider making additional divestitures over time and under the right circumstances, to further our long-term strategic goals of refocusing our portfolio on businesses with compelling margins, leading technology, high cash flow return on investment, and favorable secular tailwinds.
We remain committed to our strategy to create shareholder value through earnings growth and balanced capital allocation. We remain focused on disciplined investments for organic growth and innovation, strategic acquisitions, and returning capital to shareholders through dividends and share repurchases. In October 2018, our board of directors authorized a two-year program for expenditures of up to $50.0 million of our outstanding common shares. Prior to the expiration of this authorization in October 2020, we repurchased a total of 0.3 million shares for $20.3 million, of which we repurchased 0.1 million shares for $5.3 million in 2020 and we repurchased 0.2 million shares for $15.0 million in 2019. In October of 2020, our board of directors authorized a new two-year program of up to $50.0 million for the repurchase of our common shares through October 2022. We have yet to make any repurchases under the new authorization. In February 2021, our board of directors approved an increase in the quarterly dividend from $0.26 per share to $0.27 per share.
In connection with our growth strategy, we will continue to evaluate acquisitions; however, the effect of such acquisitions cannot be predicted and therefore is not reflected in this outlook.
Results of Operations
We measure operating performance based on segment earnings before interest, income taxes, depreciation, amortization, and other selected items ("Adjusted Segment EBITDA" or "Segment AEBITDA"), which is segment profit excluding acquisition and divestiture expenses, restructuring costs, impairment charges, non-controlling interest compensation, and depreciation and amortization. Adjusted Segment EBITDA is not defined under GAAP and may not be comparable to similarly-titled measures used by other companies.
Segment profit is total segment revenue reduced by operating, restructuring and other expenses identifiable with the segment. Corporate expenses include general corporate administrative costs. Expenses not directly attributable to the segments, including corporate expenses, net interest expense, asbestos-related expenses, asset impairments, gains/losses related to the sale of assets, and income taxes are not included in the computation of segment profit. The accounting policies of the reportable segments are the same as those for EnPro.
Non-controlling interest compensation allocation represents compensation expense associated with a portion of the rollover equity from the acquisitions of LeanTeq and Alluxa being subject to reduction for certain types of employment terminations of the sellers. This expense is recorded in selling, general, and administrative expenses on our Consolidated Statements of Operations and is directly related to the terms of the acquisitions. This expense will continue to be recognized as compensation expense over the term of the put and call options associated with each of these acquisitions unless certain employment terminations have occurred.
Corporate expenses for 2018 reflect the reclassification of allocated personnel costs from the discontinued Power Systems segment to corporate expenses. The allocated personnel costs relate to services provided to the Power Systems segment by corporate personnel which cannot be reflected in results of discontinued operations pursuant to applicable accounting guidance. The amounts reclassified from Power Systems to corporate expenses were $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Other expense, net in the table above contains all items included in other (operating) expense and other expense, net on our Consolidated Statements of Operations for the years ending December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 with the exception of $26.2 million, $6.3 million, and $19.1 million, respectively, of segment restructuring costs and $0.7 million of corporate restructuring costs in 2019. As noted previously, restructuring costs are considered to be a part of segment profit. Additionally, other expense, net in the table above for the years ending December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 also includes $6.1 million, $4.1 million, and $2.6 million, respectively, of miscellaneous expenses that are either not associated with a particular segment or not considered part of administering the corporate headquarters. These expenses are included in selling, general and administrative expense on our Consolidated Statements of Operations.
2020 Compared to 2019
Sales of $1,074.0 million in 2020 decreased 10.9% from $1,205.7 million in 2019. The following table summarizes the impact of acquisitions, divestitures, and foreign currency on sales by segment:
Following are the key effects of acquisitions and divestitures on sales for 2020 compared to 2019:
•Acquisition of The Aseptic Group in the third quarter of 2019 in the Sealing Technologies segment;
•Acquisition of LeanTeq in the third quarter of 2019 in the Advanced Surface Technologies segment;
•Acquisition of Alluxa in the fourth quarter of 2020 in the Advanced Surface Technologies segments;
•Exit of the brake products business unit located in Rome, Georgia in the third quarter of 2019 in the Sealing Technologies segment;
•Divestiture of Motorwheel in the third quarter of 2020 in the Sealing Technologies segment; and
•Divestiture of AirSprings in the fourth quarter of 2020 in the Sealing Technologies segment.
Following is a discussion of operating results for each segment during 2020 compared to 2019:
Sealing Technologies. Sales of $636.7 million in 2020 reflect a 16.5% decrease compared to $762.4 million in 2019. Excluding the impact of acquisition sales ($5.8 million) and divestitures sales ($43.6 million), sales were down 12.4 % or $88.9 million. This decline was due primarily to decreased demand in the heavy-duty truck, general industrial, and aerospace markets, despite growth in the food and pharmaceutical market.
Segment AEBITDA of $131.0 million in 2020 decreased 0.3% from $131.4 million in 2019. Segment AEBITDA margin increased from 17.2% in 2019 to 20.6% in 2020. Excluding the impact of Segment AEBITDA from acquisitions ($1.9 million), losses from divestitures ($5.0 million), the unfavorable impact of foreign exchange translation ($0.6 million), Segment AEBITDA was down 6.0% or $8.2 million. The Segment AEBITDA impact from our reduced sales ($44.1 million) was offset by reduced marketing and selling expenses ($8.0 million), lower travel-related expenses related to the COVID-19 pandemic ($6.3 million), decreased material costs ($5.7 million), reduced warranty charges ($5.1 million), improved product mix ($4.2 million), decreased research and development spend ($3.2 million), increased pricing ($2.9 million), and manufacturing efficiencies ($2.3 million).
Advanced Surface Technologies. Sales of $171.2 million in 2020 reflect a 42.4% increase compared to $120.2 million in 2019. Excluding the impact of sales attributable to acquisitions ($37.0 million) and the impact of favorable foreign exchange
translation ($0.8 million), sales were up 10.9 % or $13.1 million. This increase was driven by continued strength within the semiconductor market.
Segment AEBITDA of $47.1 million in 2020 increased 100.4% from $23.5 million in 2019. Segment AEBITDA margin increased from 19.6% in 2019 to 27.5% in 2020. Excluding the impact of Segment AEBITDA from acquisitions ($23.5 million) and the favorable impact of foreign exchange translation ($0.5 million), Segment AEBITDA was down 1.7% or $0.4 million. The Segment AEBITDA impact from our increased sales volume ($7.1 million) was offset by an unfavorable product mix and increased production costs ($7.1 million).
Engineered Materials. Sales in 2020 decreased 17.0% to $275.0 million from $331.3 million in 2019. Excluding the impact of favorable foreign exchange translation ($0.8 million), sales were down $57.1 million, or 17.2%, primarily due to weakness in automotive, oil and gas, and general industrial market despite growth in the power generation market.
Segment AEBITDA of $32.5 million in 2020 decreased from $53.7 million in 2019, a decrease of $21.2 million, or 39.5%. Segment AEBITDA margin was 11.8%, down from the 16.2% in 2019. Excluding the impact of favorable foreign exchange translation ($0.4 million), Segment AEBITDA decreased $21.7 million, or 40.4%, driven mainly by decreased sales volume ($35.3 million) and an unfavorable product mix ($4.1 million), partially offset by manufacturing savings driven by restructuring efforts ($7.2 million), reduced marketing and selling costs ($5.7 million), lower travel-related expenses ($2.8 million), and reduced incentive compensation expenses ($2.1 million).
Corporate expenses for 2020 increased $1.5 million as compared to 2019. The increase was driven primarily by higher professional fees and consulting costs ($3.3 million). These costs were partially offset by reduced travel, and meetings expenses due to the COVID-19 pandemic ($1.2 million) and less restructuring costs ($0.7 million).
Interest expense, net in 2020 decreased by $3.3 million as compared to 2019, primarily due to lower average outstanding debt.
Other expense, net in 2020 increased by $3.6 million as compared to 2019, due mainly to a $23.5 million increase in environmental charges, a $7.5 million legal settlement of a products liability claim for goods last supplied in 2008, and $2.0 million of increased miscellaneous expenses that are either not associated with a particular segment or not considered part of administering the corporate headquarters, including COVID-19 related expenses such as facility cleaning fees and personal protective equipment. The increase in environmental costs was principally due to the resolution of environmental litigation brought by the State of Mississippi to recover remediation costs it had incurred with respect to the Water Valley site ($14.0 million) and the establishment of baseline reserves in the fourth quarter for two environmental matters for which we previously did not have sufficient information to estimate a range of reasonable likely remediation costs ($25.4 million, offset by a probable recovery of $3.8 million from the U.S. government). These increases were partially offset by a $13.7 million decrease in losses on sales of businesses, $9.6 million in lower impairment charges, and a $6.3 million reduction in pension (non-service) expense.
Income tax benefit was $3.5 million in both 2020 and 2019. The effective tax rates for 2020 and 2019 were 13.2% and (79.3%) respectively. The effective tax rate for 2020 was primarily driven by the foreign rate differential associated with certain foreign divestitures and earnings that were subject to higher tax rates, the effect of these items resulted in a net $5.2 million increase in tax expense. Our effective tax rate was also impacted by global intangible low-taxed income (“GILTI”) high tax exception election and non-deductible expenses which resulted in a net $2.7 million decrease in tax expense.
Loss from continuing operations was $23.3 million, or $1.15 per share, in 2020 compared to income from continuing operations of $7.8 million, or $0.38 per share, in 2019.
2019 Compared to 2018
Sales of $1,205.7 million in 2019 decreased 5.4% from $1,274.1 million in 2018. The following table summarizes the impact of acquisitions and foreign currency by segment:
Following are the key effects of acquisitions on sales for 2019 compared to 2018:
•Exit of the industrial gas turbine business in the second quarter of 2018 in the Sealing Technologies segment;
•Acquisition of The Aseptic Group in the third quarter of 2019 in the Sealing Technologies segment;
•Acquisition of LeanTeq in the third quarter of 2019 in the Advanced Surface Technologies segment; and
•Exit of the brake products business unit located in Rome, Georgia in the third quarter of 2019 in the Sealing Technologies segment.
Following is a discussion of operating results for each segment during 2019 compared to 2018:
Sealing Technologies. Sales of $762.4 million in 2019 reflect an 6.2% decrease compared to $813.1 million in 2018. Excluding the benefit of acquisitions ($2.5 million), sales from divestitures ($7.3 million), and favorable foreign exchange translation ($1.0 million), sales were down 3.5% or $27.6 million. This decline was due primarily to softness in heavy-duty trucking and power generation markets, partially offset by strengthening in aerospace, food and pharmaceutical, and oil and gas markets.
Segment AEBITDA of $131.4 million in 2019 decreased 4.4% from $137.4 million in 2018. Segment AEBITDA margin increased from 16.9% in 2018 to 17.2% in 2019. Excluding the impact of Segment AEBITDA from acquisitions ($1.9 million), losses from divestitures ($5.7 million) and the unfavorable impact of foreign exchange translation ($1.6 million), Segment AEBITDA was down 8.3% or $11.9 million. The decrease in Segment AEBITDA was primarily attributable to the reduced sales volume ($16.2 million) and an unfavorable product mix ($5.4 million), partially offset by increased pricing ($9.0 million), and reduced warranty charges ($3.4 million).
Advanced Surface Technologies. Sales of $120.2 million in 2019 reflect a 5.4% increase compared to $114.0 million in 2018. Excluding the impact of acquisition sales ($9.0 million) sales were down 2.5 % or $2.8 million. This decrease was driven by a semiconductor market slowdown in 2019, partially offset by gains in aerospace and oil and gas markets.
Adjusted Segment EBITDA of $23.5 million in 2019 increased 33.5% from $17.6 million in 2018. Adjusted EBITDA margins for the segment increased from 15.4% in 2018 to 19.6% in 2019. Excluding the impact from acquisitions ($4.9 million), Segment Adjusted EBITDA was up 5.7% or $1.0 million. The increase in Adjusted Segment EBITDA was driven by a favorable product mix ($1.2 million) and manufacturing efficiencies ($2.3 million), partially offset by the aforementioned decrease in sales volume ($1.5 million) and a decrease in prices ($1.3 million).
Engineered Materials. Sales in 2019 decreased 6.7% to $331.3 million from $355.0 million in 2018. Excluding the impact of unfavorable foreign exchange translation ($11.0 million), sales were down 3.6% or $12.7 million primarily due to weakness in automotive and general industrial markets, partially offset by growth in oil and gas markets.
Segment AEBITDA of $53.7 million in 2019 decreased from $60.4 million in 2018, a decrease of $6.7 million, or 11.1%. Segment AEBITDA margin for the segment was 16.2%, down from the 17.0% in 2018. Excluding the impact of unfavorable foreign exchange translation ($2.3 million), Segment AEBITDA decreased $4.4 million, or 7.3%, driven mainly by decreased sales volume ($7.9 million) and impacts of tariffs ($1.0 million), partially offset by reduced incentive compensation expense ($3.3 million) and a more favorable product mix ($1.5 million).
Corporate expenses for 2019 increased $1.5 million as compared to 2018. The increase was driven primarily by higher restructuring costs ($1.0 million), increased professional services costs ($1.0 million), the favorable impact in 2018 from recognizing share based awards at fair value due to the decline in our share price during the period ($1.3 million), and increased costs related to the sale of Fairbanks Morse ($0.8 million), partially offset by decreased research and development costs ($1.0 million) due to the discontinuance of corporate-funded research and development beginning in 2019 and reduced medical costs ($1.9 million).
Interest expense, net in 2019 decreased by $9.1 million as compared to 2018, primarily due to lower average outstanding debt and a $3.2 million increase in interest credits in 2019 associated with our cross-currency swap agreements.
Other expense, net in 2019 increased by $16.2 million as compared to 2018, due mainly to $25.7 million of impairment charges in 2019, a $16.3 million loss on sale of our brake products business in 2019, $1.1 million increase in environmental reserves and costs from previously disposed of businesses, partially offset by a $8.6 million less pension (non-service) costs in 2019 and a $18.1 million expense in 2018 for extinguishment of debt upon the redemption of the Old Notes.
Income tax benefit was $3.5 million in 2019 and income tax expense was $19.8 million in 2018. The effective tax rates for 2019 and 2018 were (79.3%) and 131.4%, respectively. The effective tax rate for 2019 was lower than the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate of 21.0% primarily due to the release of foreign valuation allowances, offset by tax on the global intangible low-taxed income (“GILTI”). The effect of these items resulted in a net $12.9 million decrease in tax expense. Our effective tax rate was also increased by certain of our earnings that were subject to higher tax rates in foreign jurisdictions.
Income from continuing operations was $7.8 million, or $0.38 per share, in 2019 compared to loss from continuing operations of $4.7 million, or $0.22 per share, in 2018.
Restructuring and Other Costs
We incurred $46.7 million, $35.1 million and $22.2 million of restructuring and impairment costs during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
In 2020 our Stemco business in our Sealing Technologies segment underwent significant restructuring and portfolio reshaping activities, including the exit of our Motorwheel® and Crewson® brake adjuster brands and our Lunar® air disc brake business. In our Engineered Materials segment, we were able to successfully restructure and divest our bushing block business operated in Dieuze, France. We also took significant restructuring activities in our CPI German workforce.
Additionally, sales declines by business utilizing two indefinite lived trademarks within our Sealing Technologies segment were determined to be triggering events for impairment analysis and an impairment charge was taken. Substantially all costs associated with these initiatives, as well as other smaller restructuring and impairment charges, were incurred or accrued for as of December 31, 2020. Workforce reductions in 2020 associated with our restructuring activities totaled 289 administrative and manufacturing positions. Of the $46.7 million of restructuring and impairment charges taken in 2020, $17.4 million was related to severance and other cash restructuring charges while $29.3 million was related to impairments and write-downs of assets, including long-lived and indefinite-lived intangible assets, property, plant, and equipment, and inventory.
During 2019, we conducted several restructuring activities in our Stemco division in the Sealing Technologies segment, mostly consisting of the exit of our automatic tire inflation systems and RF-based tire pressure monitoring and inflation system product lines and impairments related to intangible assets and property, plant and equipment of our Motorwheel product line. We also recorded restructuring and impairment costs related the shut down of our ATDynamics business completed in January 2020. Substantially all costs associated with these initiatives, as well as other smaller restructuring and impairment charges, were incurred or accrued for as of December 31, 2019. Workforce reductions in 2019 associated with our restructuring activities totaled 121 administrative and manufacturing positions. Of the $35.1 million of restructuring and impairment charges taken in 2019, $6.3 million was related to severance and other cash restructuring charges while $28.8 million was related to impairments and write-downs of assets, including long-lived and indefinite-lived intangible assets, property, plant, and equipment, and inventory.
In 2018, we commenced and completed the exit from our industrial gas turbine business in the Sealing Technologies segment located in Oxford, Massachusetts and we implemented a restructuring plan under which our Stemco heavy-duty truck business in the Sealing Technologies segment discontinued the manufacturing of brake drum friction. Substantially all costs associated with these initiatives were incurred in 2018, with the exception of severance costs related to our exit of the manufacturing of brake drum friction occurring in January 2019. Workforce reductions in 2018 associated with our exit from the industrial gas turbine business and other smaller targeted restructuring activities totaled 98 administrative and manufacturing positions. Of the $22.2 million of restructuring and impairment charges taken in 2019, $8.0 million was related to severance and other cash restructuring charges while $14.2 million was related to impairments and write-downs of assets, including long-lived intangible assets, property, plant, and equipment, and inventory.
Please see the "Overview and Outlook" section of Management's Discussion and Analysis and Note 4 to our consolidated financial statements for further information.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash requirements for, but not limited to, working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions, and debt repayments have been funded from cash balances on hand, revolver borrowings and cash generated from operations. We are proactively pursuing acquisition opportunities. Should we need additional capital, we have resources available, which are discussed in this section under the heading “Capital Resources.”
As of December 31, 2020, we held $83.4 million of cash and cash equivalents in the United States and $146.1 million of cash outside of the United States. If the funds held outside the United States were needed for our operations in the U.S., we have several methods to repatriate without significant tax effects, including repayment of intercompany loans, distributions subject to a 100 percent dividends-received deduction for income tax purposes, or distributions of previously-taxed earnings.
Because of the transition tax, GILTI, and Subpart F provisions, undistributed earnings of our foreign subsidiaries totaling $196 million at year-end have been subjected to U.S. income tax or are eligible for the 100 percent dividends-received deduction under Section 245A of the Internal Revenue Code ("IRC") provided in the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. Whether through the application of the 100 percent dividends received deduction, or distribution of these previously-taxed earnings, we do not intend to distribute foreign earnings that will be subject to any significant incremental U.S. or foreign tax. During 2020, we repatriated $81.4 million of earnings from our foreign subsidiaries, resulting in no incremental U.S. tax and only $2.0 million of foreign withholding taxes. As a result, we have not recognized a deferred tax liability on our investment in foreign subsidiaries.
The net operating loss (“NOL”) resulting from a 2017 deduction in connection with the funding of our asbestos settlement trust was carried back to offset federal taxable income reported in the preceding ten years. We filed an initial carryback claim in May 2018 and received federal refunds totaling $96.9 million in 2018 ($95.8 million in June 2018 and $1.1 million in July 2018) and an additional $17.5 million in February 2019. In addition, amended income tax returns for the preceding ten years were filed in December 2018 to capture foreign tax credits freed up during the carryback period, and we expect federal refunds in 2021 from those returns totaling $21.8 million. The carryback claim and the amended returns have also freed up an additional $14.9 million in foreign tax credits, of which approximately $1.6 million were utilized to offset our 2019 federal tax liability with the remaining balance utilized to reduce taxes in 2020 and 2021.
Proceeds from Disposition
On December 13, 2019, we announced the signing of a definitive agreement to sell Fairbanks Morse, which transaction closed on January 21, 2020. Net proceeds received were approximately $444.3 million, of which $143.9 million was utilized to pay off all of the then outstanding borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility (defined below in "-Capital Resources"). Taxes on the gain of approximately $40 million were paid in 2020.
Cash Flows
Operating activities of continuing operations provided cash in the amount of $57.6 million, $130.8 million and $212.8 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The decrease in operating cash flows in 2020 versus 2019 was primarily attributable to increased tax payments ($58.4 million) and increased payments related to environmental remediation ($26.5 million), partially offset by improved working capital. The decrease in operating cash flow in 2019 versus 2018 was primarily attributable to higher income tax refunds in 2018 driven by the asbestos settlement trust funding payments ($86.7 million), higher insurance receipts in 2018 ($24.1), partially offset by higher income from continuing operations and lower net working capital.
Investing activities of continuing operations provided $216.1 million in 2020, used $331.1 million in 2019, and provided $1.1 million of cash in 2018. The increase in cash provided by investing activities in 2020 was primarily driven by cash received from divestitures, including the sales of Fairbanks Morse, our Air Springs business and other businesses during the year ($475.1), partially offset by cash used in the acquisition of Alluxa ($238.3 million) as compared to cash used in 2019, primarily attributable to acquisitions of LeanTeq and Aseptic ($310.5 million). The increased cash usage in 2019 as compared to 2018 was driven by $310.5 million used for acquiring businesses, $26.3 million more cash provided by investing activities in 2018 for the sale of fixed assets and businesses, primarily from the sale of land and building at Oxford, Massachusetts as we exited our industrial gas turbine business of our Technetics division in the Sealing Technologies segment, and $9.3 million provided by settling derivative contracts in 2018, partially offset by lower capital expenditures in 2019 ($14.5 million).
Financing activities of continuing operations used $167.3 million in cash in 2020, primarily attributable to net payments on our Revolving Credit Facility and Term Loan Facility (as defined below) of $138.3 million and $21.7 million in payments of dividends. Financing activities of continuing operations provided $123.8 million in 2019 primarily from $17.1 million net draw on the Revolving Credit Facility, and $149.1 million net proceeds from a new term loan facility, partially offset by $20.9 million in dividends paid and $15.0 million in cash used to repurchase stock. Financing activities used $252.4 million in 2018,
primarily from $118.4 million in redemption of the Old Notes, net of the net proceeds from the issuance of the Senior Notes (which terms are defined below), $56.8 million in net repayments on our revolving credit facility, $50.0 million in cash used to repurchase stock, and $20.3 million in dividends paid. Funding for this activity was mainly derived from the previously discussed tax refunds and repatriation of previously taxed earnings from our foreign subsidiaries.
Capital Resources
Senior Secured Revolving Credit Facility. On September 25, 2019, we entered into a First Amendment (the "First Amendment") to our Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the "Credit Agreement”) among EnPro Industries, Inc. and EnPro Holdings, Inc. as borrowers, the guarantors party thereto, the lenders party thereto and Bank of America, N.A., as Administrative Agent, Swing Line Lender and Letter of Credit Issuer. The Credit Agreement provides for a five-year, senior secured revolving credit facility of $400.0 million (the “Revolving Credit Facility”) and a five-year, senior secured term loan facility of $150.0 million (the "Term Loan Facility" and, together with the Revolving Credit Facility, the "Facilities"). The Amended Credit Agreement also provides that the borrowers may seek incremental term loans and/or additional revolving credit commitments in an amount equal to the greater of $225.0 million and 100% of consolidated EBITDA (as defined) for the most recently ended four-quarter period for which we have reported financial results, plus additional amounts based on a consolidated senior secured leverage ratio.
Initially, borrowings under the Facilities bore interest at an annual rate of LIBOR plus 1.50% or base rate plus 0.50%, with the interest rates under the Facilities being subject to incremental increases based on a consolidated total net leverage ratio. In addition, a commitment fee accrues with respect to the unused amount of the Revolving Credit Facility at an annual rate of 0.175%, which rate is also subject to incremental increase or decrease based on a consolidated total net leverage ratio.
The Term Loan Facility amortizes on a quarterly basis in an annual amount equal to 2.50% of the original principal amount of the Term Loan Facility in each of years one through three, 5.00% of such original principal amount in year four, and 1.25% of such original principal amount in each of the first three quarters of year five, with the remaining outstanding principal amount payable at maturity.
The Facilities are subject to prepayment with the net cash proceeds of certain asset sales not reinvested in acquisitions within a specified period, casualty or condemnation events, and non-permitted debt issuances. There is no prepayment penalty for a full or partial repayment of the Facilities at any time.
The Company and EnPro Holdings are the permitted borrowers under the Revolving Credit Facility. We have the ability to add foreign subsidiaries as borrowers under the Revolving Credit Facility for up to $100.0 million (or its foreign currency equivalent) in aggregate borrowings, subject to certain conditions. Each of our domestic, consolidated subsidiaries (other than any subsidiaries that may be designated as "unrestricted" by the Company from time to time) is required to guarantee the obligations of the borrowers under the Revolving Credit Facility, and each of our existing domestic, consolidated subsidiaries has entered into the Credit Agreement to provide such a guarantee.
Borrowings under the Facilities are secured by a first-priority pledge of the following assets:
•100% of the capital stock of each domestic, consolidated subsidiary of the Company (other than unrestricted subsidiaries);
•65% of the capital stock of any first tier foreign subsidiary of the Company and its domestic, consolidated subsidiaries (other than unrestricted subsidiaries); and
•substantially all of the assets (including, without limitation, machinery and equipment, inventory and other goods, accounts receivable, certain owned real estate and related fixtures, bank accounts, general intangibles, financial assets, investment property, license rights, patents, trademarks, trade names, copyrights, chattel paper, insurance proceeds, contract rights, hedge agreements, documents, instruments, indemnification rights, tax refunds and cash) of the Company and its domestic, consolidated subsidiaries (other than unrestricted subsidiaries)
The Credit Agreement contains certain financial covenants and required financial ratios, including:
•a maximum consolidated total net leverage ratio of not more than 4.25 to 1.0 (with total debt, for the purposes of such ratio, to be net of up to $125 million of unrestricted cash of EnPro Industries, Inc. and its domestic, consolidated subsidiaries), which ratio will decrease to 4.0 to 1.0 for each fiscal quarter beginning with the fiscal quarter ending December 31, 2020 and, once so decreased, may be increased (up to three times) at the borrowers' option to not more than 4.5 to 1.0 for the for-quarter period following a significant acquisition; and
•a minimum consolidated interest coverage ratio of at least 2.5 to 1.0.
The Credit Agreement contains affirmative and negative covenants (subject, in each case, to customary exceptions and qualifications), including covenants that limit our ability to, among other things:
•grant liens on our assets;
•incur additional indebtedness (including guarantees and other contingent obligations);
•make certain investments (including loans and advances);
•merge or make other fundamental changes;
•sell or otherwise dispose of property or assets;
•pay dividends and other distributions and prepay certain indebtedness;
•make changes in the nature of our business;
•enter into transactions with our affiliates;
•enter into burdensome contracts; and
•modify or terminate documents related to certain indebtedness.
We were in compliance with all covenants of the Credit Agreement as of December 31, 2020. On January 19, 2021, we entered into an amendment to the credit facility that waived the requirement to prepay the Term Loan Facility with remaining excess net cash proceeds related to the sale of Fairbanks Morse that had not been reinvested in operating assets within 365 days from the date of the sale.
The borrowing availability under our Revolving Credit Facility at December 31, 2020 was $388.6 million after giving consideration to $11.4 million of outstanding letters of credit.
Senior Notes. On October 17, 2018, we completed the offering of $350 million aggregate principal amount of our 5.75% senior notes due 2026 (the "Senior Notes") and applied the net proceeds of that offering, together with borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility, to redeem on October 31, 2018 the full $450 million aggregate principal amount of our outstanding 5.875% senior notes due 2022 (the "Old Notes"), of which $300 million aggregate principal amount were issued in 2014 and $150 million aggregate principal amount were issued in a follow-on offering in 2017. The Old Notes were redeemed at a price equal to 102.938% of the aggregate principal amount thereof plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but not including, the redemption date. We recorded a loss on the redemption of the Old Notes of approximately $18.1 million in the fourth quarter of 2018.
The Senior Notes were issued to investors at 100% of the principal amount thereof. The Senior Notes are unsecured, unsubordinated obligations of EnPro and mature on October 15, 2026. Interest on the Senior Notes accrues at a rate of 5.75% per annum and is payable semi-annually in cash in arrears on April 15 and October 15 of each year, commencing April 15, 2019. The Senior Notes are required to be guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by each of EnPro’s existing and future direct and indirect domestic subsidiaries that is a borrower under, or guarantees, our indebtedness under the Revolving Credit Facility or guarantees any other Capital Markets Indebtedness (as defined in the indenture governing the Senior Notes) of EnPro or any of the guarantors.
On or after October 15, 2021, we may, on any one or more occasions, redeem all or a part of the Senior Notes at specified redemption prices plus accrued and unpaid interest. In addition, we may redeem a portion of the aggregate principal amount of the Senior Notes before October 15, 2021 with the net cash proceeds from certain equity offerings at a specified redemption price plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but not including, the redemption date. We may also redeem some or all of the Senior Notes before October 15, 2021 at a redemption price of 100% of the principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but not including, the redemption date, plus a “make whole” premium.
Each holder of the Senior Notes may require us to repurchase some or all of the Senior Notes held by such holder for cash upon the occurrence of a defined “change of control” event. Our ability to redeem the Senior Notes prior to maturity is subject to certain conditions, including in certain cases the payment of make-whole amounts.
The indenture governing the Senior Notes requires us to apply the net cash proceeds of certain asset sales not reinvested in acquisitions, capital expenditures, or used to repay or otherwise reduce specified indebtedness within a specified period, to the extent the remaining net proceeds exceed a specified amount, to offer to repurchase the Senior Notes at a price equal to 100% of the principal amount thereof plus accrued and unpaid interest. At December 31, 2020, approximately $10 million of the excess net cash proceeds related to the sale of Fairbanks Morse had not yet been reinvested. We expect these remaining excess proceeds to be reinvested prior to April 25, 2021, the date at which these excess proceeds must be reinvested, or applied to reduce indebtedness, to avoid the requirement to make a Senior Notes repurchase offer with respect to the proceeds from the sale of Fairbanks Morse.
Share Repurchase Program
In October 2017, our board of directors authorized a new program for the repurchase of up to $50.0 million of our outstanding common shares. During 2018, we repurchased 0.7 million shares for $50.0 million under this program.
In October 2018, our board of directors authorized a two-year program for expenditures of up to $50.0 million of our outstanding common shares. Prior to the expiration of this authorization in October 2020, we repurchased a total of 0.3 million shares for $20.3 million, of which we repurchased 0.1 million shares for $5.3 million in 2020 and we repurchased 0.2 million shares for $15.0 million in 2019.
In October of 2020, our board of directors authorized a new two-year program of up to $50.0 million for the repurchased of our outstanding common shares through October 2022. We have not made any repurchases under the new authorization.
Dividends
On January 13, 2015, our board of directors adopted a policy under which it intends to declare regular quarterly cash dividends on EnPro’s common stock, with the determination of whether to declare a dividend and the amount being considered each quarter, after taking into account our cash flow, earnings, cash position, financial position and other relevant matters. In 2020, our board declared a dividend of $0.26 per share in each quarter, and on February 17, 2021 we announced that our board of directors had increased the quarterly dividend to $0.27 per share, commencing with the dividend to be paid on March 17, 2021 to all shareholders of record as of March 3, 2021. Each of the Credit Agreement and the indenture governing the Senior Notes includes covenants restricting the payment of dividends, but includes a basket permitting the payment of cash dividends of up to $50.0 million per year under the Credit Agreement and $60.0 million per year under the indenture governing the Senior Notes. Other baskets may be available under that the agreement governing the Revolving Credit Facility and the indenture governing the Senior Notes to permit the payment of dividends in excess of the respective basket amount.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements, in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures pertaining to contingent assets and liabilities. Note 1, “Overview, Basis of Presentation, Significant Accounting Policies and Recently Issued Accounting Guidance,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements describes the significant accounting policies used to prepare the Consolidated Financial Statements and recently issued accounting guidance. On an ongoing basis we evaluate our estimates, including, but not limited to, those related to bad debts, inventories, intangible assets, income taxes, warranty obligations, restructuring, pensions and other postretirement benefits, and contingencies and litigation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from our estimates.
We believe the following accounting policies and estimates are the most critical. Some of them involve significant judgments and uncertainties and could potentially result in materially different results under different assumptions and conditions.
Revenue Recognition
Our largest stream of revenue is product revenue for shipments of the various products discussed further in Note 19, "Business Segment Information", to our consolidated financial statements, along with a smaller amount of revenue from services that take place over a short period of time. We recognize revenue at a point in time following the transfer of control, which typically occurs when a product is shipped or delivered, depending on the terms of the sale agreement, or when services are rendered. Shipping costs billed to customers are recognized as revenue and expensed in cost of goods sold as a fulfillment cost when control of the product transfers to the customer. Payment from customers is typically due within 30 days of the sale for sales in the U.S. For sales outside of the U.S., payment terms may be longer based upon local business customs, but are typically due no later than 90 days after the sale.
Pensions and Postretirement Benefits
We and certain of our subsidiaries sponsor domestic and foreign defined benefit pension and other postretirement plans. Major assumptions used in the accounting for these employee benefit plans include the discount rate, expected return on plan assets, rate of increase in employee compensation levels and assumed health care cost trend rates. Assumptions are determined based on data available to us and appropriate market indicators, and are evaluated each year as of the plans’ measurement date. A change in any of these assumptions could have a material effect on net periodic pension and postretirement benefit costs
reported in the Consolidated Statements of Operations, as well as amounts recognized in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. See Note 15, "Pensions and Postretirement Benefits," to the consolidated financial statements for a discussion of pension and postretirement benefits.
Income Taxes
We use the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Temporary differences arising between the tax basis of an asset or liability and its carrying amount on the Consolidated Balance Sheet are used to calculate future income tax assets or liabilities. This method also requires the recognition of deferred tax benefits, such as net operating loss carryforwards. Valuation allowances are recorded as appropriate to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount considered likely to be realized. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to the taxable income (losses) in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the date of enactment of the change. A tax benefit from an uncertain tax position is recognized only if we believe it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained on its technical merits. If the recognition threshold for the tax position is met, only the portion of the tax benefit that we believe is greater than 50 percent likely to be realized is recorded.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
We do not amortize goodwill, but instead it is subject to annual impairment testing. The goodwill asset impairment test involves comparing the fair value of a reporting unit to its carrying amount. If the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, a second step of comparing the implied fair value of the reporting unit’s goodwill to the carrying amount of that goodwill is required to measure the potential goodwill impairment loss.
To estimate the fair value of our reporting units, we use both discounted cash flow and market valuation approaches. The discounted cash flow approach uses cash flow projections to calculate the fair value of each reporting unit while the market approach relies on market multiples of similar companies. There are inherent assumptions and estimates used in developing future cash flows which require management to apply judgment to the analysis of goodwill impairment, including projected revenues and profit margins, projected capital expenditures, changes in working capital, discount rates and tax rates. For the market approach, we chose a group of peer companies we believe are representative of each respective reporting unit. We used a 75% weighting for the discounted cash flow valuation approach and a 25% weighting for the market valuation approach, reflecting our belief that the discounted cash flow valuation approach provides a better indicator of value since it reflects the specific cash flows anticipated to be generated in the future by the business.
As a result of the formation of our Advanced Surface Technologies segment and the transition of a portion of our Technetics reporting unit from the Sealing Technologies segment to the Advanced Surface Technologies segment, our Technetics reporting unit was tested for impairment both before and after the allocation of goodwill and the newly formed Semiconductor reporting unit (our LeanTeq and Technetics semiconductor business) was tested after the allocation. We determined that the Technetics reporting unit was not impaired prior to the transfer of goodwill. After the transfer, the Technetics reporting unit was allocated $67.7 million of goodwill and, as of our allocation date of December 1, 2020, we determined it was not impaired as its fair value exceeded its carrying value by 26%. We also determined that our Semiconductor reporting unit, allocated $180.1 million of goodwill as of our allocation date of December 1, 2020, was not impaired and its fair value exceeded its carrying value by 2%. Any change in assumptions, including forecasted performance or external market information used in our fair value calculation, including the determination of our discount rate, could result in a future impairment of our Semiconductor reporting unit.
We will continue to monitor the Semiconductor reporting unit's performance as well as other market factors and test for impairment if we determine a triggering event has occurred. All other reporting units were tested at our annual test date of October 1, 2020 and their fair value exceeded their carrying value by at least 20%. We will test all reporting units again at our next test date of October 1, 2021, or earlier as circumstances may require.
The fair value of intangible assets associated with acquisitions is determined using an income valuation approach. Projecting discounted future cash flows requires us to make significant estimates regarding projected revenues and profit margins, projected capital expenditures, changes in working capital, discount rates, attrition rates, royalty rates, obsolescence rates and tax rates.
Many of the factors used in assessing fair value are outside the control of management, and it is reasonably likely that assumptions and estimates will change in future periods. These changes could result in future impairments. For additional information, see “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Overview and Outlook” as well as Notes 1 and 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Impact of Pending Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1, "Overview, Basis of Presentation, Significant Accounting Policies and Recently Issued Accounting Guidance," to our consolidated financial statements for a discussion of recently issued accounting guidance that we have not yet adopted.
Contingencies
General
A description of certain environmental and other legal matters relating to certain of our subsidiaries is included in this section. In addition to the matters noted herein, we are from time to time subject to, and are presently involved in, other litigation and legal proceedings arising in the ordinary course of business. We believe the outcome of such other litigation and legal proceedings will not have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. Expenses for administrative and legal proceedings are recorded when incurred.
Environmental
Our facilities and operations are subject to federal, state and local environmental and occupational health and safety laws and regulations of the U.S. and foreign countries. We take a proactive approach in our efforts to comply with these laws and regulations as they relate to our manufacturing operations and in proposing and implementing any remedial plans that may be necessary. We also regularly conduct comprehensive environmental, health and safety audits at our facilities to maintain compliance and improve operational efficiency.
Although we believe past operations were in substantial compliance with the then applicable regulations, we or one or more of our subsidiaries are involved with various remediation activities or an investigation to determine responsibility for environmental conditions at 20 sites. At 14 of these 20 sites, the future cost per site for us or our subsidiary is expected to exceed $100,000. Of these 20 sites, 18 are sites where we or one or more of our subsidiaries formerly conducted business operations but no longer do, and 2 are sites where we conduct manufacturing operations. Investigations have been completed for 16 of the 20 sites and are in progress at 3 sites. An investigation to determine responsibility for environmental conditions is ongoing at one site.
Our policy is to accrue environmental investigation and remediation costs when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated. For sites with multiple future projected cost scenarios for identified feasible investigation and remediation options where no one estimate is more likely than all the others, our policy is to accrue the lowest estimate among the range of estimates. The measurement of the liability is based on an evaluation of currently available facts with respect to each individual situation and takes into consideration factors such as existing technology, presently enacted laws and regulations and prior experience in the remediation of similar contaminated sites. Liabilities are established for all sites based on these factors. As assessments and remediation progress at individual sites, these liabilities are reviewed periodically and adjusted to reflect additional technical data and legal information. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had accrued liabilities aggregating $42.2 million and $36.0 million, respectively, for estimated future expenditures relating to environmental contingencies. These amounts have been recorded on an undiscounted basis in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Given the uncertainties regarding the status of laws, regulations, enforcement policies, the impact of other parties potentially being fully or partially liable, technology and information related to individual sites, we do not believe it is possible to develop an estimate of the range of reasonably possible environmental loss in excess of our recorded liabilities.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, new information became available that enabled us to develop and refine estimated costs of future remediation at the following sites:
•Water Valley. EnPro Holdings has been managing trichloroethylene soil and groundwater contamination at the site in Water Valley, Mississippi in connection with the former operation in the 1970s and 1980s by a corporate predecessor of a plant located at the site, which plant was divested to BorgWarner, Inc. ("BorgWarner") in 1996. The Mississippi Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) issued orders against EnPro Holdings requiring evaluation of potential vapor intrusion into residential properties and commercial facilities located over the groundwater plume as well as requiring additional groundwater investigation and remediation. All of the work to be performed at the residential area, the plant and off-site is set forth in an agreed Order that we and MDEQ entered into on September 11, 2017 and we established reserves with respect to the liability associated with the anticipated remediation. Based upon then limited information regarding any incremental remediation or other actions that may be required at the site, we were unable to estimate any further loss or a reasonably possible range of loss related to this matter. During the quarter ended
December 31, 2020, we received the results from groundwater and vapor sampling under the plant building, which results provided a basis to estimate the costs to remediate the contamination under the building, and we received approval of the design for the remediation system to be operated in the area of contamination behind the building, which approval allowed for updating of previously estimated construction and operating and maintenance costs. Based on this information, we increased the reserve for Water Valley by $12.5 million, to $15.6 million at December 31, 2020, to reflect the minimum of a range of reasonably likely scenarios to effect the remediation of the contamination under the building and the other areas where contamination is located. The total expense related to third-party claim settlements and remediation of the Water Valley site in calendar 2020, including reserve adjustments related to remediation, was $26.5 million. Total cash payments related to third-party claim settlements and remediation at Water Valley was $20.1 million in 2020. The final selection of the remediation option and design of the remedial system to address contamination under the building is subject to MDEQ approval. We are not able at this time to estimate the upper end of a range of liability with respect to the reasonably likely scenarios to effect remediation at this site.
•Arizona Uranium Mines. EnPro Holdings has received notices from the EPA asserting that it is a potentially responsible party under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act ("CERCLA") as the successor to a former operator of eight uranium mines in Arizona. The former operator conducted operations at the mines from 1954 to 1957. In the 1990s, remediation work performed by others at these sites consisted of capping the exposed areas of the mines. We have previously reserved amounts of probable loss associated with these mines, principally including the cost of the investigative work to be conducted at such mines. We entered into an Administrative Settlement Agreement and Order on Consent for Interim Removal Action with the EPA effective November 7, 2017 for the performance of this work. The balance in these reserves as of September 30, 2020 was $1.0 million. During the quarter ended December 31, 2020, the EPA initiated group discussions with EnPro Holdings and other potentially responsible parties to resolve various technical issues, including the development of cleanup standards. Based on these discussions and subsequent discussions with other responsible parties with similar sites, we have concluded that further remedial work beyond maintenance of and minor repairs to the existing caps is probable, and we have evaluated the feasibility of various remediation scenarios. As a result, we increased the reserve for these sites by $12.9 million to $13.9 million at December 31, 2020, to reflect the low end of the range of our reasonably likely liability with respect to these sites. The expected contribution of $3.8 million from the U.S. government towards remediation of the site is considered probable and is included in other assets in the accompanying consolidated balance sheet at December 31, 2020. We are not able at this time to estimate the upper end of a range of liability with respect to these sites.
•Pine Bluff. For several years, we have been operating a groundwater remediation system at the site of an electrical transformer facility in Pine Bluff, Arkansas, which facility was sold by a corporate predecessor of EnPro Holdings in 1994. Pursuant to the terms of the sale agreement, EnPro Holdings, as the corporate successor has responsibility for pre-closing environmental conditions at the site and the existing remediation system at the site had been approved by the Arkansas Division of Environmental Quality (the “ADEQ”). During the quarter ended December 31, 2020, at the initiation of the ADEQ, we conducted further sampling and technical reviews to determine whether part of the contamination was migrating off-site that was not being captured by the existing remediation system. Based on all the sampling results received and reviewed, we concluded that modifications to the remediation program will be required. Based on this information, we increased the reserve for the Pine Bluff site by $2.8 million, to $2.8 million at December 31, 2020, to reflect the low end of the range of our reasonably likely liability with respect to this site. Total cash payments in calendar year 2020 were $0.9 million. We are not able at this time to estimate the upper end of a range of liability with respect to this site.
We believe that our accruals for specific environmental liabilities are adequate for those liabilities based on currently available information. Based upon limited information regarding any incremental remediation or other actions that may be required at these sites, we cannot estimate any further loss or a reasonably possible range of loss related to these matters. Actual costs to be incurred in future periods may vary from estimates because of the inherent uncertainties in evaluating environmental exposures due to unknown and changing conditions, changing government regulations and legal standards regarding liability.
Based on our prior ownership of Crucible Steel Corporation a/k/a Crucible, Inc. (“Crucible”), we may have additional contingent liabilities in one or more significant environmental matters. One such matter, which is included in the 20 sites referred to above, is the Lower Passaic River Study Area of the Diamond Alkali Superfund Site in New Jersey. Crucible operated a steel mill abutting the Passaic River in Harrison, New Jersey from the 1930s until 1974, which was one of many industrial operations on the river dating back to the 1800s. Certain contingent environmental liabilities related to this site were retained by a predecessor of our EnPro Holdings Inc. subsidiary (which, including its corporate predecessors is referred to as "EnPro Holdings") when it sold a majority interest in Crucible Materials Corporation (the successor of Crucible) in 1985. The United States Environmental Protection Agency (the “EPA”) notified our subsidiary in September 2003 that it is a potentially
responsible party (“PRP”) for Superfund response actions in the lower 17-mile stretch of the Passaic River known as the Lower Passaic River Study Area.
EnPro Holdings and approximately 70 of the numerous other PRPs, known as the Cooperating Parties Group, are parties to a May 2007 Administrative Order on Consent with the EPA to perform a Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study (“RI/FS”) of the contaminants in the Lower Passaic River Study Area. In September 2018, EnPro Holdings withdrew from the Cooperating Parties Group but remains a party to the May 2007 Administrative Order on Consent. The RI/FS was completed and submitted to the EPA at the end of April 2015. The RI/FS recommends a targeted dredge and cap remedy with monitored natural recovery and adaptive management for the Lower Passaic River Study Area. The cost of such remedy is estimated to be $726 million. Previously, on April 11, 2014, the EPA released its Focused Feasibility Study (the “FFS”) with its proposed plan for remediating the lower eight miles of the Lower Passaic River Study Area. The FFS calls for bank-to-bank dredging and capping of the riverbed of that portion of the river and estimates a range of the present value of aggregate remediation costs of approximately $953 million to approximately $1.73 billion, although estimates of the costs and the timing of costs are inherently imprecise. On March 3, 2016, the EPA issued the final Record of Decision (ROD) as to the remedy for the lower eight miles of the Lower Passaic River Study Area, with the maximum estimated cost being reduced by the EPA from $1.73 billion to $1.38 billion, primarily due to a reduction in the amount of cubic yards of material that will be dredged. In October 2016, Occidental Chemical Corporation, the successor to the entity that operated the Diamond Alkali chemical manufacturing facility, reached an agreement with the EPA to develop the design for this proposed remedy at an estimated cost of $165 million. The EPA has estimated that it will take approximately four years to develop this design. On June 30, 2018, Occidental Chemical Corporation sued over 120 parties, including the Company, in the United States District Court for New Jersey seeking recovery of response costs under the Federal Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act ("CERCLA
No final allocations of responsibility have been made among the numerous PRPs that have received notices from the EPA, there are numerous identified PRPs that have not yet received PRP notices from the EPA, and there are likely many PRPs that have not yet been identified. In September 2017, EPA hired a third-party allocator to develop an allocation of costs among a large number of the parties identified by EPA as having potential responsibility, including the Company. In the fourth quarter of 2020, the third-party allocator issued his report, which determined the range for EnPro's liability to be between $35,000 and $950,000.
Based on our evaluation of the site, during 2014 we accrued a liability of $3.5 million related to environmental remediation costs associated with the lower eight miles of the Lower Passaic River Study Area, which was our estimate of the low end of a range of reasonably possible costs, with no estimate within the range being a better estimate than the minimum. Since 2015, we incurred $0.9 million in remediation costs. Based on the third party allocator's report, on December 31, 2020 we reduced the reserve to $1.6 million. Our future remediation costs could be significantly greater than the $1.0 million accrual at December 31, 2020. With respect to the upper nine miles of the Lower Passaic River Study Area, we are unable to estimate a range of reasonably possible costs.
Except with respect to the lower eight miles of the Lower Passaic River Study Area, we are unable to estimate a reasonably possible range of loss related to any other contingent environmental liability based on our prior ownership of Crucible.
See Note 20 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding our environmental contingencies and see the following section titled “Crucible Steel Corporation a/k/a Crucible, Inc.”
Crucible Steel Corporation a/k/a Crucible, Inc.
Crucible, which was engaged primarily in the manufacture and distribution of high technology specialty metal products, was a wholly owned subsidiary of EnPro Holdings until 1983 when its assets and liabilities were distributed to a new subsidiary, Crucible Materials Corporation. EnPro Holdings sold a majority of the outstanding shares of Crucible Materials Corporation in 1985 and divested its remaining minority interest in 2004. Crucible Materials Corporation filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in May 2009 and is no longer conducting operations.
We have certain ongoing obligations, which are included in other liabilities in our Consolidated Balance Sheets, including workers’ compensation, retiree medical and other retiree benefit matters, in addition to those mentioned previously related to EnPro Holdings' period of ownership of Crucible. Based on EnPro Holdings' prior ownership of Crucible, we may have certain additional contingent liabilities, including liabilities in one or more significant environmental matters included in the matters discussed in “Environmental” above. We are investigating these matters. Except with respect to those matters for which we have an accrued liability as discussed in “Environmental” above, we are unable to estimate a reasonably possible range of loss related to these contingent liabilities. See Note 20 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for information about certain liabilities relating to EnPro Holdings' ownership of Crucible.
Warranties
We provide warranties on many of our products. The specific terms and conditions of these warranties vary depending on the product and the market in which the product is sold. We record a liability based upon estimates of the costs we may incur under our warranties based upon a review of historical warranty experience and information regarding the number, nature, and dollar valuation of specific warranty claims being made by customers. Adjustments are made to the liability as claims data and historical experience necessitate.
Changes in the carrying amount of the product warranty liability for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 are as follows:
Asbestos Insurance Receivables
The historical business operations of certain of our subsidiaries resulted in a substantial volume of asbestos litigation in which plaintiffs alleged personal injury or death as a result of exposure to asbestos fibers. In 2010, certain of these subsidiaries, including Garlock Sealing Technologies, LLC ("GST"), filed voluntary petitions for reorganization under Chapter 11 of the United States Bankruptcy Code in the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the Western District of North Carolina (the "Bankruptcy Court"). An additional subsidiary filed a Chapter 11 bankruptcy petition with the Bankruptcy Court in 2017. The filings were part of a claims resolution process for an efficient and permanent resolution of all pending and future asbestos claims through court approval of a plan of reorganization to establish a facility to resolve and pay these asbestos claims.
These claims against GST and other subsidiaries were resolved pursuant to a joint plan of reorganization (the "Joint Plan") filed with the Bankruptcy Court which was consummated on July 29, 2017. Under the Joint Plan, GST and EnPro Holdings retained their rights to seek reimbursement under insurance policies for any amounts they have paid in the past to resolve asbestos claims, including contributions made to the asbestos claims resolution trust established under the Joint Plan (the "Trust"). These policies include a number of primary and excess general liability insurance policies that were purchased by EnPro Holdings and were in effect prior to January 1, 1976 (the “Pre-GST Coverage Block”). The policies provide coverage for “occurrences” happening during the policy periods and cover losses associated with product liability claims against EnPro Holdings and certain of its subsidiaries. Asbestos claims against GST are not covered under these policies because GST was not a subsidiary of EnPro Holdings prior to 1976. The Joint Plan provides that EnPro Holdings may retain the first $25 million of any settlements and judgments collected for non-GST asbestos claims related to insurance policies in the Pre-GST Coverage Block and EnPro Holdings and the Trust will share equally in any settlements and judgments EnPro Holdings may collect in excess of $25 million. To date, EnPro Holdings has collected almost $22 million in settlements for non-GST asbestos claims related to the Pre-GST Coverage Block and anticipates further collections once the Trust begins making claims payments on non-GST Claims.
As of December 31, 2020, approximately $4.2 million of available products hazard limits or insurance receivables existed under primary and excess general liability insurance policies other than the Pre-GST Coverage Block (the "GST Coverage Block") from solvent carriers, which we believe is available to cover contributions made to the Trust under the Joint Plan as the Trust uses those contributions to pay GST asbestos claims covered by policies in the GST Coverage Block. There are specific agreements in place with carriers regarding the remaining available coverage. We believe that all of the $4.2 million of insurance proceeds will ultimately be collected, although there can be no assurance that the insurance companies will make the payments as and when due. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we billed an insurer in the GST Coverage Block $0.8 million for GST Claims paid by the Trust to date.
We also believe that EnPro Holdings will bill, and could collect over time, as much as $10 million of insurance coverage for non-GST asbestos claims to reimburse it for Trust payments to non-GST Trust claimants. After EnPro Holdings collects the first approximately $3 million of that coverage, remaining collections for non-GST asbestos claims from the Pre-Garlock Coverage Block will be shared equally with the Trust.
GST has received $8.8 million of insurance recoveries from insolvent carriers since 2007 and may receive additional payments from insolvent carriers in the future. No anticipated insolvent carrier collections are included in the $4.2 million of
anticipated collections. The insurance available to cover current and future asbestos claims is from comprehensive general liability and excess liability policies that cover EnPro Holdings and certain of its other subsidiaries in addition to GST for periods prior to 1985 and therefore could be subject to potential competing claims of other covered subsidiaries and their assignees.
Contractual Obligations
A summary of our contractual obligations and commitments at December 31, 2020, is as follows:
The payments for long-term debt shown in the table above reflect the contractual principal amount for the Senior Notes. In our Consolidated Balance Sheet, this amount is shown net of a debt discount of $4.1 million. Additional discussion regarding the Senior Notes is included in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in “Liquidity and Capital Resources - Capital Resources,” and in Note 12, "Long-Term Debt," to the consolidated financial statements. The interest on long-term debt represents the contractual interest coupon. It does not include the debt discount accretion, which also is a component of interest expense.
The payments for long-term debt do not include approximately $10 million of excess net cash proceeds from the sale of Fairbanks Morse that had not been reinvested in acquisitions, applied in making capital expenditures, or used to repay or otherwise reduce specified indebtedness, including the borrowings under the Term Loan Facility, at December 31, 2020, which amount, if not so reinvested, applied or used by the April 25, 2021 measurement date would require us to repurchase at par value Senior Notes of an equal aggregate principal amount pursuant to a tender offer that would be required to be made by us under the indenture governing the Senior Notes, but only to the extent that holders of the Senior Notes agreed to sell their Senior Notes in such a tender offer. We expect investments to be made in 2021 prior to April 25, 2021, primarily through capital expenditures, to exceed $10 million, which would avoid the requirement to conduct such a tender offer. In the event that our 2021 investments prior to that date are less than $10 million, we have the ability to, at our option, prepay the Term Loan Facility by any remaining excess cash proceeds to avoid the requirement to make such a tender offer. We do not anticipate the need to prepay the borrowings under the Term Loan Facility.
Payments for other liabilities are estimates for other retained liabilities of previously owned businesses included in the Consolidated Balance Sheets at December 31, 2020. These estimated payments, along with our estimated payments of environmental liabilities, are based on information currently known to us. However, it is possible that these estimates will vary from actual results and it is possible that these estimates may be updated if new information becomes available in the future or if there are changes in the facts and circumstances related to these liabilities. Additional discussion regarding these liabilities is included earlier in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in “Contingencies - Environmental" and "Contingencies - Crucible Steel Corporation a/k/a Crucible, Inc.,” and in Note 20, "Commitments and Contingencies," to the consolidated financial statements.
The table does not include obligations under our pension and postretirement benefit plans, which are included in Note 15, "Pension and Postretirement Benefits," to the consolidated financial statements.
Supplemental Guarantor Financial Information
On October 17, 2018, we completed the offering of the Senior Notes and applied the net proceeds of that offering, together with borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility, to redeem all of the Old Notes on October 31, 2018. The Senior Notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed on an unsecured, unsubordinated, joint and several basis by our existing and future wholly owned direct and indirect domestic subsidiaries, that are each guarantors of our Revolving Credit Facility, including subsidiaries that were wholly owned at the time they provided the guarantee but thereafter became majority owned subsidiaries (collectively, the “Guarantor Subsidiaries”). The Guarantor Subsidiaries at December 31, 2020 comprise all of our
consolidated domestic subsidiaries at that date. Our subsidiaries organized outside of the United States, (collectively, the “Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries”) did not guarantee the Old Notes and do not guarantee the Senior Notes.
The Guarantor Subsidiaries jointly and severally guarantee on an unsecured, unsubordinated basis the performance and punctual payment when due, whether at stated maturity of the Senior Notes, by acceleration or otherwise, all of our obligations under the Senior Notes and the indenture governing the Senior Notes (the “Indenture”), whether for payment of principal of, premium, if any, or interest on the Senior Notes, expenses, indemnification or otherwise (all such obligations guaranteed by the Guarantor Subsidiaries are referred to as the “Guaranteed Obligations”). The Guarantor Subsidiaries have jointly and severally agreed to pay, in addition to the obligations stated above, any and all expenses (including reasonable counsel fees and expenses) incurred by the trustee (the “Trustee”) under the Indenture in enforcing any rights under their guarantees of the Guaranteed Obligations.
Each guarantee of a Guarantor Subsidiary is limited to an amount not to exceed the maximum amount that can be guaranteed by it without rendering the guarantee, as it relates to such Guarantor Subsidiary, voidable under applicable law relating to fraudulent conveyance or fraudulent transfer or similar laws affecting the rights of creditors generally. Each guarantee of a Guarantor Subsidiary is a continuing guarantee and shall inure to the benefit of and be enforceable by the Trustee, the holders of the Senior Notes and their successors, transferees and assigns and, subject to the provisions described in the following sentence, remains in full force and effect until payment in full of all of the Guaranteed Obligations of such Guarantor Subsidiary and is binding upon such Guarantor Subsidiary and its successors. A guarantee of the Senior Notes by a Guarantor Subsidiary is subject to release in the following circumstances: (i) the sale, disposition, exchange or other transfer (including through merger, consolidation, amalgamation or otherwise) of the capital stock of the subsidiary made in a manner not in violation of the Indenture; (ii) the designation of the subsidiary as an “Unrestricted Subsidiary” under the Indenture; (iii) the legal defeasance or covenant defeasance of the Senior Notes in accordance with the terms of the Indenture; or (iv) the subsidiary ceasing to be our subsidiary as a result of any foreclosure of any pledge or security interest securing our Revolving Credit Facility or other exercise of remedies in respect thereof.
The following tables present summarized financial information for EnPro Industries, Inc. (the "Parent") and the Guarantor Subsidiaries on a combined basis after intercompany eliminations.
The summarized results of operations information for the year ended December 31, 2020 was as follows:
The summarized balance sheet information at December 31, 2020 was as follows:
The table above reflects $11.8 million of current intercompany receivables due to the Guarantor Subsidiaries from the Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries and $4.4 million of current intercompany payables due to the Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries from the Guarantor Subsidiaries within current assets and liabilities held and used.
The Senior Notes are structurally subordinated to the indebtedness and other liabilities of the Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries. The Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries are separate and distinct legal entities and have no obligation, contingent or otherwise, to pay any amounts due pursuant to the Senior Notes or the Indenture, or to make any funds available therefor, whether by dividends, loans, distributions or other payments. Any right that the Company or the Guarantor Subsidiaries have to receive any assets of any of the Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries upon the liquidation or reorganization of any Non-Guarantor Subsidiary, and the consequent rights of holders of Senior Notes to realize proceeds from the sale of any of a Non-Guarantor Subsidiary’s assets, would be effectively subordinated to the claims of such Non-Guarantor Subsidiary’s creditors, including trade creditors and holders of preferred equity interests, if any, of such Non-Guarantor Subsidiary. Accordingly, in the event of a bankruptcy, liquidation or reorganization of any of the Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries, the Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries will pay the holders of their debts, holders of preferred equity interests, if any, and their trade creditors before they will be able to distribute any of their assets to the Company or any Guarantor Subsidiaries.
If a Guarantor Subsidiary were to become a debtor in a case under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code or encounter other financial difficulty, under federal or state fraudulent transfer or conveyance law, a court may avoid, subordinate or otherwise decline to enforce its guarantee of the Senior Notes. A court might do so if it is found that when such Guarantor Subsidiary entered into its guarantee of the Senior Notes, or in some states when payments became due under the Senior Notes, such Guarantor Subsidiary received less than reasonably equivalent value or fair consideration and either:
•was insolvent or rendered insolvent by reason of such incurrence;
•was left with unreasonably small or otherwise inadequate capital to conduct our business; or
•believed or reasonably should have believed that it would incur debts beyond its ability to pay.
The court might also avoid the guarantee of the Senior Notes without regard to the above factors, if the court found that the Guarantor Subsidiary entered into its guarantee with actual intent to hinder, delay or defraud our creditors.
A court would likely find that a Guarantor Subsidiary did not receive reasonably equivalent value or fair consideration for its guarantee of the Senior Notes, if such Guarantor Subsidiary did not substantially benefit directly or indirectly from the funding made available by the issuance of the Senior Notes. If a court were to avoid a guarantee of the Senior Notes provided by a Guarantor Subsidiary, holders of the Senior Notes would no longer have any claim against such Guarantor Subsidiary. The measures of insolvency for purposes of these fraudulent transfer or conveyance laws will vary depending upon the law applied in any proceeding to determine whether a fraudulent transfer or conveyance has occurred, such that we cannot predict what standards a court would use to determine whether or not a Guarantor Subsidiary was solvent at the relevant time or, regardless of the standard that a court uses, that the guarantee of a Guarantor Subsidiary would not be subordinated to such Guarantor Subsidiary’s other debt. As noted above, each guarantee provided by a Guarantor Subsidiary includes a provision intended to limit the Guarantor Subsidiary’s liability to the maximum amount that it could incur without causing the incurrence of obligations under its guarantee to be a fraudulent transfer or conveyance. This provision may not be effective to protect those guarantees from being avoided under fraudulent transfer or conveyance law, or it may reduce that Guarantor Subsidiary’s obligation to an amount that effectively makes its guarantee worthless, and we cannot predict whether a court will ultimately find it to be effective.
On the basis of historical financial information, operating history and other factors, we believe that each of the Guarantor Subsidiaries, after giving effect to the issuance of its guarantee of the Senior Notes when such guarantee was issued, was not insolvent, did not have unreasonably small capital for the business in which it engaged and did not and has not incurred debts beyond its ability to pay such debts as they mature. We cannot assure you, however, as to what standard a court would apply in making these determinations or that a court would agree with our conclusions in this regard.
Reconciliations of Non-GAAP Financial Measures to the Comparable GAAP Measures
Reconciliation of Adjusted Income from Continuing Operations Attributable to EnPro Industries, Inc.
We believe that it would be helpful to the readers of the financial statements to understand the impact of certain selected items on our reported income from continuing operations attributable to EnPro Industries, Inc. and diluted earnings per share attributable to EnPro Industries, Inc. continuing operations, including items that may recur from time to time. The items
adjusted for in this schedule are those that are excluded by management in budgeting or projecting for performance in future periods, as they typically relate to events specific to the period in which they occur. This presentation is intended to permit readers to better compare the Company to other diversified industrial manufacturing companies that do not incur the sporadic impact of restructuring activities, costs associated with previously disposed of businesses, or other selected items. We acknowledge that there are many items that impact a company's reported results and this list is not intended to present all items that may have impacted these results.
A reconciliation of (i) income (loss) from continuing operations before income taxes to adjusted income from continuing operations attributable to EnPro Industries, Inc., and (ii) net income (loss) from continuing operations attributable to EnPro Industries, Inc. to adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 are as follows:
1 Non-controlling interest compensation allocation represents compensation expense associated with a portion of the rollover equity from the acquisitions of LeanTeq and Alluxa that is subject to reduction for certain types of employment terminations of the LeanTeq and Alluxa sellers and is directly related to the terms of the respective acquisition. This expense will continue to be recognized as compensation expense over the term of the put and call options associated with the acquisition unless certain employment terminations have occurred.
2 There were 0.1 million and 0.2 million potentially dilutive shares in the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2018, respectively, that were excluded from the calculation of consolidated earnings per share in the respective period since they were antidilutive. These shares were added back for the purpose of calculating adjusted income from continuing operations attributable to EnPro Industries, Inc. per share.
3Adjusted diluted earnings per share
4 Other adjustments are included in selling, general, and administrative, cost of sales, and other operating expenses on the consolidated statement of operations.
The adjusted income tax expense presented above is calculated using a normalized company-wide effective tax rate excluding discrete items of 30.0% for continuing operations. Per share amounts were calculated by dividing by the weighted-average shares of diluted common stock outstanding during the periods.
Reconciliation of Segment Profit to Adjusted Segment EBITDA
1 Non-controlling interest compensation allocation represents compensation expense associated with a portion of the rollover equity from the acquisitions of LeanTeq and Alluxa that is subject to reduction for certain types of employment terminations of the LeanTeq and Alluxa sellers and is directly related to the terms of the respective acquisition. This expense
will continue to be recognized as compensation expense over the term of the put and call options associated with the acquisition unless certain employment terminations have occurred.
For a reconciliation of Adjusted Segment EBITDA to income from continuing operations, please refer to "- Results of Operations".
Reconciliation of Net Income Attributable to EnPro Industries, Inc. to Adjusted EBITDA
1 Non-controlling interest compensation allocation represents compensation expense associated with a portion of the rollover equity from the acquisitions of LeanTeq and Alluxa that is subject to reduction for certain types of employment terminations of the LeanTeq Executive Officers and the Alluxa Executive Officers sellers and is directly related to the terms of the respective acquisition. This expense will continue to be recognized as compensation expense over the term of the put and call options associated with the acquisition unless certain employment terminations have occurred.
Adjusted EBITDA as presented in the table above also represents the amount defined as "EBITDA" under the indenture governing the Senior Notes.