ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion of our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and capital resources should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Overview
We are a geographically diversified supplier providing products, as well as rentals and services. We operate our business through two reportable segments: Fluids Systems and Industrial Solutions. Our Fluids Systems segment provides customized drilling, completion, and stimulation fluids solutions to oil and natural gas exploration and production (“E&P”) customers primarily in North America and Europe, the Middle East and Africa (“EMEA”), as well as certain countries in Asia Pacific and Latin America. Our Industrial Solutions segment includes our Site and Access Solutions business (historically reported as the Mats and Integrated Services segment), along with our Industrial Blending operations. Site and Access Solutions provides composite matting system rentals utilized for temporary worksite access, along with related site construction and services to customers in various markets including electrical transmission & distribution, E&P, pipeline, renewable energy, petrochemical, construction and other industries, primarily in the United States and Europe. We also sell our manufactured composite mats to customers around the world. Our Industrial Blending operations began in 2020, leveraging our chemical blending capacity and technical expertise to enter targeted industrial end-markets.
Our long-term strategy, as approved by our Board of Directors, includes key foundational elements that are intended to enhance long-term shareholder value creation:
•End-market diversification - To help reduce our dependency on customers in the volatile E&P industry, improve the stability in cash flow generation and returns on invested capital, and provide growth opportunities into new markets, we have focused our efforts over the past several years on diversifying our presence outside of our historical E&P customer base. These efforts have been primarily focused within our Site and Access Solutions business, where we have prioritized growth in electrical transmission and distribution, pipeline, renewable energy, and construction markets. In 2020, our Industrial Solutions segment generated $138 million of revenues, including approximately $100 million from electrical transmission and distribution and other non-E&P markets. The continued diversification of our revenues, including end-markets that are likely to benefit from ongoing energy transition efforts around the world, such as electrical transmission and distribution, renewable energy, and geothermal, remains a strategic priority going forward, and we anticipate that our capital investments will primarily focus on industrial end-market expansion.
•Provide products that enhance environmental sustainability - Our Company has a long history of providing environmentally-friendly technologies to our customers. In the Industrial Solutions segment, we believe the lightweight design of our fully recyclable DURA-BASE® matting system provides a distinct environmental advantage for our customers as compared to alternative wood mat products in the market, by eliminating deforestation required to produce wood mat products while also reducing CO2 emissions associated with product transportation. In our Fluids Systems segment, our family of high-performance water-based fluids systems, which we market as Evolution® and DeepDrill® systems, are designed to enhance drilling performance while also providing a variety of environmental benefits relative to traditional oil-based fluids. The continued advancement of technology that provides our customers with economic benefits, while also enhancing their environmental and safety programs, remains a priority for our research and development efforts.
Our Fluids Systems operating results remain dependent on oil and natural gas drilling activity levels in the markets we serve and the nature of the drilling operations (including the depth and whether the wells are drilled vertically or horizontally), which governs the revenue potential of each well. Drilling activity levels, in turn, depend on a variety of factors, including oil and natural gas commodity pricing, inventory levels, product demand, and regulatory restrictions. Oil and natural gas prices and activity are cyclical and volatile, and this market volatility has a significant impact on our operating results.
While our Fluids Systems revenue potential is driven by a number of factors including those described above, rig count data remains the most widely accepted indicator of drilling activity. Average North American rig count data for the last three years is as follows:
_______________________________________________________
Source: Baker Hughes Company
During 2019, U.S. rig count steadily declined, exiting the year at 805 active rigs, a 26% decline from the end of 2018. During March 2020, oil prices collapsed due to geopolitical events along with the worldwide effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, average U.S. rig count declined 52% in 2020 from 2019. After reaching a low of 244 in mid-August, the U.S. rig count has since increased to 397 as of February 19, 2021. The Canada rig count reflects normal seasonality for this market, with the highest rig count levels generally observed in the first quarter of each year, prior to Spring break-up. We anticipate that market activity will continue to improve from current levels, although the ongoing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and an uncertain economic environment make the timing and pace of recovery difficult to predict.
Outside of North America land markets, drilling activity is generally more stable as this drilling activity is based on longer-term economic projections and multi-year drilling programs, which typically reduces the impact of short-term changes in commodity prices on overall drilling activity. However, operations in several countries in the EMEA region experienced activity disruptions and project delays beginning in March 2020 and continuing into 2021, driven by government-imposed restrictions on movements of personnel, quarantines of staffing, and logistical limitations as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect these disruptions and project delays will continue to impact international activity levels in the near-term, and while we anticipate a general improvement in customer activity during 2021, the impact from the duration and magnitude of the ongoing health pandemic and related government responses are very difficult to predict.
In response to the 2020 market changes and reduced demand for our products and services as a result of the decline in oil prices and the COVID-19 pandemic, we initiated a number of actions late in the first quarter of 2020 and continuing throughout 2020 aimed at conserving cash and protecting our liquidity, including:
•The implementation of cost reduction programs, including workforce reductions, employee furloughs, the suspension of the Company’s matching contributions to its U.S. defined contribution plan, and temporary salary reductions effective April 1, 2020 for a significant portion of U.S. employees, including a 15% cut to the salaries paid to executive officers (with a further 10% cut for the CEO effective August 12, 2020) and the annual cash retainers paid to all non-employee members of the Board of Directors;
•The initiation of additional actions to further reduce the operational footprint of the Fluids Systems business in the U.S., to better align our cost structure with the lower market activity levels; and
•The elimination of all non-critical capital investments.
As part of the cost reduction programs, we reduced our global employee base by approximately 650 (30%) in 2020.
In 2020, we recognized $29.2 million of total charges, including $28.6 million in Fluids Systems consisting of $11.7 million for the recognition of cumulative foreign currency translation losses related to our exit from Brazil, $10.3 million for inventory write-downs, $3.5 million for severance and other costs, and $3.0 million in fixed asset impairments.
While we have taken certain actions to reduce our workforce and cost structure, our business contains high levels of fixed costs, including significant facility and personnel expenses. We continue to evaluate under-performing areas as well as opportunities to further enable a more efficient and scalable cost structure. In the absence of a longer-term increase in activity levels, we may incur future charges related to further cost reduction efforts or potential asset impairments, which may negatively impact our future results.
Segment Overview
Fluids Systems - Our Fluids Systems segment, which generated 72% of consolidated revenues for 2020, provides drilling, completion, and stimulation fluids products and related technical services to customers for oil, natural gas, and geothermal projects primarily in North America and EMEA, as well as certain countries in Asia Pacific and Latin America. Despite the continuing effects of COVID-19 impacting the international customer activity, expansion outside of the North America land markets, including the penetration of international oil companies (“IOCs”) and national oil companies (“NOCs”),
remains a key element of our Fluids Systems strategy, which has historically helped to stabilize segment revenues while North American oil and natural gas exploration activities have fluctuated significantly. Revenues from IOC and NOC customers represented approximately 40% of Fluids Systems segment revenues for 2020 compared to approximately 33% for 2019.
Industrial Solutions - Our Industrial Solutions segment, which generated 28% of consolidated revenues for 2020, provides engineered composite matting system rentals utilized for temporary worksite access, along with related site construction and services to customers in various markets including electrical transmission & distribution, E&P, pipeline, renewable energy, petrochemical, construction and other industries, primarily in the United States and Europe. We also sell our manufactured composite mats to customers around the world. In addition, we began leveraging our chemical blending capacity and technical expertise into industrial blending operations, and in response to the increasing market demand for cleaning products resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, began producing disinfectants and industrial cleaning products in 2020. The scale-up of production was completed by the end of the third quarter of 2020, which effectively repositioned our chemical blending operation located in Conroe, Texas to fully support industrial end-markets. Beginning prospectively in the fourth quarter of 2020, the assets and operating results associated with these industrial blending operations are included in the Industrial Solutions segment, while the historical results from earlier in 2020, which were immaterial, are included in the Fluids Systems segment.
As described above, the expansion of our rental and service activities in electrical utility infrastructure and other non-E&P markets remains a strategic priority for us due to the magnitude of this market growth opportunity, as well as the market’s relative stability compared to E&P. During 2020, our business was impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, as customers delayed purchases and planned projects citing COVID-related market uncertainty, permitting delays, and logistical restrictions. Despite the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Industrial Solutions segment rental and service revenues from non-E&P markets increased to approximately $66 million for 2020, compared to $65 million for 2019 and $61 million for 2018. Product sales revenues largely reflect sales to utility customers and other non-E&P markets, and typically fluctuate based on the timing of customer orders. Including product sales, total revenues from non-E&P markets represented approximately 73% of total segment revenues for 2020, compared to 55% for 2019 and 50% for 2018. As a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on customer activity, we decreased our mat production levels during 2020 to reduce current inventory levels, which negatively impacted our results due to the high level of fixed costs in our manufacturing operations. Although customer activity remains impacted by the ongoing uncertainty associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, we have seen a notable recovery in customer activity in late 2020 and early 2021, particularly in the utility sector. While we expect customer activity across all end-markets to generally improve in 2021, we currently expect that demand for both rental projects and product sales remains highly dependent on our customers gaining confidence in the broader economic recovery.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Consolidated Results of Operations
Summarized results of operations for 2020 compared to 2019 are as follows:
Revenues
Revenues decreased 40% to $492.6 million for 2020, compared to $820.1 million for 2019. This $327.5 million decrease includes a $263.8 million (43%) decrease in revenues in North America, comprised of a $200.4 million decrease in the Fluids Systems segment and a $63.4 million decrease in the Industrial Solutions segment. Revenues from our North America operations decreased primarily due to the 52% reduction in North American rig count. Revenues from our international operations decreased by $63.7 million (31%), primarily driven by activity disruptions and project delays resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic as well as lower oil prices. Additional information regarding the change in revenues is provided within the operating segment results below.
Cost of revenues
Cost of revenues decreased 31% to $473.3 million for 2020, compared to $684.7 million for 2019. This $211.5 million decrease was primarily driven by the 40% decrease in revenues described above. Fluids Systems segment cost of revenues for 2020 and 2019 includes $14.1 million and $6.8 million, respectively, of total charges related to inventory write-downs, severance costs, and facility exit costs.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased $26.8 million to $86.6 million for 2020, compared to $113.4 million for 2019. The 2019 expenses included a $4.0 million charge for stock-based compensation expense associated with the February 2019 retirement policy modification and $3.9 million in professional fees related to our long-term strategic planning project and the Cleansorb acquisition. The remaining decrease of $18.9 million was primarily driven by reduced personnel costs and lower spending related to legal matters in 2020. Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenues was 17.6% for 2020 compared to 13.8% for 2019.
Other operating (income) loss, net
Other operating income for 2020 primarily relates to gains on sales of assets, including a $1.3 million gain related to our exit from Brazil.
Impairments and other charges
Fluids Systems segment includes non-cash charges for 2020 consisting of $11.7 million for the recognition of cumulative foreign currency translation losses related to the substantial liquidation of our subsidiary in Brazil, as well as $3.0
million attributable to the abandonment of certain property, plant and equipment. Fluids Systems segment for 2019 includes an $11.4 million non-cash impairment charge to write-off the goodwill related to this business.
Foreign currency exchange
Foreign currency exchange was a $3.4 million loss for 2020 compared to a $0.8 million gain for 2019, and reflects the impact of currency translation on assets and liabilities (including intercompany balances) that are denominated in currencies other than functional currencies.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense was $11.0 million for 2020 compared to $14.4 million for 2019. Interest expense for 2020 and 2019 includes $5.2 million and $6.2 million, respectively, in noncash amortization of original issue discount and debt issuance costs. The decrease in interest expense is primarily due to lower debt balances as well as a decrease in interest rates on the ABL Facility.
Gain on extinguishment of debt
The $0.4 million gain for 2020 reflects the difference in the amount paid and the net carrying value of the extinguished debt, including original issue discount and debt issuance costs, related to the repurchase of $33.1 million of our Convertible Notes in the open market for $29.1 million.
Provision (benefit) for income taxes
The benefit for income taxes was $11.9 million for 2020, reflecting an effective tax benefit rate of 13%. This result primarily reflects the impact of the $11.7 million non-cash recognition of cumulative foreign currency translation losses related to the substantial liquidation of our subsidiary in Brazil and other nondeductible expenses, as well as the impact of the geographic composition of our pretax loss, where the tax benefit from losses in the U.S was partially offset by the tax expense related to earnings from our international operations. For 2019, the provision for income taxes was $9.8 million despite reporting a small pretax loss for the year. This result reflects the impact of the $11.4 million non-deductible goodwill impairment and other nondeductible expenses, as well as the impact of the geographic composition of our pretax loss, where tax expense related to earnings from our international operations is only partially offset by the tax benefit from losses in the U.S.
Operating Segment Results
Summarized financial information for our reportable segments is shown in the following table (net of inter-segment transfers):
Fluids Systems
Revenues
Total revenues for this segment consisted of the following:
North America revenues decreased 47% to $226.8 million for 2020, compared to $427.3 million for 2019. This decrease was primarily attributable to a $200.3 million decrease from U.S. land markets driven by the 54% decline in U.S. rig count, partially offset by a $4.0 million increase from offshore Gulf of Mexico, which benefited from our completion fluids product line extension. For 2020, U.S. revenues included $150.2 million from land markets and $48.5 million from offshore Gulf of Mexico.
Internationally, revenues decreased 34% to $127.8 million for 2020, compared to $193.1 million for 2019. The decrease in EMEA was driven by lower activity primarily attributable to COVID-19 disruptions and the impact of lower oil prices in Algeria, Romania, and various other countries, partially offset by the October 2019 acquisition of Cleansorb. The decrease in other international was primarily attributable to lower activity in Australia, including the completion of the Baker Hughes Greater Enfield project in the third quarter of 2019.
Operating income (loss)
The Fluids Systems segment incurred an operating loss of $66.4 million for 2020, reflecting a $70.2 million change from the $3.8 million of operating income generated for 2019. The decrease in operating income includes a $41.6 million decline from North American operations and a $18.8 million decline from international operations, which are primarily attributable to the changes in revenues described above, partially offset by the benefit of cost reduction programs. The Fluids Systems operating loss for 2020 also includes $28.6 million of charges, consisting of $11.7 million for the recognition of cumulative foreign currency translation losses related to the substantial liquidation of our subsidiary in Brazil and $16.9 million of total charges associated with inventory write-downs, severance costs, fixed asset impairments, and facility exit costs. The Fluids Systems operating loss for 2019 included $18.8 million of charges, consisting of an $11.4 million non-cash impairment of goodwill and $7.4 million of total charges associated with facility closures and related exit costs, inventory write-downs, and severance costs, as well as the modification of the Company’s retirement policy.
Industrial Solutions
Revenues
Total revenues for this segment consisted of the following:
As described above, the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in delays to planned projects across customer industries in 2020. Rental and service revenues decreased 29% to $101.3 million for 2020, which includes a $43.6 million decrease from E&P customers, primarily resulting from lower U.S. activity caused by the decline in oil and natural gas prices. This decline was partially offset by a $1.6 million increase from our continued expansion into non-E&P markets, including a 9% increase in revenues from the electrical utility sector, which benefited from increased demand to support repairs of hurricane-damaged utility infrastructure along the U.S. Gulf Coast region. Revenues from product sales, which typically fluctuate based on the timing of mat orders from customers, was negatively impacted in 2020 as certain customers delayed orders due to the uncertainty related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Operating income
The Industrial Solutions segment generated operating income of $13.5 million for 2020 compared to $47.5 million for 2019, the decrease being primarily attributable to the change in revenues as described above.
Corporate Office
Corporate office expenses decreased $15.2 million to $25.7 million for 2020, compared to $40.9 million for 2019. The 2019 expenses included a $3.4 million charge for stock-based compensation expense associated with the February 2019 retirement policy modification and $3.9 million in professional fees related to our long-term strategic planning project and the Cleansorb acquisition. The remaining decrease of $7.9 million is primarily driven by reduced personnel costs and lower spending related to legal matters in 2020.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018
Consolidated Results of Operations
Summarized results of operations for 2019 compared to 2018 are as follows:
Revenues
Revenues decreased 13% to $820.1 million for 2019, compared to $946.5 million for 2018. This $126.4 million decrease includes a $77.9 million (11%) decrease in revenues in North America, comprised of a $49.6 million decrease in the Fluids Systems segment and a $28.3 million decrease in the Industrial Solutions segment. Revenues from our international operations decreased by $48.5 million (19%), primarily driven by transitions in key contracts in Algeria and Brazil. Additional information regarding the change in revenues is provided within the operating segment results below.
Cost of revenues
Cost of revenues decreased 11% to $684.7 million for 2019, compared to $767.0 million for 2018. This $82.2 million decrease was primarily driven by the 13% decrease in revenues described above, as well as $6.8 million of charges in the Fluids Systems segment in 2019 associated with facility closures and related exit costs, inventory write-downs, and severance costs.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased $1.7 million to $113.4 million for 2019, compared to $115.1 million for 2018. This decrease was primarily driven by lower performance-based incentive compensation, partially offset by $4.0 million of charges associated with the February 2019 retirement policy modification (as discussed in Note 12), a $3.2 million increase in professional fees primarily related to our long-term strategic planning project and the Cleansorb acquisition, as well as higher personnel costs. Selling, general and administrative expenses for 2018 included a corporate office charge of $1.8 million associated with the retirement and transition of our former Senior Vice President, General Counsel and Chief Administrative Officer. Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenues was 13.8% for 2019 compared to 12.2% for 2018.
Other operating loss, net
Other operating loss for 2018 primarily relates to the July 2018 fire at our Kenedy, Texas drilling fluids facility.
Impairments and other charges
Fluids Systems segment for 2019 includes the non-cash impairment charge to write-off goodwill.
Foreign currency exchange
Foreign currency exchange was a $0.8 million gain for 2019 compared to a $1.4 million loss for 2018, and reflects the impact of currency translation on assets and liabilities (including intercompany balances) that are denominated in currencies other than functional currencies.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense was $14.4 million for 2019 compared to $14.9 million for 2018. Interest expense for 2019 and 2018 includes $6.2 million and $5.5 million, respectively, in noncash amortization of original issue discount and debt issuance costs.
Provision for income taxes
The provision for income taxes was $9.8 million for 2019 despite reporting a small pretax loss for the year. This result reflects the impact of the $11.4 million nondeductible goodwill impairment and other nondeductible expenses, as well as the impact of the geographic composition of our pretax loss, where tax expense related to earnings from our international operations is only partially offset by the tax benefit from losses in the U.S. The provision for income taxes was $15.0 million for 2018, including a $1.6 million net benefit related to U.S. tax reform.
Operating Segment Results
Summarized financial information for our reportable segments is shown in the following table (net of inter-segment transfers):
Fluids Systems
Revenues
Total revenues for this segment consisted of the following:
North America revenues decreased 10% to $427.3 million for 2019, compared to $476.8 million for 2018. This decrease was primarily attributable to lower customer drilling activity in Canada, as reflected by the 30% decline in average rig count. Despite the 9% decline in the United States average rig count, revenues in the U.S. only declined 4% benefiting from market share gains in the offshore Gulf of Mexico market. For U.S. land markets, the revenue decrease was relatively in line with the average rig count, with a reduction from lower market share offset by an increase in footage drilled per rig due to improvements in customer drilling efficiency.
Internationally, revenues decreased 19% to $193.1 million for 2019, compared to $239.0 million for 2018. This decrease was primarily attributable to declines related to the contract transitions in Algeria, Brazil, and offshore Australia as well as lower customer activity in Romania and Albania, partially offset by growth across several EMEA countries, primarily reflecting market share gains with IOC and NOC customers.
Operating income
The Fluids Systems segment generated operating income of $3.8 million for 2019 compared to $40.3 million for 2018. Fluids Systems operating income for 2019 includes an $11.4 million non-cash impairment of goodwill and $7.3 million of total charges associated with facility closures and related exit costs, inventory write-downs, and severance costs, as well as the modification of the Company’s retirement policy. Operating income for 2018 included $5.0 million of total charges associated
with severance costs, the Kenedy, Texas facility fire, and expenses related to the upgrade and conversion of a drilling fluids facility into a completion fluids facility. Excluding these charges, the decrease in operating income includes a $10.8 million decline from North American operations and a $11.8 million decline from international operations. This decline in operating income is primarily attributable to the decreases in revenues described above.
Industrial Solutions
Revenues
Total revenues for this segment consisted of the following:
Rental and service revenues decreased 18% to $143.3 million for 2019 compared to $174.8 million for 2018, which includes a decrease in revenues from E&P customers of approximately $35.0 million, resulting from lower U.S. drilling and pressure pumping activity and weakness in natural gas prices. This decline was partially offset by an increase of approximately $3.5 million in non-E&P rental and service revenues. Revenues from product sales increased 1% and typically fluctuate based on the timing of mat orders from customers.
Operating income
The Industrial Solutions segment generated operating income of $47.5 million for 2019 compared to $60.6 million for 2018, primarily attributable to the change in revenues as described above. The benefit from the higher contribution of product sales revenue in 2019 was offset by lower average rental pricing primarily from the increase in non-E&P rental activity as well as costs associated with additional personnel to support our strategic growth initiatives.
Corporate Office
Corporate office expenses increased $3.5 million to $40.9 million for 2019 compared to $37.4 million for 2018. This increase was primarily driven by $3.4 million of charges associated with the February 2019 retirement policy modification, as discussed in Note 12. The remaining change primarily reflects a $3.2 million increase in professional fees primarily related to our long-term strategic planning project and the Cleansorb acquisition, as well as higher severance and personnel costs, partially offset by lower performance-based incentive compensation. In addition, 2018 included a $1.8 million charge associated with the retirement and transition of our former Senior Vice President, General Counsel and Chief Administrative Officer.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Net cash provided by operating activities was $55.8 million for 2020 compared to $72.3 million for 2019. The $16.5 million decrease in net cash provided by operating activities was primarily attributable to the impact from the lower cash generated from operating results, partially offset by the decrease in working capital resulting from the 2020 decline in revenues. During 2020, net loss adjusted for non-cash items used cash of $23.0 million, while changes in working capital provided cash of $78.7 million. During 2019, net income adjusted for non-cash items provided cash of $50.2 million, while changes in working capital provided cash of $22.1 million.
Net cash used in investing activities was $3.4 million for 2020, including capital expenditures of $15.8 million, partially offset by $12.4 million in proceeds from the sale of assets. The majority of the proceeds from the sale of assets reflect used mats from our rental fleet, which are a part of the commercial offering of our Site and Access Solutions business. Capital expenditures during 2020 included $7.8 million for the Industrial Solutions segment, including investments in the mat rental fleet as well as new products, and $6.2 million for the Fluids Systems segment. Net cash used in investing activities was $49.8 million for 2019, including capital expenditures of $44.8 million and $18.7 million associated with the acquisition of Cleansorb, partially offset by $13.7 million in proceeds from the sale of assets. Capital expenditures during 2019 included $23.5 million for the Industrial Solutions segment, including $15.5 million of investments in the mat rental fleet, and $18.4 million for the Fluids Systems segment.
Net cash used in financing activities was $77.9 million for 2020, which primarily includes a net repayment of $45.9 million on our ABL Facility (as defined below) and $29.1 million in repurchases of our Convertible Notes. Net cash used in financing activities was $29.5 million for 2019, which primarily included $19.0 million in share repurchases and a net repayment of $11.3 million on our ABL Facility.
Substantially all our $24.2 million of cash on hand at December 31, 2020 resides in our international subsidiaries. Subject to maintaining sufficient cash requirements to support the strategic objectives of these international subsidiaries and complying with applicable exchange or cash controls, we expect to continue to repatriate excess cash from these international subsidiaries. In addition, we may continue to purchase our Convertible Notes under our existing repurchase program prior to the December 2021 maturity. In February 2021, we repurchased $13.0 million of our Convertible Notes in the open market under the repurchase program for a total cost of $12.8 million, leaving $53.9 million of principal amount outstanding as of February 25, 2021.
Following a sequential increase in fourth quarter 2020 revenues, we anticipate that revenues will continue to increase in 2021 as market activity improves from current levels, although the ongoing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and an uncertain economic environment make the timing and pace of recovery difficult to predict. We anticipate that our near-term working capital requirements to support the revenue growth will largely be offset by the benefit from our on-going efforts to reduce inventory levels and international receivables, which remain somewhat elevated from historical levels. As we progress through 2021, we anticipate that future working capital requirements for our operations will fluctuate directionally with revenues. We expect capital expenditures in the near term to focus on industrial end-market expansion opportunities that provide stable cash flow generation.
Availability under our ABL Facility also provides additional liquidity as discussed further below. Total availability under the ABL Facility will fluctuate directionally based on the level of eligible U.S. accounts receivable, inventory, and, subject to satisfaction of certain financial covenants as described below, composite mats included in the rental fleet. As of February 25, 2021, our total availability under the ABL Facility was $88.2 million, of which $21.4 million was drawn, resulting in remaining availability of $66.8 million. This availability under the ABL Facility excludes $25.0 million related to eligible rental mats as we failed to satisfy the required minimum consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio, as measured on the trailing twelve-month period ended December 31, 2020. Based on our current projections of operating results through the first half of 2021, we expect to satisfy the financial covenants required such that the eligible rental mats would again be included in the borrowing availability under the ABL Facility following the second quarter of 2021.
We expect our available cash on-hand, cash generated by operations, and the expected availability under our ABL Facility to be adequate to fund current operations and the maturity of the 2021 Convertible Notes during the next 12 months. We also continue to evaluate other sources of additional liquidity to support our longer-term liquidity options, which include possible financing or alternative arrangements secured by certain assets in the U.S. or our international operations.
Our capitalization is as follows:
Convertible Notes. In December 2016, we issued $100.0 million of unsecured convertible senior notes (“Convertible Notes”) that mature on December 1, 2021, of which $66.9 million principal amount was outstanding at December 31, 2020. In February 2021, we repurchased $13.0 million of our Convertible Notes leaving $53.9 million outstanding as of February 25, 2021. The notes bear interest at a rate of 4.0% per year, payable semiannually in arrears on June 1 and December 1 of each year.
Holders may convert the notes at their option at any time prior to the close of business on the business day immediately preceding June 1, 2021, only under the following circumstances:
•during any calendar quarter (and only during such calendar quarter) if the last reported sale price of our common stock for at least 20 trading days (regardless of whether consecutive) during a period of 30 consecutive trading days ending on the last trading day of the immediately preceding calendar quarter is greater than or equal to 130% of the conversion price of the notes in effect on each applicable trading day;
•during the five business day period after any five consecutive trading day period in which the trading price per $1,000 principal amount of notes for each trading day was less than 98% of the last reported sale price of our common stock on such date multiplied by the conversion rate on each such trading day; or
•upon the occurrence of specified corporate events, as described in the indenture governing the notes, such as a consolidation, merger, or share exchange.
On or after June 1, 2021 until the close of business on the business day immediately preceding the maturity date, holders may convert their notes at any time, regardless of whether any of the foregoing conditions have been satisfied. As of February 25, 2021, the notes were not convertible.
The notes are convertible into, at our election, cash, shares of common stock, or a combination of both, subject to satisfaction of specified conditions and during specified periods, as described above. If converted, we currently intend to pay cash for the principal amount of the notes converted. The conversion rate is 107.1381 shares of our common stock per $1,000 principal amount of notes (equivalent to an initial conversion price of $9.33 per share of common stock), subject to adjustment in certain circumstances. We may not redeem the notes prior to their maturity date.
Asset-Based Loan Facility. In May 2016, we entered into an asset-based revolving credit agreement, which was amended in October 2017 and in March 2019 (as amended, the “ABL Facility”). The March 2019 amendment increased the amount available for borrowings, reduced applicable borrowing rates, and extended the term. The ABL Facility provides financing of up to $200.0 million available for borrowings (inclusive of letters of credit) and can be increased up to a maximum capacity of $275.0 million, subject to certain conditions.
The ABL Facility terminates in March 2024; however, the ABL Facility has a springing maturity date that will accelerate the maturity of the ABL Facility to September 1, 2021 if, prior to such date, the Convertible Notes have not been repurchased, redeemed, refinanced, exchanged or otherwise satisfied in full or we have not escrowed an amount of funds, that together with the amount that we establish as a reserve against our borrowing capacity, is sufficient for the future settlement of the Convertible Notes at their maturity. The ABL Facility requires a minimum consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio of 1.25 to 1.0 calculated based on the trailing twelve-month period ended June 30, 2021 and remaining unused availability of at least $25.0 million to utilize borrowings or assignment of availability under the ABL Facility towards funding the repayment of the Convertible Notes.
Borrowing availability under the ABL Facility is calculated based on eligible U.S. accounts receivable, inventory, and, subject to satisfaction of certain financial covenants as described below, composite mats included in the rental fleet, net of reserves and limits on such assets included in the borrowing base calculation. To the extent pledged by us, the borrowing base calculation also includes the amount of eligible pledged cash. The lender may establish such reserves, in part based on appraisals of the asset base, and other limits at its discretion which could reduce the amounts otherwise available under the ABL Facility. Availability associated with eligible rental mats will also be subject to maintaining a minimum consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio of 1.5 to 1.0 and at least $1.0 million of operating income for the Site and Access Solutions business, each calculated based on a trailing twelve-month period.
As noted above, we do not currently satisfy the minimum consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio that is required to include eligible rental mats in the borrowing availability under the ABL Facility. We expect to satisfy the minimum consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio as required to include eligible rental mats in the borrowing availability under the ABL Facility following the second quarter of 2021 and expect to satisfy the June 30, 2021 ABL Facility requirements to be able to utilize borrowings or assignment of availability under the ABL Facility towards funding the repayment of the Convertible Notes prior to September 1, 2021. If we are unable to satisfy the minimum consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio following the second quarter of 2021, we would further evaluate options, which may include a waiver or amendment to our ABL Facility. Any waiver or amendment to the ABL Facility, if required, would be expected to increase the cost of our borrowings and may impose additional limitations over certain types of activities, and we can give no assurance that we will be able to obtain such amendment or waiver on favorable terms or at all.
Under the terms of the ABL Facility, we may elect to borrow at a variable interest rate based on either, (1) LIBOR subject to a floor of zero or (2) a base rate equal to the highest of: (a) the federal funds rate plus 50 basis points, (b) the prime rate of Bank of America, N.A. and (c) LIBOR, subject to a floor of zero, plus 100 basis points, plus, in each case, an applicable margin per annum. The applicable margin ranges from 150 to 200 basis points for LIBOR borrowings, and 50 to 100 basis points for base rate borrowings, based on the consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio as defined in the ABL Facility. As of December 31, 2020, the applicable margin for borrowings under our ABL Facility was 200 basis points with respect to LIBOR borrowings and 100 basis points with respect to base rate borrowings. The weighted average interest rate for the ABL Facility was 2.3% at December 31, 2020. In addition, we are required to pay a commitment fee on the unused portion of the ABL Facility ranging from 25 to 37.5 basis points, based on the level of outstanding borrowings, as defined in the ABL Facility. As of December 31, 2020, the applicable commitment fee was 37.5 basis points.
The ABL Facility is a senior secured obligation, secured by first liens on substantially all of our U.S. tangible and intangible assets, and a portion of the capital stock of our non-U.S. subsidiaries has also been pledged as collateral. The ABL Facility contains customary operating covenants and certain restrictions including, among other things, the incurrence of additional debt, liens, dividends, asset sales, investments, mergers, acquisitions, affiliate transactions, stock repurchases and other restricted payments. The ABL Facility also requires a minimum consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio of 1.0 to 1.0 calculated based on a trailing twelve-month period if availability under the ABL Facility falls below $22.5 million. Based on our current projections, we do not expect availability under the ABL Facility to fall below $22.5 million. In addition, the ABL Facility contains customary events of default, including, without limitation, a failure to make payments under the facility, acceleration of more than $25.0 million of other indebtedness, certain bankruptcy events, and certain change of control events.
Other Debt. Certain of our foreign subsidiaries maintain local credit arrangements consisting primarily of lines of credit or overdraft facilities which are generally renewed on an annual basis. We utilize local financing arrangements in our foreign operations in order to provide short-term local liquidity needs. We had $3.5 million and $4.8 million outstanding under these arrangements at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
In February 2021, a U.K. subsidiary entered a £6.0 million (approximately $8.3 million) term loan facility that matures in February 2024, the proceeds of which were used to pay down the ABL Facility. The term loan bears interest at a rate of LIBOR plus a margin of 3.4% per year, payable in quarterly installments of £375,000 plus interest beginning March 2021 and a £1.5 million payment due at maturity.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any special purpose entities. At December 31, 2020, we had $46.2 million in outstanding letters of credit, performance bonds, and other guarantees for which certain of the letters of credit are collateralized by $6.2 million in restricted cash. We also enter into normal short-term operating leases for office and warehouse space, as well as rolling stock and other pieces of operating equipment. None of these off-balance sheet arrangements either has, or is expected to have, a material effect on our financial statements.
Contractual Obligations
A summary of our outstanding contractual and other obligations and commitments at December 31, 2020 is as follows:
(1)Operating lease liabilities represent the undiscounted future lease payments. See Note 8 for additional information.
(2)Excludes accrued interest on the Convertible Notes and the current portion of operating lease liabilities.
(3)Table does not allocate by year expected tax payments, asset retirement obligations, and uncertain tax positions due to the inability to make reasonably reliable estimates of the timing of future cash settlements.
We anticipate that the obligations and commitments listed above that are due in less than one year will be paid from available cash on-hand, cash generated by operations, and estimated availability under our ABL Facility, subject to covenant compliance and certain restrictions as further discussed above. The specific timing of settlement for certain long-term obligations cannot be reasonably estimated.
Critical Accounting Policies
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”), which requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts and disclosures. Significant estimates used in preparing our consolidated financial statements include estimated cash flows and fair values used for impairments of long-lived assets, including goodwill and other intangibles, and valuation allowances for deferred tax assets. See Note 1 for a discussion of the accounting policies for each of these matters. Our estimates are based on historical experience and on our future expectations that we believe to be reasonable. The combination of these factors forms the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from our current estimates and those differences may be material.
We believe the critical accounting policies described below affect our more significant judgments and estimates used in preparing our consolidated financial statements.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets
Goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment annually as of November 1, or more frequently, if indicators of impairment exists. When there are qualitative indicators of impairment, we use an impairment test which includes a comparison of the carrying value of net assets of our reporting units, including goodwill, with their estimated fair values, which we estimate using a combination of a market multiple and discounted cash flow approach (classified within Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy). We also compare the aggregate fair values of our reporting units with our market capitalization. If the carrying value exceeds the estimated fair value, an impairment charge is recorded in the period in which such review is performed. We identify our reporting units based on our analysis of several factors, including our operating segment structure, evaluation of the economic characteristics of our geographic regions within each of our operating segments, and the extent to which our business units share assets and other resources.
In March 2020, primarily as a result of the collapse in oil prices and the expected declines in the U.S. land E&P markets, along with a significant decline in the quoted market prices of our common stock, we considered these developments to be a potential indicator of impairment that required us to complete an interim goodwill impairment evaluation. As such, in March 2020, we estimated the fair value of our reporting unit based on our current forecasts and expectations for market conditions and determined that even though the estimated fair value had decreased, the fair value remained substantially in excess of its net carrying value, and therefore, no impairment was required. During the second quarter and third quarter of 2020, we determined that there were no further indicators of events or changes in circumstances that would more likely than not reduce the fair value below its carrying amount.
As of December 31, 2020, our consolidated balance sheet includes $42.4 million of goodwill, all of which relates to the Industrial Solutions segment. In completing the annual evaluation during the fourth quarter of 2020, we determined that the fair value was in excess of the net carrying value, and therefore, no impairment was required.
There are significant inherent uncertainties and management judgment in estimating the fair value of a reporting unit. Significant assumptions inherent in the evaluation include the estimated growth rates for future revenues and the discount rate. Our assumptions are based on historical data supplemented by current and anticipated market conditions. While we believe we have made reasonable estimates and assumptions to estimate the fair value, it is possible that a material change could occur. If actual results are not consistent with our current estimates and assumptions, or if changes in macroeconomic conditions outside the control of management change such that it results in a significant negative impact on our estimated fair values, the fair value of the reporting unit may decrease below its net carrying value, which could result in a material impairment of our goodwill.
We review property, plant and equipment, finite-lived intangible assets and certain other assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. We assess recoverability based on expected undiscounted future net cash flows. Due to the changes in market conditions, we reviewed these assets for impairment during 2020 and determined that the estimated undiscounted cash flows exceeded the carrying value, and therefore, no impairment was required.
Estimating future net cash flows requires us to make judgments regarding long-term forecasts of future revenues and costs related to the assets subject to review. These forecasts are uncertain in that they require assumptions about demand for our products and services, future market conditions, and technological developments. If changes in these assumptions occur, our expectations regarding future net cash flows may change and a material impairment could result.
Income Taxes
We had total deferred tax assets of $56.4 million and $40.7 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, with the increase primarily related to U.S. federal net operating loss carryforwards. A valuation allowance must be established to
offset a deferred tax asset if, based on available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. We have considered future taxable income and tax planning strategies in assessing the need for our valuation allowance. At December 31, 2020, a total valuation allowance of $26.3 million was recorded, which includes a valuation allowance on $13.5 million of net operating loss carryforwards for certain U.S. state and foreign jurisdictions, including Australia, as well as a valuation allowance of $3.9 million for certain tax credits recognized related to the accounting for the impact of the Tax Act. Changes in the expected future generation of qualifying taxable income within these jurisdictions or in the realizability of other tax assets may result in an adjustment to the valuation allowance, which would be charged or credited to income in the period this determination was made.
We file income tax returns in the United States and several non-U.S. jurisdictions and are subject to examination in the various jurisdictions in which we file. We are no longer subject to income tax examinations for U.S. federal and substantially all state jurisdictions for years prior to 2013 and for substantially all foreign jurisdictions for years prior to 2008.
Following an audit in 2015, the treasury authority in Mexico issued a tax assessment (inclusive of interest and penalties) in the amount of 60 million pesos (approximately $3.3 million) to our Mexico subsidiary primarily in connection with the export of mats from Mexico which took place in 2010. The mats that are the subject of this assessment were owned by a U.S. subsidiary and leased to our Mexico subsidiary for matting projects in the Mexican market. In 2010, we made the decision to move these mats out of Mexico to markets with higher demand. The Mexican treasury authority determined the export of the mats was the equivalent of a sale and assessed taxes on the gross declared value of the exported mats to our Mexico subsidiary. We retained outside legal counsel and filed administrative appeals with the treasury authority, but we were notified in April 2018 that the last administrative appeal had been rejected. In response, we filed an appeal in the Mexican Federal Tax Court in the second quarter of 2018, which required that we post a bond in the amount of the assessed taxes (plus additional interest). In the fourth quarter of 2018, the Mexican Federal Tax Court issued a favorable judgment nullifying in full the tax assessment which was subsequently appealed by the treasury authority in Mexico. Following a judgment by the Mexican Court of Appeals, in the third quarter of 2019, the Mexican Federal Tax Court confirmed the full nullification of the tax assessment based on a due process violation and recognized the treasury authority's right to cure the due process violation by starting a new tax audit, and in the fourth quarter of 2020, the Mexican Court of Appeals confirmed this ruling resolving the appeals process in favor of our Mexico subsidiary. While the treasury authority in Mexico still has the right to start a new audit, we believe our tax position has been properly reported in accordance with applicable tax laws and regulations in Mexico.
We are also under examination by various tax authorities in other countries, and certain foreign jurisdictions have challenged the amounts of taxes due for certain tax periods. These audits are in various stages of completion. We fully cooperate with all audits, but defend existing positions vigorously. We evaluate the potential exposure associated with various filing positions and record a liability for uncertain tax positions as circumstances warrant. Although we believe all tax positions are reasonable and properly reported in accordance with applicable tax laws and regulations in effect during the periods involved, the final determination of tax audits and any related litigation could be materially different than that which is reflected in historical income tax provisions and accruals.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for a discussion of new accounting pronouncements.