ITEM 7
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and notes included in Part II, Item 8 “Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this report.
Overview
NeuroBo Pharmaceuticals Inc. (the “Company”, “we”, “us”, or “our”) is a clinical-stage biotechnology company focused on developing and commercializing novel pharmaceuticals to treat neurodegenerative disorders affecting millions of patients worldwide. For more information on our business and our four product candidates, ANA001, NB-01, NB-02 and Gemcabene, see “Business-Overview” in Part I, Item 1 of this report.
Recent Developments
Merger with ANA
On December 31, 2020, we acquired ANA Therapeutics, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“ANA”), pursuant to that certain Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated December 31, 2020 (the “2020 Merger Agreement”), by and among NeuroBo, Shelby Merger Sub 1, Inc., a Delaware corporation (the “First Merger Sub”), Shelby Merger Sub 2, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (the “Second Merger Sub”), ANA, and Akash Bakshi, solely in his capacity as representative of the securityholders of ANA (the “Representative”).
Pursuant to the 2020 Merger Agreement, First Merger Sub merged with and into ANA, pursuant to which ANA was the surviving entity and became a wholly owned subsidiary of ours (the “First Merger”). Immediately following the First Merger, ANA merged with and into Second Merger Sub, pursuant to which Second Merger Sub was the surviving entity (the “Second Merger,” together with the First Merger, the “2020 Merger”). Second Merger Sub is a wholly-owned subsidiary of ours and changed its name to ANA Therapeutics, LLC (“ANA LLC”). The 2020 Merger is intended to qualify as a tax-free reorganization for U.S. federal income tax purposes. Under the terms of the 2020 Merger Agreement, at the closing of the 2020 Merger, we issued 3,243,875 shares of our common stock to the stockholders of ANA pursuant to the terms of the 2020 Merger Agreement.
Pursuant to the 2020 Merger Agreement, following the closing of the 2020 Merger, we are obligated to pay milestone payments (each, a “Milestone Payment”) to certain persons identified in the 2020 Merger Agreement (each a “Stakeholder” and collectively, the “Stakeholders”) in the form, time and manner as set forth in the 2020 Merger Agreement, upon the achievement of the following milestone events set forth below by us or any of its affiliates (each, a “Milestone Event”):
Additionally, pursuant to the 2020 Merger Agreement, we are obligated to pay certain single-digit royalty payments (each, a “Royalty Payment”) to the Stakeholders in the form, time and manner as set forth in the 2020 Merger Agreement, following the first commercial sale of each Niclosamide Product (as defined in the 2020 Merger Agreement) on a country-by-country and Niclosamide Product-by-Niclosamide Product basis.
If, at the closing of the 2020 Merger, the fair market value of the Milestone Payments and Royalty Payments (the “Contingent Consideration”), as determined by an independent valuation firm nationally recognized in valuation matters selected by ANA and reasonably acceptable to us (the “Contingent Consideration Value”), is greater than 60% of the Total Consideration Value (as defined in the 2020 Merger Agreement), no more than 60% of each Milestone Payment may be paid in cash and the remainder shall be paid in NeuroBo common stock (any such shares, “Milestone Consideration Shares”). The Milestone Payments and Royalty Payments were not probable of being triggered as of this report.
The 2020 Merger Agreement further provides that NeuroBo and the Representative may agree that the payment of certain Milestone Payments be in the form of NeuroBo’s common stock. If the Representative and NeuroBo have agreed to pay a portion of a Milestone Payment in shares of NeuroBo common stock, any such payments shall be made in accordance with Nasdaq Listing Rule 5635, and if necessary shall have been approved by the stockholders of NeuroBo prior to issuance.
We will have the option to pay the Contingent Consideration in shares of our common stock, but the number of shares of our common stock to be issued in connection with each Milestone Payment or Royalty Payment, if any, are not currently determinable. The number of shares to be issued in such event will be calculated by dividing the Milestone Payment or Royalty Payment due, as applicable, by the average of the closing sale prices per share of the Company’s common stock as reported on the Nasdaq for the ten (10) trading day period ending on the day before such payment is to be made.
Pursuant to the 2020 Merger Agreement, NeuroBo, the Representative and an escrow agent entered into an Escrow Agreement pursuant to which 405,472 shares of NeuroBo common stock will be held in escrow for a period of fifteen months, to secure the indemnification obligations as contemplated by the 2020 Merger Agreement.
Additionally, pursuant to the 2020 Merger Agreement, NeuroBo and certain Stakeholders entered into indemnification support agreements wherein the Stakeholders agreed (i) to be bound by the indemnification obligations set forth in the 2020 Merger Agreement and (ii) to pay a pro rata share of certain losses as set forth in the 2020 Merger Agreement.
The Board unanimously approved the 2020 Merger Agreement and the related transactions, and the consummation of the 2020 Merger was not subject to approval of the NeuroBo stockholders.
COVID-19
We are subject to risks and uncertainties as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business is highly uncertain and difficult to predict, as the responses that we, other businesses and governments are taking continue to evolve. Furthermore, capital markets and economies worldwide have also been negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, and it is possible that it could cause a lasting national or global economic recession. Policymakers around the globe have responded with fiscal policy actions to support the healthcare industry and economy as a whole. The magnitude and overall effectiveness of these actions remain uncertain.
To date, except for the adjustments to scientific activity described under “Current Scientific Activity” below, we have not experienced any significant external changes in our business that would have a significant negative impact on our consolidated statements of operations or cash flows.
Exclusive of the development of certain of our proposed therapies, the severity of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business will depend on a number of factors, including, but not limited to, the duration and severity of the pandemic and the extent and severity of the impact on our service providers, suppliers, contract research organizations and our clinical trials, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. As of the date of issuance of our financial statements, the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may in the future materially impact our financial condition, liquidity or results of operations is uncertain.
Current Scientific Activity
In light of the present business environment, including the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, we are currently conducting the scientific activities described below with a view toward conserving financial resources.
ANA001, our lead drug candidate, is a proprietary oral niclosamide formulation and was developed as a treatment for patients with moderate COVID-19. Niclosamide is a potential oral antiviral and anti-inflammatory agent with a long history of use and well-understood safety in humans. ANA001 is currently being studied in a 60-subject Phase 2 clinical trial conducted in the United States. We plan to initiate its Phase 3 development program for ANA001 in the third quarter of 2021.
NB-01. For NB-01, we have determined that any attempt to conduct Phase 3 clinical trials, as previously announced, would be difficult if not impossible in the short or medium term. Accordingly, in the first quarter of 2020, we directed our contract research organization (“CRO”) partners and other vendors working on the Phase 3 clinical trials of NB-01 to cease all work and we terminated our existing contract arrangements with each of them.
We are currently evaluating our options regarding the NB-01 asset:
● Orphan drug. Development of NB-01 as an orphan drug is among the alternatives we are considering. We have identified one potential rare disease indication for NB-01, but we have not yet conducted feasibility studies for it. We believe that development for such indication would depend on our ability to renegotiate milestone payments under our exclusive license agreement with Dong-A ST to reflect the potential revenue from such indication. See the risk factor entitled “We have determined to postpone the initiation of Phase 3 clinical trials of NB-01 under present circumstances and we have terminated all of our agreements with contract research organizations related to NB-01. We may not be able to successfully develop NB-01 pursuant to other alternatives, including as an orphan drug or as a nutraceutical candidate” in Part I, Item 1A “Risk Factors” of this report.
● Nutraceutical. We have considered marketing NB-01 as a nutraceutical (non-pharmaceutical) product, and we may re-explore this pathway if the identified rare disease indication for NB-01 does not proceed.
NB-02. During the third quarter of 2020, we continued work on preparing an Investigational New Drug (“IND”) application to the FDA for NB-02. In order to preserve operating capital, we have postponed continued work on the IND and the first human clinical trials for NB-02 until global health and macroeconomic conditions improve, with a view toward commencing clinical trial activity in the second half of 2021, subject to improvement of the constraints imposed by the COVID-19 pandemic. We are also considering engaging with a strategic partner to assist with clinical trials for NB-02.
Gemcabene. In May 2020, we received written communication from the FDA that the clinical development program for Gemcabene remains on a partial clinical hold. We are currently exploring additional therapeutic indications for Gemcabene that may strengthen our pipeline of assets to treat viral diseases, including COVID-19, either as a stand-alone treatment or in combination with ANA001.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $10.1 million. Operating at such level of scientific activity, we expect that our cash, including the net proceeds from our private placement in January 2021 (as described below under “Liquidity and Capital Resources”), will be adequate to fund operations into the fourth quarter of 2021.
We will need to raise additional capital to fund continued operations at the current level through the fourth quarter of 2021 and beyond. Although we are exploring financing opportunities and carefully monitoring the capital markets, we do not yet have any commitments for additional financing and may not be successful in our efforts to raise additional funds. Any amounts raised will be used for further development of our product candidates and for other working capital purposes and, depending on the amount raised, for commencing clinical activity on NB-02 in the second half of 2021.
If we are unable to raise additional capital (which is not assured at this time, particularly as a result of recent depressed capital market conditions), our long-term business plan may not be accomplished, and we may be forced to cease, reduce, or delay operations. We have some ability to reduce costs further in 2021, thereby potentially lengthening our operational window further into the first quarter of 2022.
Going Concern
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”), which contemplate our continuation as a going concern. We have not established a source of revenues and, as such, have been dependent on funding operations through the sale of equity securities. Since inception, we have experienced significant losses and incurred negative cash flows from operations. We expect to incur further losses over the next several years as we develop our business. We have spent, and expect to continue to spend, a substantial amount of funds in connection with implementing our business strategy.
We will need substantial additional funding to support our continuing operations and to pursue our business strategy and, in the meantime, we have reduced scientific activity (as indicated above) and we are carefully controlling expenses. Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from product sales, if ever, we expect to continue to finance our operations primarily through proceeds derived from the sale of equity.
These factors individually and collectively raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Our financial statements do not include any adjustments or classifications that may result from our possible inability to continue as a going concern. The report of our independent registered public accounting firm on our financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 includes an explanatory paragraph regarding the existence of substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Key operating data
We have incurred significant operating losses since inception. Our ability to generate product revenue sufficient to achieve profitability will depend on the successful development and eventual commercialization of one or more of our current or future product candidates. Our net losses were $29.7 million and $21.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales, collaborations with other companies, government grants or any other source, and do not expect to generate any revenue in the foreseeable future.
As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $66.5 million. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for at least the next several years. We expect that our expenses and capital requirements will increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly if and as we:
● pursue clinical development for any of our current product candidates;
● initiate preclinical studies and clinical trials with respect to any additional indications for our current product candidates and any future product candidates that we may pursue;
● acquire or in-license other product candidates and/or technologies;
● develop, maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
● hire additional clinical, scientific and commercial personnel;
● establish a commercial manufacturing source and secure supply chain capacity sufficient to provide commercial quantities of any product candidates for which we may obtain regulatory approval;
● seek regulatory approvals for any product candidates that successfully complete clinical trials;
● establish a sales, marketing and distribution infrastructure and/or enter into partnership arrangements to commercialize any products for which we may obtain regulatory approval; or
● add administrative, operational, financial and management information systems and personnel, including personnel to support our product development and planned future commercialization efforts, and to support our transition to a public reporting company.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales, collaborations with other companies, government grants or any other source, and do not expect to generate any revenue in the foreseeable future. If our product development efforts for our product candidates are successful and result in regulatory approval, we may generate revenue in the future from product sales. We cannot predict if, when, or to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of our product candidates. We may never succeed in obtaining regulatory approval for any of our product candidates or generating revenue through alternative marketing strategies such as nutraceuticals.
Cost of Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue and thus have no cost of revenue. If our development efforts for our product candidates are successful and result in regulatory approval, we may generate revenue in the future from product sales and have corresponding cost of revenue. We cannot predict if, when, or to what extent we will incur costs from revenue from the commercialization and sale of our product candidates. If we are successful at commercialization, the cost of revenues would include all costs directly related to providing the commercial asset, which would consist primarily of labor, material, facilities, warehousing and other overhead expenses. Cost of revenues would also include depreciation expense related to certain equipment used as part of the commercial asset.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred in connection with the development of our product candidates. We expense research and development costs to operations as incurred. These expenses include:
● employee-related expenses, including salaries, related benefits and stock-based compensation, for employees engaged in research and development functions;
● expenses incurred in connection with the clinical development of our product candidates, including under agreements with third parties, such as consultants and Clinical Research Organizations (“CROs”);
● the cost of manufacturing and storing drug products for use in our preclinical studies and clinical trials, including under agreements with third parties, such as consultants and Clinical Manufacturing Organizations (“CMOs”);
● facilities, depreciation and other expenses, which include direct or allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and insurance;
● costs related to compliance with regulatory requirements; and
● payments made under third-party licensing agreements.
We recognize external development costs based on an evaluation of the progress toward completion of specific tasks using information provided to us by our service providers. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf, and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual costs. Nonrefundable advance payments for goods or services to be received in the future for use in research and development activities are recorded as prepaid expenses. Such amounts are recognized as an expense when the goods have been delivered or the services have been performed, or when it is no longer expected that the goods will be delivered, or the services rendered.
Our direct research and development expenses consist primarily of external costs, such as fees paid to outside consultants, CROs, CMOs and research laboratories in connection with our clinical development, quality assurance and quality control processes, manufacturing, and clinical development activities. Our direct research and development expenses also include fees incurred under third-party license agreements. We use our employee and infrastructure resources across multiple research and development projects. We do not allocate employee costs and costs associated with our facilities, including depreciation or other indirect costs, to specific product candidates because these costs are deployed across multiple programs and, as such, are not separately classified. We use internal resources primarily to conduct manufacturing and clinical development activities. These employees work across multiple programs and, therefore, we do not track our costs by product candidate.
Clinical development activities are central to our business model. We do not believe that our historical costs are indicative of the future costs associated with these programs, nor do they represent the costs of other future programs we may initiate. Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. We have some control over the timing of these expenses, but costs may be difficult to control once clinical trials have commenced.
The successful development and commercialization of our product candidates are highly uncertain. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate or know the nature, timing and costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the preclinical and clinical development of any of our product candidates. Additionally, because of the risks inherent in novel treatment discovery and development, we cannot reasonably estimate or know:
● the timing and progress of preclinical and clinical development activities;
● the number and scope of clinical programs that we decide to pursue;
● our ability to maintain our current development programs and to establish new ones;
● establishing an appropriate safety profile with IND-enabling studies;
● successful patient enrollment in, and the initiation and completion of, clinical trials;
● the successful completion of clinical trials with safety, tolerability and efficacy profiles that are satisfactory to the FDA or any comparable foreign regulatory authority;
● the receipt of regulatory approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
● the timing, receipt and terms of any marketing approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
● our ability to establish new licensing or collaboration arrangements;
● establishing agreements with third-party manufacturers for clinical supply for our clinical trials and commercial manufacturing, if any of our product candidates is approved;
● development and timely delivery of clinical-grade and commercial-grade drug formulations that can be used in our clinical trials and for commercial launch;
● obtaining, maintaining, defending and enforcing patent claims and other intellectual property rights;
● launching commercial sales of our product candidates, if approved, whether alone or in collaboration with others;
● maintaining a continued acceptable safety profile of the product candidates following commercialization; or
● the effect of competing technological and market developments.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of our product candidates could significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate.
Acquired In-Process Research and Development
We include costs to acquire or in-license product candidates in acquired in-process research and development expenses (“IPR&D”). When we acquire the right to develop and commercialize a new product candidate, any up-front payments, or any future milestone payments that relate to the acquisition or licensing of such a right are immediately expensed as acquired in-process research and development in the period in which they are incurred. These costs are immediately expensed provided that the payments do not also represent processes or activities that would constitute a “business” as defined under GAAP, or provided that the product candidate has not achieved regulatory approval for marketing and, and absent obtaining such approval, has no alternative future use. Royalties owed on future sales of any licensed product will be expensed in the period the related revenues are recognized.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in executive, finance and administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include direct and allocated facility-related costs as well as professional fees for legal, patent, consulting, investor and public relations, accounting, and audit services.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as a result of accounting, audit, legal, regulatory, compliance, and director and officer insurance costs as we pursue the development of our product pipeline, as well as investor and public relations expenses associated with being a public company.
Loss on note extinguishment
Loss on note extinguishment consists of the loss associated with debt instrument modifications accounted for as debt extinguishments.
Interest Income (Expense), net
Interest Income
Interest income consists of bank interest earned on our cash and cash equivalents.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of the interest calculated at a rate of 5% per annum on the convertible notes issued by the Company, which was a private entity formerly known as NeuroBo Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (“Private NeuroBo”) in February 2018 and debt discount amortization attributed to the underlying beneficial conversion features of the convertible notes. The convertible notes were converted into shares of common stock in connection with the 2019 Merger.
Other Expense, net
Other expense, net reflects non-operating expenses associated mainly with realized foreign currency exchange gains and losses.
Income Taxes
The 2020 Merger was intended to qualify as a tax-free reorganization under Section 368 of the Code, the former ANA shareholders owned approximately 16.5% of the outstanding common stock of the Company immediately after the 2020 Merger.
The 2019 Merger in the prior year was intended to qualify as a tax-free reorganization under Section 368 of the Code. Based on the exchange ratio under the 2019 Merger Agreement, the former stockholders of Private NeuroBo owned approximately 96.2% of the outstanding common stock of the Company immediately after the 2019 Merger. Therefore, the 2019 Merger was treated as a reverse acquisition for U.S. federal income tax purposes. As a result of the reverse acquisition, the Company became part of the Private NeuroBo (now NeuroBo Therapeutics) consolidated group with the Company as its new parent. In addition, the Company had a short taxable year in 2019 ending on the date of the 2019 Merger. Also, as a result of the 2019 Merger, for U.S. federal income tax purposes, we believe that the Company underwent an ownership change which places a limit on the amount of a company’s net operating losses that can be deducted annually. We have begun, but have not completed, a preliminary analysis to confirm whether such an ownership change has occurred with respect to the 2019 Merger, but have not conducted any such study to assess whether any prior ownership changes have historically occurred.
Since our inception, we have not recorded any income tax benefits for the NOLs we have incurred in each year or for our earned research and development tax credits, as we believe, based upon the weight of available evidence, that it is more likely than not that all of our NOL carryforwards and tax credits will not be realized. As of December 31, 2020, we had federal, state and foreign NOLs carryforwards of $57.5 million, $25.1 million, and $1.0 million, respectively, which may be available to offset future income tax liabilities and begin to expire in 2034 for federal carryforwards incurred prior to 2018, in 2026 for state carryforwards and in 2028 for the foreign carryforwards. Federal operating loss carryforwards incurred beginning in 2018 do not expire. As of December 31, 2020, we also had federal and state research and development tax credit carryforwards of $0.7 million and $0.5 million, respectively, which may be available to offset future tax liabilities and each begin to expire in 2038 for federal and 2033 for state. We have recorded a full valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets at each balance sheet date. Utilization of the NOL and research and development credit carryforwards may be subject to a substantial annual limitation due to ownership changes that may have occurred previously or that could occur in the future, as provided by Section 382 of the Code, as well as similar state provisions. Ownership changes may limit the amount of NOL and tax credit carry forwards that can be utilized to offset future taxable income and tax, respectively.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 (in thousands):
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $4.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $5.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $0.8 million decrease in 2020 was primarily related to the
overall reduction of clinical trial activity, as CRO fees, supply and personnel related costs decreased by approximately $2.5 million, offset in part by CRO termination costs associated with the March 2020 determination to postpone Phase 3 clinical trials of NB-01 in the amount of approximately $1.3 million, and $0.4 million for the development of Gemcabene, which was acquired in the 2019 Merger.
Acquired In-process Research and Development
Acquired in-process research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 amounted to $17.3 million and was attributable to research and development projects of Niclosamide which were in-process at the 2020 Merger date. Acquired in-process research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 amounted to $12.2 million and was attributable to research and development projects of Gemphire which were in-process at the 2019 Merger date. Current accounting standards require that the fair value of IPR&D with no alternative future use be charged to expense on the acquisition date.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $7.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $2.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $5.1 million was primarily due to the costs associated with operating as a public company when compared to the comparable prior year. The cost increases in 2020 included legal costs of $1.6 million, $1.5 million in director and officer and other insurance premiums, $0.8 million in accounting and auditing fess, $0.6 million in board of director and other public company costs and $0.6 million in stock-based compensation.
Loss on note extinguishment
Non-cash loss on note extinguishment for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $1.1 million stemming from the modification of our convertible notes in October 2019 that were accounted for as a debt extinguishment. There were no modifications of debt instruments in the current year.
Interest Income (Expense), net
Interest income (expense), net for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $39,000 compared to $(22,000) for the year ended December 31, 2019. Interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $39,000 related to cash deposits. The Company did not incur interest expenses during the year ended December 31, 2020 as there was no debt outstanding during the period.
Interest income (expense), net during the year ended December 31, 2019 included non-cash interest expense in connection with our convertible notes of $129,000, offset in part by interest income of $107,000 million related to cash deposits. Non-cash interest expense during the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of interest on principal in the amount of $25,000 and costs attributed to the underlying beneficial conversion features of the convertible notes in the amount of $104,000.
Other Expense, net
Other expense, net was $1,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to less than $1,000 during the year ended December 31, 2019. The net increase in other expense, net was due to a nominal increase in net realized foreign currency exchange losses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On January 18, 2021, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “2021 Purchase Agreement”) with certain institutional and accredited investors, pursuant to which we, in a private placement (the “2021 Private Placement”), agreed to issue and sell an aggregate of 2,500,000 shares (the “2021 Shares”) of our common stock, par value $0.001 per share at a purchase price of $4.00 per share, and warrants to purchase an aggregate of 2,500,000 shares of common stock (the “2021 Warrants”), resulting in total gross proceeds to us in the amount of $10.0 million, before
deducting placement agent fees and offering expenses. The 2021 Warrants have an initial exercise price of $6.03 per share. The 2021 Private Placement closed on January 21, 2021.
On April 13, 2020, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with an institutional investor, pursuant to which we sold in a registered direct offering (the “Registered Offering”) 750,000 shares of our common stock, at an offering price of $10.00 per share. The Registered Offering resulted in gross proceeds of $7.5 million, before deducting the placement agent’s fees and related offering expenses.
Prior to the 2019 Merger, Private NeuroBo funded operations with proceeds from sales of preferred stock and proceeds from the issuance of convertible debt. Prior to the 2019 Merger, Private NeuroBo received net proceeds of $40.9 million from sales of preferred stock and $0.5 million from the sales of convertible notes which were converted into shares of Private NeuroBo common stock, effective immediately prior to the closing of the 2019 Merger.
ln August 2019, Private NeuroBo issued an aggregate of 3,463,593 shares of Series B preferred stock (as adjusted for the exchange ratio in the 2019 Merger Agreement) at a purchase price of $7.00 per share, for aggregate gross consideration of approximately $24.2 million. On December 30, 2019, each share of Series B preferred stock then outstanding was converted into common stock in accordance with the terms of the 2019 Merger Agreement.
Since inception, we have experienced significant losses and incurred negative cash flows from operations. We expect to incur further losses over the next several years as we develop our business. We have spent, and expect to continue to spend, a substantial amount of funds in connection with implementing our business strategy.
We will need substantial additional funding to support our continuing operations and to pursue our business strategy and, in the meantime, we have reduced scientific activity, as described under “Overview-Current Scientific Activity-NB-01” above, and we are carefully controlling expenses. In the first quarter of 2020, in connection with the reduced scientific activity, we directed our CRO partners and other vendors working on the Phase 3 clinical trials of NB-01 to cease all work and have terminated our existing contract arrangements with each of them.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $10.1 million. Operating at such level of scientific activity, we expect that our cash, including the net proceeds from the Registered Offering and 2021 Private Placement, will be adequate to fund operations into the fourth quarter of 2021.
We will need to raise additional capital to fund continued operations at the current level through the fourth quarter of 2021 and beyond. Although we are exploring financing opportunities and carefully monitoring the capital markets, we do not yet have any commitments for additional financing and may not be successful in our efforts to raise additional funds. If we are unable to raise additional capital (which is not assured at this time), our long-term business plan may not be accomplished, and we may be forced to cease, reduce, or delay operations. We have some ability to reduce costs further in 2021, thereby potentially lengthening our operational window further into the first quarter of 2022.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for each of the periods presented (in thousands):
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, operating activities used $10.8 million of cash, primarily resulting from our net loss of $29.7 million offset by non-cash expenses related to IPR&D, stock-based compensation and depreciation in the aggregate of $18.1 million. Net cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0.8 million which primarily consisted of a net increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses. The net increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses was primarily attributed to the timing of vendor invoicing and payments and increases in clinical trial termination costs.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, operating activities used $7.0 million of cash, primarily resulting from our net loss of $21.3 million offset by non-cash expenses related to interest in connection with our convertible notes, the extinguishment loss stemming from the modification of our convertible notes, IPR&D, stock-based compensation and depreciation in the aggregate of $13.5 million. Net cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $0.7 million which consisted of a net decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets of approximately $0.8 million, offset in part by a net decrease in our accounts payable and accrued expenses of $0.1 million as adjusted for the net liabilities assumed in connection with the 2019 Merger. The net decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets was primarily due to utilization of clinical research organization deposits for clinical activities. The net decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses was primarily attributed to the 2019 Merger and the timing of vendor invoicing and payments.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by investing activities was $0.1 million. Investing activities during the period consisted mainly of cash received, net of transaction costs paid, in connection with the 2020 Merger in the amount of $0.1 million. Purchases of property and equipment in the amount of $4,000 comprised the balance of investing activities during the period.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in investing activities was $6.1 million. Investing activities during the period consisted mainly of transaction costs paid in connection with the 2019 Merger, net of cash acquired, in the amount of $5.8 million. Purchases of property and equipment in the amount of $0.2 million comprised the balance of investing activities during the period.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $6.9 million, consisting of proceeds from the Registered Offering of $6.8 million, net of issuance costs, and from the exercise of stock options of $0.1 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities was $24.2 million, consisting primarily of net proceeds from the sale of Series B preferred stock.
Funding Requirements
We expect our expenses to increase substantially over time in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we advance the preclinical activities and clinical trials of our product candidates. The timing and amount of our preclinical and clinical expenditures will depend largely on:
● the availability of capital;
● the scope, number, initiation, progress, timing, costs, design, duration, any potential delays, and results of clinical trials and nonclinical studies for our current or future product candidates;
● the clinical development plans we establish for our product candidates;
● the number and characteristics of product candidates and programs that we develop or may in-license;
● the outcome, timing and cost of regulatory reviews, approvals or other actions to meet regulatory requirements established by the FDA and comparable foreign regulatory authorities, including the potential for the FDA or
comparable foreign regulatory authorities to require that we perform more studies for our product candidates than those that we currently expect;
● our ability to obtain marketing approval for our product candidates;
● the cost of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing our patent claims and other intellectual property rights covering our product candidates, including any such patent claims and intellectual property rights that we have licensed pursuant to the terms of our license agreement;
● our ability to maintain, expand and defend the scope of our intellectual property portfolio, including the cost of defending intellectual property disputes, including patent infringement actions brought by third parties against us or our product candidates;
● the cost and timing of completion of commercial-scale outsourced manufacturing activities with respect to our product candidates;
● our ability to establish and maintain licensing, collaboration or similar arrangements on favorable terms and whether and to what extent we retain development or commercialization responsibilities under any new licensing, collaboration or similar arrangement;
● the cost of establishing sales, marketing and distribution capabilities for any product candidates for which we may receive regulatory approval in regions where we choose to commercialize our products on our own;
● the success of any other business, product or technology that we acquire or in which we invest;
● the costs of acquiring, licensing or investing in businesses, product candidates and technologies; and
● our need and ability to hire additional management and scientific and medical personnel.
We expect that, with current levels of scientific activity, our existing cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to fund our operating expenses, capital expenditure requirements into the fourth quarter of 2021. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could exhaust our available capital resources sooner than we expect.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, costs, and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. On an on-going basis, our management evaluates its estimates, including those related to accounting for clinical trials, income taxes including the valuation allowance for deferred tax assets, accrued expenses, contingencies and stock-based compensation. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgements about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Changes in estimates are reflected in reported results in the period in which they become known.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development costs are charged to expense as incurred. Research and development expenses may comprise of costs incurred in performing research and development activities, including clinical trial costs, manufacturing costs for both clinical and pre-clinical materials as well as other contracted services, license fees, and other external costs. Nonrefundable advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities are expensed when the activity is performed or when the goods have been received, rather than when payment is made, in accordance with ASC 730, Research and Development.
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with applicable personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or
otherwise notified of actual costs. Certain of our service providers invoice us in arrears for services performed, on a pre-determined schedule or when contractual milestones are met; however, some service providers require advance payments. We make estimates of our accrued and prepaid expenses as of each balance sheet date in the consolidated financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of these estimates with the service providers and make adjustments, if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to:
● vendors in connection with preclinical development activities;
● CROs and investigative sites in connection with preclinical studies and clinical trials; and
● CMOs in connection with the production of preclinical and clinical trial materials.
We base the expense recorded related to external research and development on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with multiple CMOs and CROs that supply, conduct and manage preclinical studies and clinical trials on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the expense. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of patients and the completion of clinical trial milestones. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the estimate, we adjust the accrual or the amount of prepaid expenses accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period.
Acquired In-Process Research and Development Expenses
We include costs to acquire or in-license product candidates in acquired in-process research and development expenses. These costs are immediately expensed provided that the payments do not also represent processes or activities that would constitute a “business” as defined under GAAP or provided that the product candidate has not achieved regulatory approval for marketing and absent obtaining such approval, has no alternative future use. Royalties owed on future sales of any licensed product will be expensed in the period the related revenues are recognized.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation in accordance with the provisions of ASC 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation (“ASC 718”). Accordingly, compensation costs related to equity instruments granted are recognized at the grant-date fair value. We record forfeitures when they occur. Stock-based compensation arrangements to non-employees are accounted for in accordance with the applicable provisions of ASC 718 using a grant date fair value approach.
The fair value of each stock option grant is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which uses as inputs the fair value of our common stock and assumptions we make for the volatility of the common stock, the expected term of the stock options, the risk-free interest rate for a period that approximates the expected term of the stock options and the expected dividend yield.
Leases
We adopted Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842) (“ASU 2016-02”) in the third quarter of 2019. We assess our contracts at inception to determine whether the contract contains a lease, including evaluation of whether the contract conveys the right to control an explicitly or implicitly identified asset for a period of time. We have recognized right-of-use assets and lease liabilities that represent the net present value of future operating lease payments utilizing a discount rate corresponding to our incremental borrowing rate which we amortize over the remaining terms of the leases. For operating leases of a short-term nature, i.e., those with a term of less than twelve months, we recognize lease payments as an expense on a straight-line basis over the remaining lease term.
Emerging Growth Company Status
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups (“JOBS”) Act permits an “emerging growth company” such as us to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. We are choosing to take advantage of this provision and, as a result, we will adopt the extended transition period available under the JOBS Act until the earlier of the date we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided under the JOBS Act.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have off balance sheet arrangements during the periods presented in this report, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position and results of operations disclosed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 “Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this report.