Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (“Business Combination”). We have reviewed a number of opportunities to enter into a Business Combination and intend to enter into the Proposed Business Combination described below under “Recent Developments.”
We intend to consummate a Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering (the “Public Offering”) that closed on October 9, 2020 (the “Close Date”) and the private placement of warrants to purchase our Class A ordinary shares (“Private Placement Warrants”) that occurred at the Close Date, and from additional issuances of, if any, our capital stock and our debt, or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
At December 31, 2020, we held cash of $534,095 and current liabilities of $533,908. Further, we expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
The financial statements presented in this Annual Report on Form 10-K have been prepared on a going concern basis and do not include any adjustments that might arise as a result of uncertainties about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Recent Developments
On January 28, 2021, the Company, TPG Pace Tech Merger Sub LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“Nerdy Merger Sub”), TCV VIII (A) VT, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“TCV Blocker”), LCSOF XI VT, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Learn Blocker” and, together with TCV Blocker, the “Blockers”), TPG Pace Blocker Merger Sub I Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Blocker Merger Sub I”), TPG Pace Blocker Merger Sub II Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Blocker Merger Sub II” and, together with Blocker Merger Sub I, the “Blocker Merger Subs” and, together with Nerdy Merger Sub, the “Merger Subs”), Live Learning Technologies LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“Nerdy”), and, solely for the purposes described therein, certain entities affiliated with the Blockers (“Blocker Holders”) entered into a Business Combination Agreement (the “Business Combination Agreement,” and the transactions contemplated thereby, the “Proposed Business Combination”), pursuant to which, among other things and subject to the terms and conditions contained therein:
(a) Pursuant to the Business Combination Agreement, on the date (the “Closing Date”) of closing of the Proposed Business Combination (the “Closing”), prior to the Effective Time (as defined in the Business Combination Agreement), (i) the Company will change its jurisdiction of incorporation by deregistering as a Cayman Islands exempted company and continuing and domesticating as a corporation incorporated under the laws of the State of Delaware (the “Domestication”), upon which the Company will change its name to “Nerdy Inc.”, and (ii) Nerdy will cause each outstanding class of preferred units and the Nerdy profits units to be automatically converted into Nerdy common units (subject to applicable vesting requirements).
(b) Nerdy Merger Sub will merge with and into Nerdy (the “Merger”), with Nerdy surviving the Merger. Pursuant to the Merger, (i) each holder of Nerdy common units (other than the Blockers) will exchange its Nerdy common units for (A) certain cash consideration, (B) either (x) certain limited liability company units in Nerdy (“OpCo Units”), subject to applicable vesting requirements, and an equivalent number of shares of the Company’s class B common stock, par value $0.0001 per share (“Class B Common Stock”), or (y) certain shares of the Company’s class A common stock, par value $0.0001 per share (“Class A Common Stock” and, together with Class B Common Stock, “Common Stock”)), and (C) (x) certain Nerdy warrants to purchase OpCo Units at an exercise price of $11.50 (the “OpCo Warrants”) or (y) certain Company warrants to purchase shares of Class A Common Stock at an exercise price of $11.50 (“Pace Warrants”) and (ii) each holder of unit appreciation rights under the Nerdy 2016 U.S. Unit Appreciation Rights Plan and the 2016 Canadian Unit Appreciation Rights Plan will exchange all such unit appreciation rights for either (1) corresponding stock appreciation rights in the Company or (2) certain cash consideration. The holders of Nerdy common units (other than the Blockers) will also receive the rights set forth in the Tax Receivable Agreement (as defined below).
(c) (i) Immediately following the Merger, Blocker Merger Sub I will merge with and into TCV Blocker, with TCV Blocker surviving such merger, and (ii) immediately thereafter, Blocker Merger Sub II will merge with and into Learn Blocker, with Learn Blocker surviving such merger (such mergers in clauses (i) and (ii), each a “Reverse Blocker Merger” and, together, the “Reverse Blocker Mergers”), and (iv) immediately following the Reverse Blocker Mergers, each surviving Blocker will merge with and into the Company (one after another) (each a “Direct Blocker Merger” and, together, the “Direct Blocker Mergers” and, together with the Reverse Blocker Mergers, the “Blocker Mergers”), with the Company surviving each Direct Blocker Merger. Each holder of equity interests in the Blockers will exchange such equity interests in the Reverse Blocker Mergers for (A) certain cash consideration, (B) certain shares of Class A Common Stock and (C) certain Pace Warrants.
(d) Immediately following the Blocker Mergers and in connection with the Closing, the Company will contribute all of its assets (other than the OpCo Units it then holds) to Nerdy in exchange for a number of additional OpCo Units and a number of OpCo Warrants, such that the Company will hold a number of OpCo Units equal to the total number of shares of Class A Common Stock and a number of OpCo Warrants equal to the total number of Pace Warrants, in each case, issued and outstanding immediately after giving effect to the Proposed Business Combination. The aggregate consideration to be paid to the holders of Nerdy equity (including the owners of the Blockers with respect to their indirect interest in the Nerdy equity) is based on an enterprise value of $1,250,000,000 (subject to certain debt related adjustments) and shall consist of (i) an amount of cash equal to the excess of the amount of available cash over $250,000,000 (but not to exceed $388,200,000), plus (ii) equity consideration valued at $10.00 per share in respect of the remaining portion of Nerdy’s enterprise value after deducting the cash consideration in clause (i), plus (iii) certain OpCo Warrants or Pace Warrants, as applicable, plus (iv) the Nerdy Earnout (as defined below), if payable.
Following the Closing, the combined company will be organized in an “Up-C” structure, and the Company’s only direct assets will consist of OpCo Units and OpCo Warrants. Immediately following the Closing, the Company is expected to own approximately 60% of the OpCo Units and approximately 90% of the OpCo Warrants, and will control Nerdy as the managing member of Nerdy in accordance with the terms of the Second Amended and Restated Limited Liability Company Agreement of Nerdy to be entered into in connection with the Closing (the “OpCo LLC Agreement”). The amount of cash to be contributed by the Company to Nerdy at the Closing of the Proposed Business Combination is estimated to be approximately $265 million.
In addition to the consideration described above, the existing holders of Nerdy equity will be issued an aggregate of 4 million additional issued (i) shares Class A Common Stock or (ii) OpCo Units (and a corresponding number of Class B Common Stock), as applicable, in earn-out consideration that will be subject to forfeiture if the achievement of certain stock price thresholds are not met within five years of the Closing Date (the “Nerdy Earnout”).
Under the Business Combination Agreement, the obligations of the parties to consummate the transactions contemplated thereby are subject to a number of closing conditions, including the Company obtaining the requisite approval of its shareholders and the holders of Nerdy membership interests, which the Company expects to seek at an extraordinary general meeting of the Company in the second quarter of 2021. The Business Combination Agreement may be terminated at any time prior to the closing of the Proposed Business Combination by mutual written consent of the Company and Nerdy and, among other things, if the Proposed Business Combination has not occurred prior to the date that is 180 days after the date of the Business Combination Agreement. As such, the closing of the Proposed Business Combination cannot be assured.
Concurrently with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, the Company entered into the following agreements:
•
Transaction Support Agreements, pursuant to which the Nerdy equity holders agreed to, among other things, vote in favor of the Business Combination Agreement and the Proposed Business Combination and to be bound by certain other covenants and agreements related to the Proposed Business Combination;
•
A Stockholders Agreement, pursuant to which certain unit holders in Nerdy and our Sponsor were provided with certain governance and board nomination rights;
•
Subscription Agreements with certain qualified institutional buyers and accredited investors (collectively, the “Investors”), pursuant to which, among other things, the Investors agreed to subscribe for and purchase, and the Company agreed to issue and sell to the Investors, an aggregate of 15,000,000 newly issued shares of Class A Common Stock in connection with the closing of the Proposed Business Combination for aggregate gross proceeds of $150,000,000 (the “Pipe Financing”); and
A Waiver Agreement with each holder of Founder Shares, including our Sponsor, pursuant to which such holders agreed to waive their right to receive certain shares of Class A Common Stock in connection with a conversion adjustment applicable to the Pipe Financing and other issuances of securities in excess of 15,000,000 shares under the forward purchase agreements. Such holders also agreed (i) to forfeit (a) 2,000,000 shares, (b) certain shares of Class A Common Stock in connection with the consummation of issuances pursuant to the forward purchase agreements of any shares in excess of an aggregate 15,000,000 shares and (c) 2,444,444
warrants, and (ii) to subject 4,000,000 shares of Class A Common Stock following the closing to potential forfeiture if certain stock price thresholds are not achieved within a period of five years from the Closing Date, consistent with the forfeiture thresholds for the Nerdy Earnout.
Other than as specifically discussed herein, this Annual Report on Form 10-K does not give effect to the Proposed Business Combination or the transactions contemplated thereby.
Results of Operations
For the year ended December 31, 2020 and the period from Inception to December 31, 2019, we incurred net losses of $637,366 and $8,494. Our income consists solely of interest earned on investments held in the Trust Account. Our business activities since our Public Offering have consisted solely of identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition targets for a Business Combination.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On August 12, 2019, our Sponsor purchased an aggregate of 20,000,000 Founder Shares for an aggregate purchase price of $25,000, or approximately $0.001 per share. On October 2, 2020, our Sponsor transferred 40,000 Founder Shares to each of our four independent directors at their original purchase price. On October 2, 2020, our Sponsor forfeited 7,062,500 Founder Shares for no consideration On November 20, 2020, our Sponsor forfeited 1,687,500 Founder Shares on the expiration of the underwriters’ over-allotment option. At December 31, 2020, our Sponsor and four independent directors (collectively, the “Initial Shareholders”) held, collectively, 11,250,000 Founder Shares.
On October 9, 2020, we consummated the Public Offering of 45,000,000 Units (which included the purchase of 5,000,000 Units subject to the underwriters’ 6,000,000 Unit over-allotment option) at a price of $10.00 per Unit generating gross proceeds of $450,000,000 before underwriting discounts and expenses. Each Unit consists of one Public Share and one-fifth of one Warrant. Each whole Warrant entitles the holder to purchase one Class A ordinary share at a price of $11.50 per share. Only whole Warrants may be exercised and no fractional Warrants will be issued upon separation of the Units and only whole Warrants may be traded. Prior to the Close Date, we completed the private sale of an aggregate of 7,333,333 Private Placement Warrants, each exercisable to purchase one Class A ordinary share for $11.50 per share, to our Sponsor, at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant.
We received gross proceeds from the Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants of $450,000,000 and $11,000,000, respectively, for an aggregate of $461,000,000. $450,000,000 of the gross proceeds were deposited in the Trust Account. At the Close Date, the remaining $11,000,000 was held outside of the Trust Account, of which $9,000,000 was used to pay underwriting discounts and $300,000 was used to repay notes payable to our Sponsor, with the balance reserved to pay accrued offering and formation costs, business, legal and accounting due diligence on prospective acquisitions and continuing general and administrative expenses. In the future, a portion of interest income on the funds held in the Trust Account may be released to us to pay tax obligations.
On October 14, 2020, we invested the funds held in the Trust Account in a money market account invested in permitted United States “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended (the “Investment Company Act”), having a maturity of 180 days or less, or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act (“Permitted Investments”).
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we earned interest income of $5,937 on investments held in the Trust Account.
At December 31, 2020, we had cash held outside of the Trust Account of $534,095, which is available to fund our working capital requirements.
At December 31, 2020, we had current liabilities of $533,908, primarily due to costs associated with our identification and evaluation of potential Business Combinations. The identification and evaluation of potential Business Combinations is continuing after December 31, 2020, and we therefore expect to incur additional expenses, which may be significant. We expect some portion of these expenses to be paid upon consummation of a Business Combination. We may, however, need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business prior to a Business Combination. We may request loans from our Sponsor, affiliates of our Sponsor or certain of our executive officers and directors to fund our working capital requirements prior to completing a Business Combination. We may use working capital to repay such loans. Additional funds could also be raised through a private offering of debt or equity. There can be no assurance that we will be able to raise such funds
We may also need to obtain additional financing either to complete a Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our Class A ordinary shares upon completion of a Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination.
We have 24 months from the Close Date to complete our Business Combination. If we do not complete a Business Combination within this period, we shall (i) cease all operations except for the purposes of winding up; (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds in the Trust Account and not previously released to us to pay our taxes (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses) divided by the number of then outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining shareholders and the board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject in each case to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law. The Initial Shareholders and our officers and directors have entered into a letter agreement with us, pursuant to which they have waived their rights to liquidating distributions from the Trust Account with respect to their Founder Shares if we fail to complete the Business Combination within 24 months from the Close Date. However, if the Initial Shareholders acquire Public Shares after the Close Date, they will be entitled to liquidating distributions from the Trust Account with respect to such Public Shares if we fail to complete the Business Combination within the allotted 24-month time period.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including earned interest (which interest shall be net of taxes payable) to consummate a Business Combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to consummate a Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account after completion of the Business Combination and redemptions of Class A ordinary shares, if any, will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategy.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements.
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or entered into any non-financial agreements involving assets as of December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities other than an administrative agreement to pay monthly recurring expenses of $50,000 for office space, administrative and support services to an affiliate of our Sponsor. The agreement terminates upon the earlier of the completion of a Business Combination or the liquidation of the Company.
We are committed to pay the deferred discount of 3.50% of the gross proceeds of the Public Offering, or $15,750,000 (the “Deferred Discount”), to the underwriters upon the completion of a Business Combination. The underwriters are not entitled to receive any of the interest earned on Trust Account funds that would be used to pay the Deferred Discount, and no Deferred Discount is payable to the underwriters if a Business Combination is not completed within 24 months after the Close Date.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires our management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the condensed financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Offering Costs
We comply with the requirements of Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 340-10-S99-1 and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin Topic 5A, “Expenses of Offering.” We incurred offering costs in connection with our Public Offering of $1,094,456,
primarily consisting of accounting and legal services, securities registration expenses and exchange listing fees. These costs, along with paid and deferred underwriter discounts totaling $24,750,000, were charged to additional paid-in capital at the Close Date.
Redeemable Ordinary Shares
The 45,000,000 Class A ordinary shares sold as part of the Units in the Public Offering contain a redemption feature under which holders of the Class A ordinary shares may redeem all or a portion of their Public Shares upon completion of our Business Combination for an amount in cash equal to their pro rata share of the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account as of two business days prior to the consummation of the Business Combination (including interest, net of taxes payable). In accordance with ASC 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” (“ASC 480”), redemption provisions not solely within our control require the security to be classified outside of permanent equity. Ordinary liquidation events, which involve the redemption and liquidation of all of an entity’s equity instruments, are excluded from the provisions of ASC 480. Although we did not specify a maximum redemption threshold, our amended and restated memorandum and articles of association provide that in no event will we redeem our Class A ordinary shares in an amount that would cause our net tangible assets, or total shareholders’ equity, to fall below $5,000,001. Accordingly, at December 31, 2020, 42,953,401 of our 45,000,000 Class A ordinary shares were classified outside of permanent equity.
Net Loss per Ordinary Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share”. Net loss per ordinary share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period as calculated using the treasury stock method. At December 31, 2020, we had outstanding warrants and forward purchase contracts to purchase up to 36,333,333 Class A ordinary shares. The weighted average of these shares was excluded from the calculation of diluted net income per ordinary share since the exercise of the warrants and forward purchase contracts is contingent upon the occurrence of future events. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we did not have any dilutive securities or other contracts that could, potentially, be exercised or converted into ordinary shares and then share in our earnings under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted net loss per ordinary share is the same as basic net loss per ordinary share for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.