Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following is a discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations. The following should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and accompanying notes. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those projected, forecasted, or expected in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including, but not limited to, those discussed below and elsewhere in this this annual report. See “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” in this annual report. Our management believes the assumptions underlying the Company’s financial statements and accompanying notes are reasonable. However, the Company’s financial statements and accompanying notes may not be an indication of our financial condition and results of operations in the future.
Overview
We are a commercial mortgage REIT incorporated in Maryland on June 7, 2019. Our strategy is to originate, structure and invest in first-lien mortgage loans, mezzanine loans, preferred equity and common stock, as well as multifamily CMBS securitizations. We primarily focus on investments in real estate sectors where our senior management team has operating expertise, including in the multifamily, SFR, self-storage, hospitality and office sectors predominantly in the top 50 MSAs. In addition, we target lending or investing in properties that are stabilized or have a light-transitional business plan.
Our investment objective is to generate attractive, risk-adjusted returns for stockholders over the long term. We seek to employ a flexible and relative-value focused investment strategy and expect to re-allocate capital periodically among our target investment classes. We believe this flexibility will enable us to efficiently manage risk and deliver attractive risk-adjusted returns under a variety of market conditions and economic cycles. For highlights of our acquisition, financing and other activity during 2020, see “Item 1. Business-2020 Highlights.” Our business continues to be subject to the uncertainties associated with COVID-19. For additional information, see Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements and “Item 1A. Risk Factors-Risk Factors Related to Our Business-The current COVID-19 pandemic and the future outbreak of other highly infectious or contagious diseases could materially and adversely impact or disrupt our financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and performance.”
We are externally managed by our Manager, a subsidiary of our Sponsor, an SEC-registered investment advisor, which has extensive real estate experience, having completed as of December 31, 2020 approximately $11.7 billion of gross real estate transactions since the beginning of 2012. In addition, our Sponsor, together with its affiliates, including NexBank, SSB (“NexBank”), is one of the most experienced global alternative credit managers managing approximately $12.4 billion of loans and debt or credit related investments as of December 31, 2020 and has managed credit investments for over 25 years. We believe our relationship with our Sponsor benefits us by providing access to resources including research capabilities, an extensive relationship network, other proprietary information, scalability, and a vast wealth of knowledge of information on real estate in our target assets and sectors.
We intend to elect to be treated as a REIT for U.S. federal income tax purposes beginning with our taxable year ending December 31, 2020. We also intend to operate our business in a manner that will permit us to maintain one or more exclusions or exemptions from registration under the Investment Company Act.
Components of Our Revenues and Expenses
Net Interest Income
Interest income. Our earnings are primarily attributable to the interest income from mortgage loans, mezzanine loan and preferred equity investments. Loan premium/discount amortization is also included as a component of interest income.
Interest expense. Interest expense represents interest accrued on our various financing obligations used to fund our investments and is shown as a deduction to arrive at net interest income.
The following table presents the components of net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands):
(1)
Average balances for the SFR Loans, the mezzanine loan and preferred equity are calculated based upon carrying values.
(2)
Yield calculated on an annualized basis.
(3)
Net interest income is calculated as the difference between total interest income and total interest expense.
Other Income (Loss)
Change in net assets related to consolidated CMBS variable interest entities. Includes unrealized gain (loss) based on changes in the fair value of the assets and liabilities of the CMBS trusts and net interest earned on the consolidated CMBS trusts. See Note 5 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Change in unrealized gain on CMBS structured pass through certificates. Includes unrealized gain (loss) based on changes in the fair value of the CMBS I/O Strips. See Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Loan loss provision, net. Loan loss provision, net represents the change in our allowance for loan losses. See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Dividend income. Dividend income represents the accrued interest income earned on our preferred stock investment in JCAP as well as the quarterly cash and stock dividends as discussed in Note 6 to our consolidated financial statements.
Realized losses. Realized losses relate to the difference between par and amortized cost on SFR Loan principal payments. Realized losses include the excess, or deficiency, of net proceeds received, less the carrying value of such investments, as realized losses. The Company reverses cumulative unrealized gains or losses previously reported in its Consolidated Statement of Operations with respect to the investment sold at the time of the sale.
Other income. Includes prepayment fees, placement fees, exit fees and other miscellaneous income items.
Operating Expenses
G&A expenses. G&A expenses include, but are not limited to, audit fees, legal fees, listing fees, Board fees, equity-based compensation expense, investor-relations costs and payments of reimbursements to our Manager. The Manager will be reimbursed for expenses it incurs on behalf of the Company. However, our Manager is responsible, and we will not reimburse our Manager or its affiliates, for the salaries or benefits to be paid to personnel of our Manager or its affiliates who serve as our officers, except that 50% of the salary of our VP of Finance is allocated to us and we may grant equity awards to our officers under the NexPoint Real Estate Finance, Inc. 2020 Long Term Incentive Plan (the “2020 LTIP”). Direct payment of operating expenses by us, which includes compensation expense relating to equity awards granted under the 2020 LTIP, together with reimbursement of operating expenses to our Manager, plus the Annual Fee, may not exceed 2.5% of equity book value determined in accordance with GAAP, for any calendar year or portion thereof, provided, however, that this limitation will not apply to Offering Expenses, legal, accounting, financial, due diligence and other service fees incurred in connection with extraordinary litigation and mergers and acquisitions and other events outside the ordinary course of our business or any out-of-pocket acquisition or due diligence expenses incurred in connection with the acquisition or disposition of certain real estate related investments. To the extent total corporate G&A expenses would otherwise exceed 2.5% of equity book value, our Manager will waive all or a portion of its Annual Fee to keep our total corporate G&A expenses at or below 2.5% of equity book value.
Loan servicing fees. We pay various service providers fees for loan servicing of our SFR Loans and consolidated CMBS trusts. We classify the expenses related to the administration of the SFR Loans as servicing fees while the fees associated with the CMBS trusts are included as a component of the change in net assets related to consolidated CMBS variable interest entities (“VIEs”).
Management fees. Management fees include fees paid to our Manager pursuant to the Management Agreement.
Results of Operations for the Year Ended December 31, 2020
The Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following table sets forth a summary of our operating results for the year ended December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
Our net income attributable to common stockholders for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $11.1 million. We earned approximately $17.7 million in net interest income, $25.8 million in other income, incurred operating expenses of $9.2 million, allocated $1.7 million of income to preferred stockholders and allocated $21.3 million of income to redeemable noncontrolling interests in the OP for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Revenues
Net interest income. Net interest income was $17.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other income. Other income was $25.8 million of income for the year ended December 31, 2020. This was primarily due to dividend income of $6.3 million and change in net assets related to consolidated CMBS VIEs of $19.9 million.
Expenses
G&A expenses. G&A expenses were $3.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Loan servicing fees. Loan servicing fees were $4.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Management fees. Management fees were $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Key Financial Measures and Indicators
As a real estate finance company, we believe the key financial measures and indicators for our business are earnings per share, dividends declared, Core Earnings, CAD and book value per share.
Earnings Per Share and Dividends Declared
The following table sets forth the calculation of basic and diluted net income per share and dividends declared per share (in thousands, except per share data):
Core Earnings
We use Core Earnings to evaluate our performance which excludes the effects of certain GAAP adjustments and transactions that we believe are not indicative of our current operations and loan performance. Core Earnings is a non-GAAP financial measure of performance. Core Earnings is defined as the net income (loss) attributable to our common stockholders computed in accordance with GAAP, including realized gains and losses not otherwise included in net income (loss), excluding any unrealized gains or losses or other similar non-cash items that are included in net income (loss) for the applicable reporting period, regardless of whether such items are included in other comprehensive income (loss), or in net income (loss) and adding back amortization of stock-based compensation and our loan loss provision.
We believe providing Core Earnings as a supplement to GAAP net income (loss) to our investors is helpful to their assessment of our performance. Core Earnings should not be used as a substitute for GAAP net income (loss). The methodology used to calculate Core Earnings may differ from other REITs. As such, our Core Earnings may not be comparable to similar measures provided by other REITs.
We also use Core Earnings as a component of the management fee paid to our Manager. As consideration for the Manager’s services, we will pay our Manager an annual management fee of 1.5% of Equity, paid monthly, in cash or shares of our common stock at the election of our Manager. “Equity” means (a) the sum of (1) total stockholders’ equity immediately prior to our IPO, plus (2) the net proceeds received from all issuances of our equity securities in and after the IPO, plus (3) our cumulative Core Earnings from and after the IPO to the end of the most recently completed calendar quarter, (b) less (1) any distributions to our holders of common stock from and after the IPO to the end of the most recently completed calendar quarter and (2) all amounts that we have paid to repurchase for cash the shares our equity securities from and after the IPO to the end of the most recently completed calendar quarter. In our calculation of Equity, we will adjust our calculation of Core Earnings to (i) remove the compensation expense relating to awards granted under one or more of our long-term incentive plans that is added back in our calculation of Core Earnings and (ii) adjust net income (loss) attributable to common stockholders for (x) one-time events pursuant to changes in GAAP and (y) certain material non-cash income or expense items, in each case of (x) and (y) after discussions between the Manager and independent directors of our Board and approved by a majority of the independent directors of our Board. Additionally, for the avoidance of doubt, Equity does not include the assets contributed to us in the Formation Transaction.
The following table provides a reconciliation of Core Earnings to GAAP net income (loss) attributable to common stockholders (in thousands, except per share amount):
(1)
One-time non-cash item is the make-whole premium in the JCAP preferred stock investment conversion to common stock. See Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements for additional disclosures.
(2)
Unrealized gains are the net change in unrealized loss on investments held at fair value applicable to common shareholders.
(3)
Weighted-average diluted shares outstanding does not include dilutive effect of redeemable non-controlling interests.
The following table provides a reconciliation of Core Earnings to GAAP net income including the dilutive effect of non-controlling interests (in thousands, except per share amount):
(1)
One-time non-cash item is the make-whole premium in the JCAP preferred stock investment conversion to common stock. See Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements for additional disclosures.
(2)
Unrealized gains are the net change in unrealized loss on investments held at fair value.
Cash Available for Distribution
CAD is a non-GAAP measure. We believe that it provides meaningful information that is used by investors, analysts and our management to evaluate and determine trends in cash flow as it is not affected by non-cash items. CAD is also a useful measure used by our Board to determine our dividend and the long-term viability of the current dividend. CAD does not represent net income or cash flows from operating activities and should not be considered as an alternative to GAAP net income, an indication of our GAAP cash flows from operating activities, a measure of our liquidity or an indication of funds available for our cash needs. In addition, our methodology for calculating it may differ from the methodologies employed by other companies to calculate the same or similar supplemental performance measures and, accordingly, our reported CAD may not be comparable to the CAD reported by other companies.
We calculate CAD by adjusting net income (loss) attributable to common shareholders by adding back amortization of stock-based compensation, amortization of premiums on our former preferred stock investment in JCAP and our loan loss provision, net and by removing the change in unrealized loss on our investments held at fair value, accretion of discounts, stock dividends receivable on preferred stock that was converted to common stock and stock dividends received.
(1)
One-time non-cash item is the make-whole premium in the JCAP preferred stock investment conversion to common stock. See Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements for additional disclosures.
(2)
Weighted-average diluted shares outstanding does not include dilutive effect of redeemable non-controlling interests.
The following table provides a reconciliation of CAD including the dilutive effect of non-controlling interests (in thousands, except per share amount):
(1)
One-time non-cash item is the make-whole premium applicable to common shareholders in the JCAP preferred stock investment conversion to common stock. See Note 7 to our financial statements for additional disclosures.
Book Value per Share
The following table calculates our book value per share (in thousands, except per share data):
Book value per share as of December 31, 2020, includes the impact of $19.9 million, or $1.31 per common share, of unrealized gains from our CMBS VIEs and the impact of $3.1 million, or $0.58 per common share, of offering costs associated with the IPO.
Due to the large noncontrolling interest in the Subsidiary OPs (see Note 12 to our consolidated financial statements for more information), we believe it is useful to also look at book value on a combined basis as shown in the table below (in thousands, except per share data):
Our Portfolio
Our portfolio consists of SFR Loans, CMBS B-Pieces, CMBS I/O Strips, a mezzanine loans, preferred equity investments, and a common stock investment with a combined unpaid principal balance of $2.9 billion at December 31, 2020 and assumes the CMBS Entities’ assets and liabilities are not consolidated. The following table sets forth additional information relating to our portfolio as of December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands)
(1)
Our total portfolio represents the current principal amount of the consolidated SFR Loans, the mezzanine loans, preferred equity, common stock and CMBS I/O Strips, as well as the net equity of our CMBS B-Piece investments.
(2)
Net equity represents the carrying value less borrowings.
(3)
The weighted-average life is weighted on current principal balance and assumes no prepayments. The maturity date for preferred equity investments represents the maturity date of the senior mortgage, as the preferred equity investments require repayment upon the sale or refinancing of the asset.
(4)
The CMBS B-Pieces are shown on an unconsolidated basis reflecting the value of our investments.
(5)
The number shown represents the notional value on which interest is calculated for the CMBS I/O Strips. CMBS I/O Strips receive no principal payments and the notional value decreases as the underlying loans are paid off.
(6)
Common stock consists of NSP common stock.
The following table details overall statistics for our portfolio as of December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands):
(1)
Cost is used in lieu of principal balance for CMBS I/O Strips.
The following charts illustrate our portfolio based on interest rate category, underlying property type, investment structure and geography:
Note: The charts above do not reflect the GAAP consolidation of the trusts that issued CMBS B-Pieces in our financial statements. In addition, the geography charts do not reflect our common stock investment in NSP.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our short-term liquidity requirements consist primarily of funds necessary to pay for our ongoing commitments to repay borrowings, maintain our investments, make distributions to our stockholders and other general business needs. Our investments generate liquidity on an ongoing basis through principal and interest payments, prepayments and dividends.
Our long-term liquidity requirements consist primarily of acquiring additional investments, scheduled debt payments and distributions. We expect to meet our long-term liquidity requirements through various sources of capital, which may include future debt or equity issuances, net cash provided by operations and other secured and unsecured borrowings. Our leverage is matched in term and structure to provide stable contractual spreads which will protect us from fluctuations in market interest rates over the long-term. However, there are a number of factors that may have a material adverse effect on our ability to access these capital sources, including the state of overall equity and credit markets, our degree of leverage, borrowing restrictions imposed by lenders, general market conditions for REITs and our operating performance and liquidity.
Our primary sources of liquidity and capital resources to date consist of cash generated from our operating results and the following:
KeyBank Bridge Facility
On February 7, 2020, we, through our subsidiaries, entered into the $95.0 million Bridge Facility with KeyBank and immediately drew $95.0 million to fund a portion of the Formation Transaction. We used proceeds from the IPO to pay down the entirety of the Bridge Facility (see Note 4 to our consolidated financial statements).
Raymond James Bridge Facility
On July 30, 2020, we, through our subsidiaries, entered into the $86.0 million RJ Bridge Facility with Raymond James Bank, N.A. and drew $21.0 million on July 30, 2020 and $65.0 million on August 7, 2020. We used proceeds from the RJ Bridge Facility to finance the acquisitions of the FREMF 2020-KF81 and FREMF 2020-K113 securitization. The RJ Bridge Facility was repaid in August 2020 (see Note 4 to our consolidated financial statements).
Freddie Mac Credit Facility
Prior to the Formation Transaction, two of our subsidiaries entered into a loan and security agreement, dated July 12, 2019, with Freddie Mac (the “Credit Facility”). Under the Credit Facility, these entities borrowed approximately $788.8 million in connection with their acquisition of senior pooled mortgage loans backed by SFR properties (the “Underlying Loans”). No additional borrowings can be made under the Credit Facility, and our obligations will be secured by the Underlying Loans. The Credit Facility was assumed by the Company as part of the Formation Transaction. As such, the remaining outstanding balance of $788.8 million was contributed to the Company on February 11, 2020. Our borrowings under the Credit Facility will mature on July 12, 2029. However, if an Underlying Loan matures prior to July 12, 2029, we will be required to repay the portion of the Credit Facility that is allocated to that loan (see Note 4 to our consolidated financial statements). As of December 31, 2020, the outstanding balance on the Credit Facility was $780.5 million.
Cash Generated from IPO
On February 11, 2020, we completed our IPO in which we sold 5,350,000 shares of common stock (including 350,000 shares pursuant to the partial exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares) at a price of $19.00 per share for gross proceeds of approximately $101.7 million. The IPO generated net proceeds of approximately $91.5 million to us after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of approximately $6.9 million and offering expenses of approximately $3.3 million.
We contributed the net proceeds from the IPO to our OP in exchange for OP Units and our OP contributed the net proceeds from the IPO to our Subsidiary OPs for SubOP Units. Our Subsidiary OPs used the net proceeds from the IPO to repay the amount outstanding under the $95 million Bridge Facility, consistent with our investment strategy and guidelines.
Preferred Stock Offering
As discussed in Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements, on July 24, 2020, we issued 2,000,000 shares of our Series A Preferred Stock at a price to the public of $24.00 per share, for gross proceeds of $48.0 million before deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other estimated offering expenses. The Series A Preferred Stock has a $25.00 per share liquidation preference.
Notes Offering
On October 15, 2020, the OP issued unsecured notes with a coupon rate of 7.5% and aggregate principal amount of $36.5 million at approximately 99% of par value for proceeds of approximately $36.1 million before offering costs. On October 20, 2020, the Company acquired a portfolio of 18 mezzanine loans with an aggregate principal amount outstanding of approximately $97.9 million. Freddie Mac provided seller financing of approximately $59.9 million with a weighted average fixed interest rate of 0.30%. Proceeds from the Notes offering and cash on hand were used to fund the remainder of the purchase price.
Repurchase Agreements
From time to time, we may enter into repurchase agreements to finance the acquisition of our target assets. Repurchase agreements will effectively allow us to borrow against loans and securities that we own in an amount equal to (1) the market value of such loans and/or securities multiplied by (2) the applicable advance rate. Under these agreements, we will sell our loans and securities to a counterparty and agree to repurchase the same loans and securities from the counterparty at a price equal to the original sales price plus an interest factor. During the term of a repurchase agreement, we will receive the principal and interest on the related loans and securities and pay interest to the lender under the repurchase agreement. At any point in time, the amounts and the cost of our repurchase borrowings will be based upon the assets being financed. For example, higher risk assets will result in lower advance rates (i.e., levels of leverage) at higher borrowing costs. In addition, these facilities may include various financial covenants and limited recourse guarantees.
As discussed in Note 14 to our consolidated financial statements, in connection with our recent CMBS acquisitions and new mezzanine debt investment, we, through the OP and the Subsidiary OPs, have borrowed approximately $161.5 million under our repurchase agreements and posted approximately $2.0 billion par value of our CMBS B-Piece and CMBS I/O Strip investments as collateral. The CMBS B-Pieces and CMBS I/O Strips held as collateral are illiquid and irreplaceable in nature. These assets are restricted solely to satisfy the interest and principal balances owed to the lender. Refer to Note 14 for additional disclosures on repurchase agreements subsequent to December 31, 2020.
The table below provides additional details regarding recent borrowings under the master repurchase agreement:
(1)
Weighted-average interest rate using unpaid principal balances.
(2)
Weighted-average life is determined using the maximum maturity date of the corresponding loans, assuming all extension options are exercised by the borrower.
(3)
Assets are shown at fair value.
(4)
In April 2020, three of our subsidiaries entered into a master repurchase agreement with Mizuho. Borrowings under these repurchase agreements are collateralized by portions of the CMBS B-Pieces and CMBS I/O Strips.
(5)
The master repurchase agreement with Mizuho does not have a stated maturity date. The transactions in place have a one-month to two-month tenor and are expected to roll accordingly.
Other Potential Sources of Financing
We may seek additional sources of liquidity from further repurchase facilities, other borrowings and future offerings of equity and debt securities and contributions from existing holders of the OP or Subsidiary OPs. NREF OP IV, L.P. (“OP IV”), one of the Subsidiary OPs, entered into subscription agreements with certain entities affiliated with the Manager, which were then-current majority owners of OP IV, in late July and early August for a collective 626,320 SubOP Units in OP IV and a total consideration of approximately $11.5 million. In addition, we may apply our existing cash and cash equivalents and cash flows from operations to any liquidity needs. As of December 31, 2020, our cash and cash equivalents were $30.2 million.
We believe that our available cash, expected operating cash flows, and potential debt or equity financings will provide sufficient funds for our operations, anticipated scheduled debt service payments and dividend requirements for the twelve-month period following December 31, 2020.
Cash Flows
The following table presents selected data from our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the year ended December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
Cash flows from operating activities. During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by operating activities was $32.9 million. This was primarily due to the interest income generated by our investments and the change in net assets related to consolidated CMBS variable interest entities.
Cash flows from investing activities. During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $68.3 million. This was primarily driven by purchases of mortgage loans held in VIEs, purchases of CMBS I/O Strips and purchases of loans held-for investment, partially offset by proceeds received from those investments.
Cash flows from financing activities. During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $68.8 million. This was primarily by borrowings under secured repurchase agreements of $161.5 million and net proceeds from the IPO of approximately $91.5 million, partially offset by $192.9 million in distributions to bondholders of CMBS variable interest entities, and $181 million in payments on the Bridge Facility.
Emerging Growth Company and Smaller Reporting Company Status
Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act, for complying with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. In other words, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to take advantage of this extended transition period. As a result of this election, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates for such new or revised standards. We may elect to comply with public company effective dates at any time, and such election would be irrevocable pursuant to Section 107(b) of the JOBS Act.
We are also a “smaller reporting company” as defined in Regulation S-K under the Securities Act and may elect to take advantage of certain of the scaled disclosures available to smaller reporting companies. We may be a smaller reporting company even after we are no longer an “emerging growth company.”
Income Taxes
We intend to elect to be treated as a REIT for U.S. federal income tax purposes, beginning with our taxable year ending December 31, 2020. We believe that our organization and proposed method of operation will enable us to meet the requirements for qualification and taxation as a REIT. To qualify as a REIT, we must meet certain organizational and operational requirements, including a requirement to distribute at least 90% of our annual REIT taxable income to stockholders. As a REIT, we will be subject to federal income tax on our undistributed REIT taxable income and net capital gain and to a 4% nondeductible excise tax on any amount by which distributions we pay with respect to any calendar year are less than the sum of (1) 85% of our ordinary income, (2) 95% of our capital gain net income and (3) 100% of our undistributed income from prior years. Taxable income from certain non-REIT activities is managed through a TRS and is subject to applicable federal, state, and local income and margin taxes. We had no significant taxes associated with our TRS for the year ended December 31, 2020.
If we fail to qualify as a REIT in any taxable year, we will be subject to U.S. federal income tax on our taxable income at regular corporate income tax rates, and dividends paid to our stockholders would not be deductible by us in computing taxable income. Any resulting corporate liability could be substantial and could materially and adversely affect our net income and net cash available for distribution to stockholders. Unless we were entitled to relief under certain Code provisions, we also would be disqualified from re-electing to be taxed as a REIT for the four taxable years following the year in which we failed to qualify to be taxed as a REIT.
We evaluate the accounting and disclosure of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in the course of preparing our tax returns to determine whether the tax positions are “more-likely-than-not” (greater than 50 percent probability) of being sustained by the applicable tax authority. Tax positions not deemed to meet the more-likely-than-not threshold would be recorded as a tax benefit or expense in the current year. Our management is required to analyze all open tax years, as defined by the statute of limitations, for all major jurisdictions, which include federal and certain states. We have no examinations in progress and none are expected at this time.
We recognize our tax positions and evaluate them using a two-step process. First, we determine whether a tax position is more likely than not to be sustained upon examination, including resolution of any related appeals or litigation processes, based on the technical merits of the position. Second, we will determine the amount of benefit to recognize and record the amount that is more likely than not to be realized upon ultimate settlement. We had no material unrecognized tax benefit or expense, accrued interest or penalties as of December 31, 2020.
Dividends
We intend to make regular quarterly dividend payments to holders of our common stock. We also intend to make the accrued dividend payments on the Series A Preferred Stock, which are payable quarterly in arrears as provided in the articles supplementary setting forth the terms of the Series A Preferred Stock. U.S. federal income tax law generally requires that a REIT distribute annually at least 90% of its REIT taxable income, without regard to the deduction for dividends paid and excluding net capital gains. As a REIT, we will be subject to federal income tax on our undistributed REIT taxable income and net capital gain and to a 4% nondeductible excise tax on any amount by which distributions we pay with respect to any calendar year are less than the sum of (1) 85% of our ordinary income, (2) 95% of our capital gain net income and (3) 100% of our undistributed income from prior years. We intend to make regular quarterly dividend payments of all or substantially all of our taxable income, which is not used to pay a dividend on the Series A Preferred Stock, to holders of our common stock out of assets legally available for this purpose, if and to the extent authorized by our Board. Before we make any dividend payments, whether for U.S. federal income tax purposes or otherwise, we must first meet both our operating requirements and debt service on our debt payable. If our cash available for distribution is less than our taxable income, we could be required to sell assets, borrow funds or raise additional capital to make cash dividends or we may make a portion of the required dividend in the form of a taxable distribution of stock or debt securities.
We will make dividend payments to holders of our common stock based on our estimate of taxable earnings per share of common stock, but not earnings calculated pursuant to GAAP. Our dividends and taxable income and GAAP earnings will typically differ due to items such as depreciation and amortization, fair-value adjustments, differences in premium amortization and discount accretion, and non-deductible G&A expenses. Our quarterly dividends per share of our common stock may be substantially different than our quarterly taxable earnings and GAAP earnings per share. Our Board declared our fourth quarterly dividend of 2020 to common stockholders of $0.40 per share on October 26, 2020, which was paid on December 31, 2020. On December 22, 2020, our Board declared the second preferred stock dividend of $0.53125 per share, which was paid on January 25, 2021.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Commitments and Contingencies
The Company is not aware of any contractual obligations, legal proceedings, or any other contingent obligations incurred in the normal course of business that would have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires our management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We evaluate these judgments, assumptions and estimates for changes that would affect the reported amounts. These estimates are based on management’s historical industry experience and on various other judgments and assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these judgments, assumptions and estimates. Below is a discussion of the accounting policies that we consider critical to understanding our financial condition or results of operations where there is uncertainty or where significant judgment is required. A discussion of recent accounting pronouncements and our significant accounting policies, including further discussion of the accounting policies described below, can be found in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements.
Allowance for Loan Losses
The Company, with the assistance of an independent valuations firm, performs a quarterly evaluation of loans classified as held for investment for impairment on a loan by loan basis in accordance with ASC 310-10-35, Receivables, Subsequent Measurement (“ASC 310-10-35”). If we deem that it is probable that we will be unable to collect all amounts owed according to the contractual terms of a loan, impairment of that loan is indicated. If we consider a loan to be impaired, we will establish an allowance for loan losses, through a valuation provision in earnings that reduces carrying value of the loan to the present value of expected future cash flows discounted at the loan’s contractual effective rate or the fair value of the collateral, if repayment is expected solely from the collateral. For non-impaired loans with no specific allowance the Company determines an allowance for loan losses in accordance with ASC 450-20, Loss Contingencies (“ASC 450-20”), which represents management’s best estimate of incurred losses inherent in the portfolio at the balance sheet date, excluding impaired loans and loans carried at fair value. Management considers quantitative factors likely to cause estimated credit losses including default rate and loss severity rates. The Company also evaluates qualitative factors such as macroeconomic conditions, evaluations of underlying collateral, trends in delinquencies and non-performing assets. Increases to (or reversals of) the allowance for loan loss are included in “Loan loss provision, net” on the accompanying Consolidated Statement of Operations.
Significant judgment is required in determining impairment and in estimating the resulting loss allowance, and actual losses, if any, could materially differ from those estimates.
Income Recognition
Loans held-for-investment, CMBS I/O Strips and mortgage loans from the consolidated CMBS Entities where the Company expects to collect the contractual interest and principal payments are considered to be performing loans. The Company recognizes income on performing loans in accordance with the terms of the loan on an accrual basis. Interest income also includes amortization of loan premiums or discounts and loan origination costs. We consider loans to be past due when a monthly payment is due and unpaid for 60 days or more. Loans will be placed on nonaccrual status and considered non-performing when full payment of principal and interest is in doubt, which generally occurs when they become 120 days or more past due unless the loan is both well secured and in the process of collection. Accrual of interest on individual loans is discontinued when management believes that, after considering economic and business conditions and collection efforts, the borrower’s financial condition is such that collection of interest is doubtful. Our policy is to stop accruing interest when a loan’s delinquency exceeds 120 days. All interest accrued but not collected for loans that are placed on nonaccrual status or subsequently charged-off are reversed against interest income. Income is subsequently recognized on the cash basis until, in management’s judgment, the borrower’s ability to make periodic principal and interest payments returns and future payments are reasonably assured, in which case the loan is returned to accrual status.
Formation Transaction
The Company commenced operations on February 11, 2020 upon the closing of its IPO. Prior to the closing of the IPO, the Company engaged in the Formation Transaction through which it acquired the Initial Portfolio consisting of SFR Loans, CMBS B-Pieces, mezzanine loan and preferred equity investments in real estate companies and properties in other structured real estate investments within the multifamily, SFR and self-storage asset classes. The Initial Portfolio was acquired from the Contribution Group, pursuant to a contribution agreement through which the Contribution Group contributed their interest in the Initial Portfolio to SPEs owned by the Subsidiary OPs in exchange for SubOP Units. The assets and liabilities constituting the Initial Portfolio were contributed at fair value using a cutoff date of January 31, 2020. The mezzanine loan, preferred stock and preferred equity investments were valued using a discounted cash flow model using discount rates negotiated with the Contribution Group. A third-party valuation firm was utilized to value the SFR Loans using the income approach in accordance with ASC Topic 820. The income approach utilizes a discounted cash flow method to present value the expected future cash flows. The future cash flows were projected based on the terms of the loans including interest rates, current balances and servicing fees. The future cash flows depend substantially on various other assumptions such as prepayment rates, prepayment charges, default rates, expected loss given default (severity), and other inputs. The Credit Facility
contributed along with the SFR Loans was also valued using the income approach as previously described. The equity and financial liabilities of the consolidated CMBS B-Pieces were valued using broker quotes (see Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements for more information on our valuation methodologies). The Bridge Facility was originated shortly before the closing of the IPO and was contributed at its carrying value which approximated fair value. The fair values of the contributed cash and accrued interest and dividends approximated their carrying values because of the short-term nature of these instruments. The fair values of the contributed assets described above were agreed upon by the Contribution Group and used to determine the number of SubOP Units issued. Any purchase premiums or discounts are amortized over the expected life of the investment.
The following table shows the par values, fair values and purchase premiums (discounts) of the Initial Portfolio as of February 11, 2020, the closing date of the IPO:
Valuation of CMBS Trusts
We report the financial assets and liabilities of each CMBS trust that we consolidate at fair value using the measurement alternative included in Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2014-13, Measuring the Financial Assets and the Financial Liabilities of a Consolidated Collateralized Financing Entity (“ASU 2014-13”). Pursuant to ASU 2014-13, we measure both the financial assets and financial liabilities of the CMBS trusts we consolidate using the fair value of the financial liabilities (which we consider more observable than the fair value of the financial assets) and the equity of the CMBS trusts beneficially owned by us. As a result, we presented the CMBS issued by the consolidated trusts, but not beneficially owned by us, as financial liabilities in our consolidated financial statements, measured at their estimated fair value; we measured the financial assets as the total estimated fair value of the CMBS issued by the consolidated trust, regardless of whether such CMBS represent interests beneficially owned by us. Under the measurement alternative prescribed by ASU 2014-13, our “Net income (loss)” reflects the economic interests in the consolidated CMBS beneficially owned by us, presented as “Change in net assets related to consolidated CMBS variable interest entities” in our Consolidated Statement of Operations, which includes applicable (1) changes in the fair value of CMBS beneficially owned by us, (2) interest income, interest expense and servicing fees earned from the CMBS trusts and (3) other residual returns or losses of the CMBS trusts, if any.
The financial liabilities and equity of the consolidated CMBS trusts are valued using broker quotes. Broker quotes represent the price that an investment could be sold for in a market transaction and represent fair market value. Loans and bonds with quotes that are based on actual trades with a sufficient level of activity on or near the valuation date are classified as Level 2 assets. Loans and bonds that are priced using quotes derived from implied values, bid/ask prices for trades that were never consummated, or a limited amount of actual trades are classified as Level 3 assets because the inputs used by the brokers and pricing services to derive the values are not readily observable.
REIT Tax Election
We intend to elect to be treated as a REIT under Sections 856 through 860 of the Code. To qualify as a REIT, we must meet a number of organizational and operational requirements, including a requirement that we distribute at least 90% of our “REIT taxable income,” as defined by the Code, to our stockholders. Taxable income from certain non-REIT activities is managed through a TRS and is subject to applicable federal, state, and local income and margin taxes. We had no significant taxes associated with our TRS for the year ended December 31, 2020. We believe that our organization and current and proposed method of operation will allow us to qualify for taxation as a REIT, but no assurance can be given that we will operate in a manner so as to qualify as a REIT.
Inflation
Virtually all of our assets and liabilities will be interest rate sensitive in nature. As a result, interest rates and other factors influence our performance far more so than does inflation. Changes in interest rates do not necessarily correlate with inflation rates or changes in inflation rates. Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP and our distributions will be determined by our Board consistent with our obligation to distribute to our stockholders at least 90% of our REIT taxable income on an annual basis in order to maintain our REIT qualification; in each case, our activities and balance sheet are measured with reference to historical cost and/or fair market value without considering inflation.