ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on September 18, 2017 and formed for the purpose of entering into a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, recapitalization, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more target businesses or entities (a “Business Combination”). Our efforts in identifying a prospective target business for our initial Business Combination are not limited to a particular industry or geographic region. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of our Initial Public Offering and the sale of Private Placement Units that occurred simultaneously with the completion of our Initial Public Offering, our securities, debt or a combination of cash, securities and debt.
Recent Developments
Proposed Business Combination
On December 13, 2020, the Company entered into the Merger Agreement with NeuroRx and Merger Sub. Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, Merger Sub will merge with and into NeuroRx, with NeuroRx surviving the Merger. As a result of the Merger, NeuroRx will become a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, with the stockholders of NeuroRx becoming stockholders of the Company. Under the Merger Agreement, at the Effective Time, each outstanding share of NeuroRx common stock (including shares of NeuroRx common stock resulting from the conversion of NeuroRx preferred stock immediately prior to the Effective Time) will be converted into the right to receive a pro rata portion of the Closing Consideration and the contingent right to receive a pro rata portion of the Earnout Shares and Earnout Cash. Each option and warrant of NeuroRx that is outstanding and unexercised immediately prior to the Effective Time will be assumed by the Company and will represent the right to acquire an adjusted number of shares of the Company’s Common Stock at an adjusted exercise price, in each case, pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement.
Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, the Company will enter into the Sponsor Agreement with the Sponsor and BRAC providing that (a) the Sponsor and BRAC will forfeit the Forfeited Shares and (b) the Sponsor Earnout Shares will be subject to escrow, and will either be released from escrow to the Sponsor upon the achievement of the Earnout Shares Milestone or terminated and canceled by the Company on December 31, 2022, in the event that the Earnout Shares Milestone is not achieved.
Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, the Company, Sponsor, BRAC, Graubard Miller, the Initial Stockholders and Continental will enter into the Stock Escrow Amendment providing: (a) for the forfeiture and cancellation of the Forfeited Shares, (b) that the Sponsor Earnout Shares will be subject to escrow pursuant to the Sponsor Agreement and in accordance with the terms of the Merger Agreement, (c) that the 40,000 shares of Common Stock held by Graubard Miller will be released from escrow and (d) that all remaining shares of Common Stock held in escrow thereunder will be released from escrow on the earlier of (i) the six-month anniversary of the closing, (ii) with respect to 50% of the shares of Common Stock, the date on which the closing price of the Common Stock equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for stock splits, stock dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing after the closing, and (iii) the date after the closing on which the Company consummates a liquidation, merger, stock exchange or other similar transaction which results in all of the Company’s stockholders having the right to exchange their Common Stock for cash, securities or other property.
Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, to the extent the sum of the amount remaining in the trust account after disbursements to the Company’s public stockholders who seek redemption of their public shares plus the amount raised in the PIPE (described below) and any other financing exceeds $5 million, the Company’s outstanding loans will be repaid at the closing of the Merger. Further, the Company, the Sponsor and the Company’s lenders will enter into an omnibus amendment to each outstanding promissory note or other borrowing with the Company as the maker providing that, to the extent not repaid in accordance with the Merger Agreement, the outstanding principal and accrued unpaid interest pursuant to such promissory notes, after any repayments permitted pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement, will be converted into convertible notes of NRX Pharmaceuticals with an aggregate principal amount of no more than approximately $2.7 million, which will bear interest at three percent (3%) per annum, and may be converted from time to time, at the holder’s option, into shares of Common Stock at a price of $10.00 per share, and which will mature on the date that is twenty-four (24) months after the date of the Merger closing. Any other borrowings not repaid or converted into convertible notes pursuant to the Merger Agreement will be forgiven or discharged prior to closing.
Immediately after the closing of the Merger, NeuroRx’s stockholders will hold approximately 93% of the issued and outstanding shares of the Company’s Common Stock, the current stockholders of the Company will hold approximately 5% of the issued and outstanding Common Stock, and the PIPE Investors will hold approximately 2% of the issued and outstanding Common Stock, which pro forma ownership (i) takes into effect the forfeiture, termination and cancellation of 875,000 shares of Common Stock by the Sponsor and BRAC pursuant to the Merger Agreement, and the issuance to EBC of 200,000 shares of Common Stock in lieu of the cash fee owed to EBC under the existing Business Combination Marketing Agreement, (ii) takes into effect the exchange of each outstanding Right for one-tenth of one share of Common Stock pursuant to the terms of the Rights, (iii) assumes no holder of Public Shares exercises its conversion rights, (iv) includes the effect of the PIPE but does not include the effect of any other financing of the Company and (v) assumes the Earnout Shares Milestone is not satisfied immediately after the Closing.
Private Placement
In connection with the Merger, on March 12, 2021, the Company entered into Subscription Agreements the PIPE Investors, pursuant to which the Company will, substantially concurrently with, and contingent upon, the consummation of the Merger, issue an aggregate of 1,000,000 shares of Common Stock to the PIPE Investors at a price of $10.00 per share, for aggregate gross proceeds to the Company of $10,000,000.
The closing of the PIPE is conditioned upon, among other things, (i) the substantially concurrent consummation of the Merger, (ii) the accuracy of all representations and warranties of the Company and the PIPE Investors in the Subscription Agreements, and the performance of all covenants of the Company and the PIPE Investors under the Subscription Agreements, (iii) the shares of Common Stock shall have been approved for listing on the Nasdaq, subject to official notice of issuance, and (iv) the Merger Agreement shall not have been terminated or rescinded, and no amendment, waiver or modification shall have occurred thereunder that would materially adversely affect the economic benefits that the PIPE Investor would reasonably expect to receive under the Subscription Agreement without having received the PIPE Investor’s prior written consent (not to be unreasonably withheld, conditioned, or delayed).
Extensions to Complete Business Combination
On July 23, 2020, our stockholders approved an amendment to the charter to extend the period of time for which we are required to consummate a Business Combination (the “Fifth Extension”) from July 23, 2020 to December 23, 2020. The number of shares of common stock presented for redemption in connection with the Fifth Extension was 27,786. We paid cash in amount of approximately $299,000, or approximately $10.77 per share, to redeeming stockholders. We agreed to deposit, or cause to be deposited on its behalf, into the Trust Account $0.02 for each public share outstanding for each 30-day extension period utilized through the Fifth Extension. In connection with this extension, we deposited an aggregate of $44,219 into the Trust Account to fund the extension through November 23, 2020.
On December 18, 2020, our stockholders approved an amendment to the charter to extend the date by which we must complete an initial business combination from December 23, 2020 to April 23, 2021 (the “Sixth Extension”). No stockholders exercised their right to convert their public shares into cash in connection with the Sixth Extension.
On March 22, 2021, the Company filed a preliminary proxy statement seeking approval from its stockholders to further amend its charter to extend the date by which the Company is required to complete its initial business combination.
Nasdaq Compliance
On November 23, 2020, the Company received a notice from the Listing Qualifications Department of The Nasdaq Stock Market LLC stating that, as of November 20, 2020, the Company was not in compliance with Listing Rule IM-5101-2, which requires that a special purpose acquisition company complete one or more business combinations within 36 months of the effectiveness of the registration statement filed in connection with its initial public offering. Since the Company’s registration statement became effective on November 20, 2017, it was required to complete an initial business combination by no later than November 20, 2020. The Rule also provides that failure to comply with this requirement will result in the Listing Qualifications Department issuing a Staff Delisting Determination under Rule 5810 to delist the Company’s securities. The Listing Qualifications Department had advised the Company that its securities would be subject to delisting unless it timely requested a hearing before an independent Hearings Panel. The Company appealed the ruling and Nasdaq scheduled the appeal for January 14, 2021. On January 4, 2021, the Company received an additional notice from Nasdaq stating that the Company’s failure to hold an annual stockholder meeting for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 by December 31, 2020, as required by Nasdaq Listing Rule 5820, could serve as an additional basis for delisting the Company’s securities from Nasdaq, the Company requested that this issue be added to the Nasdaq Appeal.
On January 14, 2021, the Company attended a hearing before the Nasdaq Hearings Panel with respect to the November 23, 2020 and January 2, 2021 delisting notices. During the hearing, the Company requested an extension through May 24, 2021 to regain compliance with the Nasdaq listing rules. On January 15, 2021, the Company received notice from Nasdaq that Nasdaq had granted the Company’s request to continue its listing on Nasdaq through May 24, 2021. Nasdaq’s decision is subject to certain conditions, including that the Company will have completed the Merger with NeuroRx on or before the Extended Date and that NRX Pharmaceuticals will have demonstrated compliance with all requirements for initial listing on Nasdaq.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Since our Initial Public Offering, our activity has been limited to the search for a prospective initial Business Combination, and we will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial Business Combination. We are incurring expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $439,412, which consists of operating expenses of $907,406, offset by interest income on securities held in the trust account established for the benefit of our public stockholders (the “Trust Account”) of $138,764 and the forgiveness of previously recorded professional fees of $352,071.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we had a net income of $408,427, which consists of interest income on securities held in the Trust Account of $1,205,820, offset by operating costs of $713,187 and provision for income taxes of $84,206.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $5,967,947 (including approximately $138,764 of interest income) consisting of money market funds. Interest income earned on the balance in the Trust Account may be used by us to pay taxes. To date, we have withdrawn $716,788 of interest from the Trust Account in order to pay our income and franchise taxes, of which $161,430 was withdrawn during the year ended December 31, 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities amounted to $598,617. Net loss of $434,412 was the result of the forgiveness of previously recorded professional fees in the amount of $352,071 and interest earned on securities held in the Trust Account of $138,764 and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which provided $326,630 of cash for operating activities.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in operating activities amounted to $792,731. Net income of $408,427 was the result of interest earned on securities held in the Trust Account of $1,205,820, offset by changes in operating assets and liabilities, which provided $4,662 of cash for operating activities.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account to acquire a target business or businesses and to pay our expenses relating thereto. To the extent that our capital stock is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account, as well as any other net proceeds not expended, will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business. Such working capital funds could be used in a variety of ways including, but not limited to, continuing or expanding the target business’ operations, for strategic acquisitions and for marketing, research and development of existing or new products. Such funds could also be used to repay any expenses or finders’ fees which we had incurred prior to the completion of our Business Combination if the funds available to us outside of the Trust Account were insufficient to cover such expenses.
As of December 31, 2020, A/Z Property has loaned us an aggregate of approximately $862,148 in order to pay our Non-Business Combination Related Expenses and extension payments. Upon consummation of a Business Combination, up to $200,000 of the Non-Business Combination Related Expenses may be repaid by us to the Sponsor provided that we have funds available to us sufficient to repay such expenses (the “Cap”) as well as to pay for all stockholder redemptions, all Business Combination Expenses, repayment of the Notes, and any funds necessary for our working capital requirements following closing of the Business Combination. Any remaining amounts in excess of the Cap will be forgiven. If we do not consummate a Business Combination, all outstanding loans made by the Sponsor to cover the Non-Business Combination Related Expenses will be forgiven. We repaid $35,000 of such loans during the year ended December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, BRAC has loaned us an aggregate of approximately $1,809,889 in order to fund extension payments and other expenses.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amounts necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor, officers and directors or their respective affiliates may, but are not obligated to, except as described above, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into units, at a price of $10.00 per unit at the option of the lender. The units would be identical to the Private Placement Units.
Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our Business Combination. If we are unable to complete our Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-balance sheet financing arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
Contractual obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities.
We have engaged EarlyBirdCapital as an advisor in connection with a Business Combination to assist us in holding meetings with its stockholders to discuss a potential Business Combination and the target business’ attributes, introduce us to potential investors that are interested in purchasing securities, assist us in obtaining stockholder approval for the Business Combination and assist us with our press releases and public filings in connection with a Business Combination. The Business Combination Marketing Agreement between us and EarlyBirdCapital provides that we will pay EarlyBirdCapital a cash fee for such services upon the consummation of a Business Combination in an amount equal to 4.0% of the gross proceeds of the Initial Public Offering (exclusive of any applicable finders’ fees which might become payable). In connection with the proposed Merger with NeuroRx, EarlyBirdCapital agreed that, in lieu of such cash fee, it would be paid an aggregate of 200,000 shares of our common stock upon consummation of the Merger. If a Business Combination is not consummated for any reason, no fee will be due or payable.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our common stock subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our consolidated balance sheets.
Net Income (Loss) per Common Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Net income (loss) per common share, basic and diluted for common stock subject to possible redemption is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the Trust Account, net of applicable taxes, if any, by the weighted average number of shares of common stock subject to possible redemption outstanding for the period. Net income (loss) per common share, basic and diluted for and non-redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing net loss less income attributable to common stock subject to possible redemption, by the weighted average number of shares of non-redeemable common stock outstanding for the period presented.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.