ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on November 12, 2020, for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Recent Developments
On February 21, 2021, we entered into the Merger Agreement by and among the Company, the Merger Subs, Apex and, solely for the purposes of Section 5.21 of the Merger Agreement, PEAK6.
Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, the parties will enter into a business combination transaction by which (i) Merger Sub I will merge with and into Apex (the “Initial Merger”), with Apex being the surviving entity (the “Initial Surviving Company”) of the Initial Merger and Apex’s members receiving shares of Class A common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, of the Company in exchange for their membership interests in Apex, and (ii) immediately following the Initial Merger and as part of the same overall transaction as the Initial Merger, the Initial Surviving Company will merge with and into Merger Sub II (the “Final Merger” and, together with the Initial Merger, the “Mergers”), with Merger Sub II being the surviving entity of the Final Merger. As a result of the Mergers, Apex will become a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, with the members of Apex becoming stockholders of the Company.
Under the Merger Agreement, the members of Apex will receive an aggregate of 470,000,000 shares of the Company, subject to adjustment as set forth in the Merger Agreement. In addition, each convertible promissory note issued by Apex and outstanding immediately prior to the Initial Merger will remain outstanding and will become convertible in accordance with its terms into shares of the Company. Immediately following the Mergers, PEAK6 and its affiliates will own a majority of the Company.
The Mergers are expected to be consummated in the second quarter of 2021, after the required approval by the Company’s stockholders and the fulfillment of certain other conditions set forth in the Merger Agreement.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any operating revenues to date. Our only activities from inception through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial Business Combination. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the Initial Public Offering. We expect that we will incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with searching for, and completing, a Business Combination.
For the period from November 12, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $392, which consisted of formation and operating expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $124,983. Until the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, our only source of liquidity was an initial purchase of common stock by the Sponsor and loans from our Sponsor.
On January 28, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 40,000,000 Units, at a price of $10.00 per Unit, which included the partial exercise by the underwriter of its over-allotment option in the amount of 5,000,000 Units, generating gross proceeds of $400,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 9,750,000 Private Warrants to the Sponsor at a price of $1.00 per Private Warrant generating gross proceeds of $9,750,000.
Following the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Warrants, a total of $400,000,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $22,524,463 in transaction costs, including $8,000,000 of underwriting fees, $14,000,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $524,463 of other offering costs.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less deferred underwriting commissions and income taxes payable), to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants of the post Business Combination entity, at a price of $1.00 per warrant, at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the Private Warrants.
After the closing of the Initial Public Offering on January 28, 2021, $1,517,305 was held outside of the Trust Account for working capital purposes. We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our Business Combination. If we are unable to complete our Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than described below.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $14,000,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have not identified any critical accounting policies.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.