Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis together with the financial statements and the related notes to those statements included elsewhere in this report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, such as those set forth in the section of this report captioned “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this report, our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements. Throughout this discussion, unless the context specifies or implies otherwise, the terms “NanoString”, “we”, “us” and “our” refer to NanoString Technologies, Inc. and its subsidiaries.
Overview
We develop, manufacture and sell products that unlock scientifically valuable and clinically actionable information from minute amounts of biological material. Our core technology includes unique, proprietary chemistries that enable the labeling and counting of single molecules. Our mission is to incorporate our core technology into proprietary product platforms that enable our customers to map the universe of biology.
We use our core technology to develop tools for scientific and clinical research, primarily in the fields of genomics and proteomics. Our proprietary chemistries may reduce the number of steps required to conduct certain types of scientific experiments and allow for multiple experiments to be conducted at once. Our platforms are also able to extract information from multiple types of biological samples, including those that are often challenging to work with using other scientific methods or platforms. As a result, we are able to develop tools that are easier for researchers to use and that may generate faster and more consistent scientific results.
We currently offer two commercially available product platforms: our nCounter Analysis System and our GeoMx Digital Spatial Profiling, or DSP, system, both of which include instruments, related consumables and software. We also have a new product platform candidate, our Spatial Molecular Imager, or SMI, currently under development.
nCounter was launched in 2008 and was our first commercially available product platform. It can be used to analyze the activity of up to 800 genes in a single experiment. nCounter is also used by clinicians to analyze gene activity relevant for diagnostic applications. nCounter is used to conduct what is known as bulk gene activity, or gene expression, analysis, whereby biological samples are first reduced, and then the level of gene expression is measured at its average level throughout the totality of the sample.
GeoMx DSP, which was launched in 2019 and is our second commercially available product platform. It is designed to enable the field of spatial biology. While nCounter and other predominantly used gene expression analysis technologies use bulk analysis approaches, GeoMx DSP is used to analyze specifically selected regions of an intact biological sample in order to see how gene expression might vary across those regions, or in certain cell types. GeoMx DSP operates by enabling users to prepare and select certain regions of a biological sample in which to study gene expression without the need to reduce or destroy the sample. Researchers then use our nCounter system or NGS to subsequently evaluate, or “read out” gene expression activity in each of the selected regions.
We derive a substantial majority of our revenue from the sale of our products, which consist of our nCounter and GeoMx DSP instruments and related proprietary consumables. Our instruments are designed to work only with our consumable products. Accordingly, as the installed base of instruments grows, we expect recurring revenue from consumable sales to become an increasingly important driver of our operating results. Our consumables include our standardized nCounter and GeoMx DSP panel products, and nCounter custom CodeSet products that contain a specific set of targets for scientific analysis as requested by a customer. We also derive service revenue from processing fees related to proof-of-principle studies, including from our GeoMx DSP technology access program, or TAP, which we conduct for potential customers. For both our nCounter and GeoMx DSP systems, we also offer and derive revenue from extended service contracts. Additionally, we generate revenue through product development collaborations.
We market and sell our instruments and related consumables to researchers in academic, government and biopharmaceutical laboratories for research use, both through our direct sales force and through distributors in certain markets. As of December 31, 2020, we had an installed base of approximately 950 nCounter systems, which our customers have used to publish more than 4,000 peer-reviewed papers. As of December 31, 2020, we had shipped more than 160 GeoMx DSP systems to customer sites and had installed approximately 130 systems. As of December 31, 2020, 35 peer-reviewed publications have been published utilizing our GeoMx DSP technology.
In advance of and subsequent to our recent commercial launch of GeoMx DSP, pursuant to our TAP we have offered selected customers the opportunity to send biological samples to our Seattle facilities to be analyzed by us using GeoMx DSP. Upon completion of each project, the raw data and analysis report is provided to the customer and service revenue is recorded by us. As of December 31, 2020, we have conducted over 430 TAP projects for approximately 200 customers.
We use third-party contract manufacturers to produce the instruments comprising our nCounter and GeoMx DSP systems. We manufacture consumables at our greater Seattle, Washington area facilities.
We focus a substantial portion of our resources on developing new technologies, products and solutions. Research and development expense totaled $62.9 million, $68.0 million and $61.6 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. We intend to continue to incur significant investments in research and development expenses to support and expand our existing instrument platforms and related consumable offerings, as well as to research and develop new technologies and product platforms.
In December 2019, we entered into a License and Asset Purchase Agreement, or LAPA, and service and supply agreements, or SSAs, with Veracyte, Inc, or Veracyte. Pursuant to the LAPA, we completed a license of intellectual property and a sale of certain assets to Veracyte relating to our nCounter FLEX system for use in clinical diagnostic applications. Veracyte also acquired certain intellectual property rights and worldwide distribution rights relating to our Prosigna Breast Cancer Assay and our LymphMark assay and certain clinical diagnostic assay software modules that operate with the nCounter FLEX system. Pursuant to the terms of the LAPA, Veracyte paid us $50.0 million, consisting of $40.0 million in cash, paid in connection with the entry into the LAPA, and 376,732 shares of Veracyte common stock valued at $10.0 million, which shares were issued in connection with the entry into the LAPA. Additionally, we may receive future potential milestone payments of up to $10.0 million in the aggregate, to be paid upon the launch of additional clinical diagnostic tests by Veracyte for our nCounter FLEX platform. Pursuant to the SSAs, we agreed to supply to Veracyte nCounter FLEX systems, and to manufacture and supply Prosigna kits, LymphMark kits and any additional clinical diagnostic tests that Veracyte may develop in the future for nCounter, for a period of at least four years subsequent to the transaction date. Pursuant to the SSAs, Veracyte will pay the designated transfer prices for nCounter FLEX systems, Prosigna kits, LymphMark kits and any other nCounter-based diagnostic tests developed by Veracyte.
Our product and service revenue increased 7% to $111.4 million in 2020, compared to $103.7 million in 2019. The increase was driven primarily by increased revenues from our sales of GeoMx DSP systems and related consumables. The increases were offset by declines in sales of nCounter consumables primarily as a result the COVID-19 pandemic impact on our customers, certain of which implemented full or partial closures of their lab operations during various periods throughout 2020. In addition, while greater unit sales of Prosigna kits were recorded as compared to 2019, our revenues recorded from the sale of Prosigna kits were lower, as our Prosigna supply agreement entered into as part of the transaction with Veracyte completed in December 2019 reduced our average selling price received on Prosigna kits, which in prior periods had been sold directly to end user customers or distributors. Our product and service revenue increased 24% to $103.7 million in 2019, compared to $83.5 million in 2018. The increase was driven primarily by increased revenue from nCounter consumables associated with our growing installed base of nCounter systems, revenue recognized during the second half of 2019 related to the initial commercial shipments of GeoMx DSP systems and increases in revenue related to our GeoMx DSP TAP.
Our total revenue in 2020 was $117.3 million, compared to $125.6 million in 2019 and $106.7 million in 2018. Our total revenue has varied more significantly as compared to our product and service revenue, as a result of the timing of revenue recognition associated with our collaboration agreements. Revenue recognition relating to these agreements, which is recorded as collaboration revenue, consists primarily of recognizing deferred revenue relating to cash payments received previously from our collaborators. Collaboration revenue recognized may vary significantly depending on the timing and cost of certain research and development activities relating to a collaboration, the expected time frame for completing certain collaboration activities, the outcome of research and development activities being conducted pursuant to a collaboration, the contractual terms of a particular collaboration agreement and other factors.
We have never been profitable and had net losses of $110.1 million, $40.7 million and $77.4 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, our accumulated deficit was $542.0 million.
Key Financial Metrics
We are organized as, and operate in, one reportable segment: the development, manufacture and commercialization of instruments, consumables and services for efficiently profiling the activity of hundreds of genes and proteins simultaneously from a single tissue sample. Our chief operating decision maker is the chief executive officer, who manages our operations and evaluates our financial performance on a total company basis. Our principal operations and decision-making functions are located at our corporate headquarters in the United States.
Revenue
We generate revenue from the sale of our products and related services and collaborations. For a description of our revenue recognition policies, see the section of this report captioned “-Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Estimates-Revenue Recognition.”
Product Revenue
Our product revenue consists of sales of our nCounter Analysis Systems and related consumables and our GeoMx DSP systems and related consumables. Our nCounter MAX Analysis System typically consists of one nCounter Digital Analyzer and one nCounter Prep Station, having a U.S. list price of $235,000. The U.S. list price of the similarly configured nCounter FLEX Analysis System is $265,000. Our nCounter SPRINT Profiler has a reduced footprint and combines the function of the prep station with the digital analyzer in a single instrument. It has a U.S. list price of $149,000. Our GeoMx DSP system has a U.S. list price of $295,000.
Outside the United States, depending on the country, list prices are generally higher. In certain cases, customers may pay less than the list price for our various nCounter instruments. For example, some of our systems are sold to customers through independent distributors, and these distributors may purchase systems from us at a discount to list price. In certain regions outside of the US, we sell through distribution partners who typically receive discounted prices. In addition, in some cases we may sell an nCounter system and a GeoMx DSP system together as a bundle, or we may sell a system together with an initial order of consumables for a single price, in which cases we may offer discounted prices for instruments as compared to list prices.
Our customer base is primarily composed of academic institutions, government laboratories, biopharmaceutical companies and clinical laboratories that perform analyses or testing using our nCounter Analysis and GeoMx DSP systems and purchase related consumables.
For our research customers, related consumables include standardized and pre-manufactured kits, or panels, that are designed to measure the expression of a pre-selected set of genes. For nCounter, we also offer custom CodeSets, which we manufacture to the specific requirements of an individual researcher, and Master Kits, cartridges and reagents, which are ancillary reagents, cartridges, tips and reagent plates required to setup and process samples in our instruments.
Pursuant to the LAPA with Veracyte entered into in 2019, we now sell our nCounter Prosigna in vitro diagnostic kits to Veracyte, who then sells Prosigna to end user customers or distributors.
Our average annualized consumables revenue per installed nCounter Analysis System was approximately $51,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, which includes our consumable sales and Prosigna. Our average annualized consumables revenue per installed GeoMx DSP was approximately $82,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Service Revenue
Service revenue consists of fees associated with service contracts and conducting proof-of-principle studies. We include a one-year warranty with the sale of our instruments and offer service contracts, which are purchased by a majority of our customers. We selectively provide proof-of-principle studies and/or TAP to prospective customers in order to help them better understand the benefits primarily of our GeoMx DSP system or other technologies under development, for which we generate data and perform analysis services on their behalf.
Collaboration Revenue
Collaboration revenue has been derived primarily from our collaborations with Lam, and historically, our terminated collaborations with Celgene and Merck. As of December 31, 2020, we have recorded collaboration revenue of $5.9 million, $21.9 million and $23.2 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we do not expect to receive further development funding from Lam in future periods, and the original commitment from Lam to provide up to $50.0 million in development funding was fully satisfied in 2019. Collaboration revenue also includes revenue recognized under several smaller collaborations.
Revenue by Geography
We sell our products through our own sales forces in the United States, Canada, certain European countries and also various countries within the Asia Pacific region, including China, India, Japan and Singapore, among others. We also sell through distributors in other parts of the world. As we have expanded our European direct sales force and entered into agreements with distributors of our products in Europe, the Middle East, Asia Pacific and South America, the amount of revenue generated outside of North America has generally increased, although there have been significant quarter-to-quarter fluctuations. In the future, we intend to continue to expand our sales force and establish additional distributor relationships outside the United States to better access international markets.
The following table reflects total revenue by geography based on the geographic location of our customers, distributors and collaborators. For sales to distributors, their geographic location may be different from the geographic locations of the ultimate end customer. Americas consists of the United States, Canada, Mexico and South America; and Asia Pacific includes Japan, China, South Korea, Singapore, Malaysia, Vietnam, Thailand, India and Australia.
Most of our revenue is denominated in U.S. dollars. Changes in foreign currency exchange rates have not materially affected us to date; however, they may become material to us in the future if our operations outside of the United States expand.
Cost of Product and Service Revenue
Cost of product and service revenue consists primarily of costs incurred in the production process, including costs of purchasing instruments from third-party contract manufacturers, consumable component materials and assembly labor and overhead, packaging and delivery, installation, warranty and any follow-on servicing related costs. In addition, cost of product and service revenue includes royalty costs for licensed technologies included in our products, provisions for slow-moving and obsolete inventory and non-cash expenses including depreciation and amortization associated with various assets used in the production of our products and stock-based compensation expense. We provide a one-year warranty on each nCounter Analysis System and GeoMx DSP system and we establish a reserve for warranty repairs based on historical warranty repair costs incurred.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of salaries and benefits, occupancy costs, laboratory supplies, engineering services, consulting fees, costs associated with licensing molecular diagnostics rights and clinical study expenses and non-cash expenses including depreciation and amortization associated with various assets used in the research and development of our products and stock-based compensation expense.
We have made substantial investments in research and development since our inception. Our research and development efforts have focused primarily on the tasks required to enhance our technologies and to support development and commercialization of new and existing products and applications. We believe that our continued investment in research and development is essential to our long-term competitive position and expect to continue to make investments in research and development activities, with an expected focus on spatial genomics.
To date, we have found that it has been effective for us to manage our research and development activities on a departmental basis. Accordingly, other than pursuant to terms of certain of our collaborations, we have neither required employees to report their time by project nor allocated our research and development costs to individual projects.
Research and development expense by functional area was as follows:
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expense consists primarily of costs for our sales and marketing, finance, human resources, information technology, business development, legal and general management functions, as well as professional fees for legal, consulting and accounting services and non-cash expenses including primarily stock-based compensation expense.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
We believe that our financial performance has been and in the foreseeable future will continue to be primarily driven by the following factors. While each of these factors presents significant opportunities for our business, they also pose important challenges that we must successfully address in order to sustain our growth and improve our results of operations. Our ability to successfully address the factors below is subject to various risks and uncertainties, including those described under the heading “Risk Factors.”
The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted our ability to solicit and fulfill customer orders, and record related product and service revenue. The slower pace at which we are receiving and delivering system, consumable and service orders has negatively impacted our 2020 revenue, including the comparability of revenue recorded to historical periods. While all revenue categories have been impacted due to lab closures and lower customer activity, nCounter-related consumables revenue has been impacted most substantively given our current higher installed base of nCounter systems. To the extent the COVID-19 pandemic continues to have a negative impact on our customers’ ability to conduct research, or our ability to actively engage with our customers or to receive and fulfill customer orders, we expect our near term revenues will continue to be negatively impacted. We expect consumables revenue to be more severely impacted by COVID-19, as consumables revenue more closely correlates with day-to-day customer research activity. We cannot predict with any certainty if, or how quickly, our customers will return to previous activity or product order levels, if any increase in activity or product order levels will be maintained, or our ability to resume our activities and operations and maintain them at levels consistent with past performance. Until the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic subside, we expect our near-term revenues may continue to be negatively impacted. With consideration to these near-term negative impacts on our business, we expect our product and service revenue may continue to increase in future periods, primarily as a result of the growth in sales of GeoMx DSP instruments and consumables.
Instrument Installed Base
Our future financial performance will be driven in part by the rate of adoption of our GeoMx DSP system, for which we commenced commercial shipments in the second half of 2019. As of December 31, 2020, we had shipped more than 160 GeoMx DSP systems to customer sites and we had installed approximately 130 systems. Future financial performance will also be driven by our ability to continue to grow the installed base of our nCounter Analysis Systems. As of December 31, 2020, we had an installed base of approximately 950 nCounter Analysis Systems. In addition, future product and service revenue may be impacted by the introduction of new product platforms.
We will continue to employ other strategies to increase the adoption rate of our instrument platforms, including expanding our sales channel in both direct and distributor territories, developing new consumable content for our nCounter and GeoMx platforms and enhancing certain features of our nCounter and GeoMx platforms. As part of this strategy, we have added incremental sales territories and augmented our field sales team, and have continued to grow our base of distributors. As our installed base of instruments grows, we solicit feedback from our customers and focus certain of our research and development efforts on improving our systems or enabling applications, which in turn helps to drive additional sales of our instruments.
Our instruments require a significant capital investment and, as a result, our instrument sales process involves numerous interactions with multiple individuals within an organization, and often includes in-depth analysis by potential customers of our products, performance of proof-of-principle studies, preparation of extensive documentation and a lengthy
review process. As a result of these factors, the significant capital investment required in purchasing our instruments and the budget cycles of our customers, the time from initial contact with a customer to our receipt of a purchase order can vary significantly, and may be up to 12 months or longer. Given the length and uncertainty of our sales cycle, we have in the past experienced, and likely will in the future experience, fluctuations in our instrument sales on a period-to-period basis.
Recurring Consumables Revenue
Our instruments are designed to be used only with our consumables. This closed system model generates recurring revenue from each instrument we sell. Management focuses on recurring consumable revenue per system as an indicator of the continuing value generated by each system. Quarterly, we calculate recurring annualized consumables revenue per system (also known as pull-through) by dividing related annualized consumables revenue recognized in a particular quarter (other than consumables revenue related to proof-of-principle studies) by the total number of installed systems as of the last day in the immediately preceding quarter. We calculate the average annualized consumable pull-through per instrument by dividing related consumables revenue recognized during the year (other than consumables revenue related to proof-of-principle studies) by the average total number of installed systems as of the last day in the immediately preceding quarter for each of the preceding four quarters. Historically, the majority of our systems and related consumables have been sold to research customers.
Our average annualized consumable pull-through per installed nCounter system was approximately $51,000 and $80,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The lower nCounter consumable pull-through in 2020 was primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our customers’ ability to access their laboratories to conduct research, complete purchases and receive product shipments for a substantial portion of 2020. In addition, while greater unit sales of Prosigna kits were recorded as compared to 2019, our revenues recorded from the sale of Prosigna kits were lower, as our Prosigna supply agreement entered into as part of the transaction with Veracyte completed in December 2019 reduced our average selling price received on Prosigna kits, which in prior periods had been sold directly to end user customers or distributors.
Our average annualized consumable pull-through per installed GeoMx DSP system was approximately $82,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
As the installed base of our instrument platforms expands, consumables revenue is expected to increase. Our consumables revenue per installed system may fluctuate in the future, reflecting the mix of our installed instruments, and potential shifts in the mix, or type, of consumables sold to our installed customer base. In addition, subsequent to entering into the LAPA with Veracyte in December 2019, we are no longer selling Prosigna kits directly to third parties and are now manufacturing and supplying Prosigna kits exclusively to Veracyte at designated transfer prices, which has and will continue to result in a decrease in revenue and gross margins associated with Prosigna kits.
The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted our consumables revenue most substantively, given the impact on our customers’ ability to conduct research or our ability to actively engage with our customers or to receive and fulfill customer orders.We expect our consumables revenue may continue to be more severely impacted by COVID-19, as consumables revenue more closely correlates with day-to-day customer research activity. We cannot predict with any certainty if, or how quickly, our customers will return to previous activity or product order levels, if any increase in activity or product order levels will be maintained, or our ability to resume our activities and operations and maintain them at levels consistent with past performance. With consideration to these near-term negative impacts on our business, we expect our consumables revenue may continue to increase in future periods, as a result of the growth in sales of GeoMx DSP consumables and the introduction of new nCounter and GeoMx DSP consumable products, as well as the continued growth in the installed base of our nCounter and GeoMx DSP systems.
Other Revenue Sources
We derive service revenue from service contracts, which are purchased by a majority of our customers. Additionally, we selectively provide and generate revenue from services such as TAP or other proof-of-principle studies, which are designed to demonstrate for prospective customers the performance of our existing product platforms and certain new technologies that are under development.
Collaboration revenue has been primarily derived from our collaboration with Lam, and historically, our collaborations with Celgene and Merck. We expect collaboration revenue to remain a significantly smaller portion of our total revenues in future periods due to the conclusion or termination of the substantial majority of our previous collaboration agreements.
Revenue Mix and Gross Margin
Our product revenue is derived from sales of nCounter Analysis System and GeoMx DSP instruments and related consumables. Generally, our consumables have higher gross margins than our instruments. Our GeoMx DSP instruments, which commenced shipping during 2019, contribute a higher average gross margin as compared to our nCounter instrument platforms. There may be fluctuations in sales mix between instruments and consumables from period to period.In addition, while greater unit sales of Prosigna kits were recorded as compared to 2019, our revenues recorded from the sale of Prosigna kits were lower, as our Prosigna supply agreement entered into as part of the transaction with Veracyte completed in December 2019 reduced our average selling price received on Prosigna kits, which in prior periods had been sold directly to end user customers or distributors.
Given our limited selling and marketing experience with GeoMx DSP, our orders and sales may not meet our and analysts’ expectations. Our future results may vary period to period and as our installed base of systems grows, consumables may continue to constitute a larger percentage of total product revenue, which would tend to increase our gross margins. Such gross margin increases may be offset by the mix of consumable products sold or the introduction of new instrument product platforms that become increasing components of our product sales, such as our expected SMI platform. In certain regions outside of the US, we sell through distribution partners who typically receive discounted prices. Future instrument selling prices and gross margins may fluctuate as we grow our volume of distribution partners in geographies outside of the United States, as we introduce new products and reduce our product costs, and from variability in the timing of new product introductions.
In addition to seeking to increase sales of our existing nCounter and GeoMx DSP platforms and consumables, we will continue to employ other growth strategies, including expanding our sales channel in both direct and distributor territories, developing new consumable content for our nCounter and GeoMx platforms and enhancing certain features of our both of these platforms. As part of this strategy, during 2018, 2019 and 2020, we have added incremental sales territories and augmented our field sales team, and have continued to grow our base of distributors.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
Instrument revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased as compared to the prior year, due primarily to the first full year of commercial shipments of our GeoMx DSP system. The increase in instrument revenue was partially offset by lower revenue from sales of our nCounter instruments as compared to the prior year primarily as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on certain of our customers, including full or partial closures of their operations or facilities and their resulting inability to complete purchases or receive product shipments for a substantial portion of the current year.
Consumables revenue includes sales of consumables for both nCounter and GeoMx DSP, and also includes sales of Prosigna in vitro diagnostic kits to our partner Veracyte. Consumables revenue decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020 with multiple factors impacting consumables revenue as compared to 2019. Sales of consumables for GeoMx DSP increased in 2020, as we had our first full year of sales following the commercial launch of GeoMx DSP in the second half of 2019. The GeoMx DSP consumable revenue contribution was offset by lower nCounter consumables revenue as compared to 2019, due primarily to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our customers’ ability to access their laboratories to conduct research, complete purchases and receive product shipments for a substantial portion of the current year. In addition, while greater unit sales of Prosigna kits were recorded as compared to 2019, our revenues recorded from the sale of Prosigna kits were lower, as our Prosigna supply agreement entered into as part of the transaction with Veracyte completed in December
2019 reduced our average selling price received on Prosigna kits, which in prior periods had been sold directly to end user customers or distributors.
Service revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased as compared to 2019, due to increases in service revenue generated from TAP as well as increased revenue received from service contracts on our larger installed base of instruments as compared to the prior year.
The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted our ability to solicit and fulfill customer orders, and record related product and service revenue.
The slower pace at which we are receiving and delivering system, consumable and service orders has negatively impacted our 2020 revenue, including the comparability of revenue recorded to historical periods.
While all revenue categories have been impacted due to lab closures and lower customer activity, nCounter-related consumables revenue has been impacted most substantively given our current higher installed base of nCounter systems. To the extent the COVID-19 pandemic continues to have a negative impact on our customers’ ability to conduct research, or our ability to actively engage with our customers or to receive and fulfill customer orders, we expect our near term revenues will continue to be negatively impacted. Notwithstanding the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our near term revenue, our product and service revenue may continue to increase in future periods as a result of the growth in sales of our GeoMx DSP instruments, the growth in sales of our nCounter and GeoMx DSP consumable products as driven by our increasing installed base of these systems, the introduction of new nCounter and GeoMx DSP consumable products and the potential introduction of new product platforms.
Collaboration revenue decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year, due primarily to decreased activity levels after our receipt of the full commitment of development funding of $50.0 million from Lam during 2019 and to a lesser extent, our terminated collaboration with Celgene. Our collaboration agreement with Lam represented $4.8 million and $16.3 million of collaboration revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Cost of Product and Service Revenue; Gross Profit; and Gross Margin
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cost of product and service revenue increased as compared to the same periods in 2019, due to increased costs associated with the first full year of commercial shipments of GeoMx DSP, which commenced during the second half of 2019, coupled with investments made to support the growth, installation and service of our product lines, including investments to expand our production and distribution capacity in late 2019 and early 2020 in consideration of the commercial launch of GeoMx DSP. Our gross margin on product and service revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased compared to the prior year primarily as a result of lower nCounter consumables revenue as compared to the prior year due to the negative impacts of COVID-19, which in turn also resulted in greater instrument revenue as a percent of our total sales mix, with instrument sales generally contributing lower gross margins as compared to consumables sales. Our margins were negatively impacted in the current year by the impact of lower consumable revenue which resulted in excess manufacturing capacity absorbed in our cost of product and service revenue, and to a lesser extent, by the Prosigna supply agreement with Veracyte pursuant to which we sell Prosigna for a lower realized price, while our Prosigna production costs have generally remained unchanged from the prior year.
With consideration to the potential near term and uncertain negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, which may impact our product and service revenue growth and the related costs incurred, we expect our cost of product and service revenue to increase in future periods. These potential increases would be coincident with anticipated growth in sales of GeoMx DSP instruments, continued sales growth of nCounter and GeoMx consumables and our TAP service. We also expect to make investments in our operations to support the growth of our business.
We expect our gross margin on product and service revenue may fluctuate in future periods. Variability will depend in part on the uncertain impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our product and service revenue, in particular on our consumables revenue for which we operate the manufacturing process directly, as well on our relative level of instrument sales, for which we typically record lower gross margins as compared to our sales of our consumable products or services. In addition, our gross margins may vary depending on potential expenses we may incur for regulatory compliance, quality assurance or activities
related to the expansion of our manufacturing capacity. Costs related to collaboration revenue are included in research and development expense.
Research and Development Expense
The decrease in research and development expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily reflects reduced activities associated with diagnostic product development and clinical research, due to the conclusion or termination of certain of our previous collaboration agreements and as a result of the LAPA with Veracyte, which has subsequently reduced the ongoing diagnostic research and support associated with the Prosigna in vitro diagnostic kits as well as reduced travel expenses due to the COVID-19 pandemic. These decreases were partially offset by investments made in our continuing product development efforts related to GeoMx DSP and other potential new product platforms including investments in instrument and software development and consumables content and increased facility costs.
We expect research and development expense may increase in future periods, as a result of continued investment in GeoMx DSP and related consumables and the research and development of potential new product platforms and technologies. As of December 31, 2019, Lam had provided the full commitment of up to $50.0 million and we do not expect to receive any further funding from Lam in future periods.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
The decrease in selling, general and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 is due to the COVID-19 pandemic significantly altering certain commercial activities during the period, including significantly lower travel and trade-show related costs and sales commissions. Additionally, selling related expenses were reduced as a result of the LAPA with Veracyte, pursuant to which our Prosigna-related direct sales and marketing resources were eliminated or transferred to Veracyte. These decreases were partially offset by continued investment in GeoMx DSP-related commercial initiatives, in particular investments made in our customer experience and service group, as well as certain digital marketing and related initiatives.
With consideration to the potential near term and uncertain negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, which may impact our product and service revenue growth and the related costs incurred, we expect selling, general and administrative expenses to increase in future periods as the number of sales, technical support, marketing and administrative personnel grows to support the expected growth in our business and the potential introduction of new products and product platforms.
Other Income (Expense), net
Pursuant to the terms of the LAPA completed in 2019, Veracyte paid us total consideration of $50.0 million, consisting of $40.0 million in cash paid in connection with the entry into the LAPA, and 376,732 shares of Veracyte common stock valued at $10.0 million, which shares were issued in connection with the entry into the LAPA. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we included an aggregate of $48.9 million as a separate line item in our consolidated statement of operations reflecting our gain on sale of business net of transaction costs of $1.1 million related to this transaction. There were no similar transactions during 2020.
Interest income decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020 due primarily to lower investment yields being available in the market resulting from the COVID-19 global pandemic as well as other broader macroeconomic conditions. We continue to maintain a cash preservation investment strategy and as a result, held the majority of our cash and cash equivalents in money market or other short duration fixed income positions for which yields were very low.
Interest expense increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 due primarily to an increase in our average outstanding debt balance during the year. The average balance of long-term debt outstanding during 2020 was $202.3 million as compared to $73.2 million for 2019, which reflects an increase in long-term debt related to our convertible debt financing completed during March 2020, which generated $230.0 million in gross proceeds. In conjunction with closing our convertible debt financing, we terminated our existing term loan facility with Capital Royalty Group and our revolving credit facility with Silicon Valley Bank, and as a result we recorded a charge of $7.1 million representing certain fees and prepayment penalties associated with these facilities. After taking into consideration the repayment of outstanding term debt, accrued interest expense and termination fees associated with these facilities, net proceeds from our convertible debt financing totaled approximately $130.0 million.
Other expense, net is comprised primarily of certain expenses for pending state and local tax obligations, as well as the unfavorable impact of fair value declines related to our equity securities. As of December 31, 2020, our holdings of Veracyte common stock equity securities have been sold pursuant to certain terms and conditions included within the LAPA and all net proceeds from the sale of the common stock have been included in our cash and cash equivalents.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Revenue
Instrument revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased as compared to the prior year, due primarily to the first commercial shipments of our GeoMx DSP system. In addition, we experienced an increase in the number of nCounter FLEX and nCounter MAX instruments sold, which generally have higher average selling prices, as compared to the number of nCounter SPRINT instruments sold during the year. Consumables revenue increased for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily as a result of our growing installed base of nCounter Analysis Systems, as well as growth in sales of our standardized panel consumable products. In vitro diagnostic kit revenue represents sales of Prosigna assays, which were approximately flat for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the prior year. Prosigna revenues were impacted during the fourth quarter of 2019 subsequent to entering into the LAPA and Prosigna supply agreement with Veracyte, which reduced our average selling price on Prosigna kits sold during the period. Service revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased, primarily related to growth in the number of projects relating to our GeoMx DSP technology access program, and, to a lesser extent, increases in the number of installed instruments covered by service contracts. Our product and service revenue may continue to increase in future periods as a result of the growth in sales of our GeoMx DSP instruments, the growth in sales of our nCounter and GeoMx DSP consumable products as driven by our increasing installed base of these systems and the introduction of new nCounter and GeoMx DSP consumable products.
Collaboration revenue decreased for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the prior year, due primarily to changes in activity levels relating to our collaboration with Lam, and historically, our terminated collaborations with Merck. These decreases were partially offset by collaboration revenue recognized following the termination of our agreement with Celgene. Our collaboration agreement with Lam represented $16.3 million of collaboration revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019. Collaboration revenue related to our agreement with Lam was $18.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. As of December 31, 2019, we have received the total committed collaboration development funding of $50.0 million from Lam.
Cost of Product and Service Revenue; Gross Profit; and Gross Margin
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cost of product and service revenue increased as compared to the same periods in 2018, due to a higher volume of consumables sold, as well as increased costs associated with the first commercial shipments of GeoMx DSP. Our gross margin on product and service revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased compared to the prior year primarily as a result of higher sales of consumables as a percentage of our sales mix, as well as due to our sales of GeoMx DSP instruments, which generally have a higher gross margin than our nCounter Analysis Systems. In addition, increased revenue from our GeoMx TAP service favorably impacted our overall margins for the year as compared to the prior year. These increases were partially offset by lower average selling prices realized for Prosigna pursuant to our supply agreement with Veracyte, and to a lesser extent, additional investments made in our operations to support the growth of our business.
Research and Development Expense
The increase in research and development expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 reflects higher stock-based compensation expense, which was driven by increases in our stock price as well as changes in the form of equity compensation granted to our employees and executives beginning in 2019. In addition, we experienced increases to staffing and personnel-related costs to support development activities related to the GeoMx DSP commercial launch, as well as increased facility costs. These increases were partially offset by decreases in professional fees and clinical trial costs, primarily due to fewer diagnostic product related development activities associated with our terminated collaboration agreements as compared to the prior year.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
The increase in selling, general and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 is primarily attributable to an increase in staffing and personnel-related costs of $13.4 million to support the GeoMx DSP commercial launch, professional fees associated with the execution of our LAPA and supply agreements with Veracyte, and higher accounting and audit service fees, in particular relating to our compliance with the Sarbanes Oxley Act. Personnel-related costs also reflect higher stock-based compensation expense, which was driven by increases in our stock price as well as changes in the form of equity compensation granted to our employees and executives beginning in 2019.
Other Income (Expense), net
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we have included an aggregate of $48.9 million as a separate line item in our consolidated statement of operations reflecting our gain on sale of business net of transaction costs of $1.1 million related to this transaction. As of December 31, 2019, we have included the shares of Veracyte common stock received in the transaction, at their fair value of $10.5 million, within short-term investments, and the $40.0 million of cash received on the closing date has been included in cash and cash equivalents in the consolidated balance sheets.
Interest expense increased for the year ended December 31, 2019 due primarily to increased borrowings outstanding under our term loan agreement. The average balance of long-term debt outstanding during 2019 was $73.2 million as compared to $52.5 million for 2018. Interest income increased for the year ended December 31, 2019, due to higher interest rates earned on investment holdings as well as an increase in our average investment balance during the year. Other expense, net is comprised primarily of estimated costs for certain state and local taxes and realized and unrealized gains or losses associated with foreign currency transactions primarily denominated in the Euro and British Pounds.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments of $440.7 million, compared to $156.9 million as of December 31, 2019. We believe our existing cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure needs for at least the next 12 months.
The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted our ability to solicit and fulfill customer orders and record related product and service revenue at levels comparable to historical periods. To the extent the COVID-19 pandemic continues to have a negative impact on our customers’ ability to conduct research or our ability to actively engage with our customers and take or fulfill customer orders, we expect our revenues, and consequently our liquidity and capital resources, in the near term may be negatively impacted. We cannot predict with any certainty if, or how quickly, our customers will return to previous levels of activity or product order levels, or our ability to resume our activities and operations at levels consistent with past performance. Until the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic subside, we expect our near term revenues, as well as our use of our liquidity and capital resources, to be negatively impacted.
Our assessment of the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support our operations is a forward-looking statement and involves risks and uncertainties. Any future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including: the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and the impact on our customer and operational activity; market acceptance and the level of sales of our existing products and new product candidates; the nature and timing of any additional research, product development or other partnerships or collaborations we may establish; the cost and timing of establishing additional sales, marketing, and distribution capabilities; the cost of our research and development activities; the cost and timing of regulatory clearances or approvals; the effect of competing technological and market developments; and the extent to which we acquire or invest in businesses, products and technologies, although we currently have no commitments or agreements relating to any of these types of transactions. We may require additional funds in the future and we may not be able to obtain such funds on acceptable terms, or at all. If we raise additional funds by issuing equity or equity-linked securities, our stockholders may experience dilution. Debt financing, if available, may involve covenants restricting our operations or our ability to incur additional debt. Any debt or additional equity financing that we raise may contain terms that are not favorable to us or our stockholders. If we raise additional funds through partnership, collaboration or licensing arrangements with third parties, it may be necessary to relinquish some rights to our technologies or our products, or grant licenses on terms that are not favorable to us. If we are unable to raise adequate funds, we may have to liquidate some or all of our assets; delay or reduce the scope of or eliminate some or all of our research and development programs, launch activities, or commercialization of our products; license to third parties the rights to commercialize products or technologies that we would otherwise seek to commercialize; reduce marketing, customer support or other resources devoted to our products; or cease operations.
Sources of Funds
Since inception, we have financed our operations primarily through the sale of equity securities, borrowings under term loan agreements and convertible notes, licensing of intellectual property and, to a lesser extent, sales of certain assets. Our cash used in operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $81.7 million.
Equity Financings
In October 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of 5,750,000 shares of our common stock, including the exercise in full by the underwriters of their option to purchase 750,000 additional shares of common stock. Our total gross proceeds were $230.0 million. After underwriters’ commissions and other expenses of the offering, our aggregate net proceeds were approximately $215.8 million.
In March 2019, we completed an underwritten public offering of 3,175,000 shares of our common stock, including the exercise in full by the underwriters of their option to purchase 675,000 additional shares of common stock. An additional 2,000,000 shares were sold by a related party stockholder. Our total gross proceeds were $73.0 million. We did not receive any proceeds from the sale of shares of common stock by the related party stockholder. After underwriter’s commissions and other expenses of the offering, and net of proceeds received by the related party stockholder, our aggregate net proceeds were approximately $68.3 million.
In July 2018, we completed an underwritten public offering of 4,600,000 shares of common stock, including the exercise in full by the underwriters of their option to purchase 600,000 additional shares of common stock in August 2018, for total gross proceeds of $57.5 million. After underwriter’s commissions and other expenses of the offering, our aggregate net proceeds were approximately $53.8 million.
In January 2018, we entered into a sales agreement with a sales agent to sell shares of our common stock through an “at the market” equity offering program for up to $40.0 million in gross cash proceeds. In March 2019, subsequent to our most recent underwritten public offering, we terminated this agreement. No shares of our common stock were sold under this agreement.
Debt Instruments
2.625% Convertible Senior Notes due 2025
In March 2020, we issued $230.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 2.625% Convertible Senior Notes due 2025, or the Convertible Notes, in a private offering. The Convertible Notes are governed by an indenture dated March 9, 2020 between us and U.S. Bank, National Association, as trustee.
We received net proceeds from the offering of $222.6 million. We used $88.6 million to repay in full all outstanding amounts borrowed, accrued interest and fees owed in connection with the termination of the amended and restated term loan agreement, or the 2018 Term Loan, with Capital Royalty Group, and the fees owed in connection with the termination of our revolving credit facility with Silicon Valley Bank. We intend to use the remainder of the net proceeds for general corporate purposes, including the continued development and commercialization of GeoMx DSP, the continued commercialization of our portfolio of nCounter based products, and for working capital needs.
The Convertible Notes bear interest at a rate of 2.625% per year, payable semi-annually in arrears on March 1 and September 1, beginning on September 1, 2020. The Convertible Notes may bear additional interest under specified circumstances relating to our failure to comply with our reporting obligations under, or if the Convertible Notes are not freely tradeable as required by, the indenture governing the Convertible Notes. Upon conversion, the Convertible Notes will be convertible into cash, shares of common stock, or a combination of cash and shares of common stock, at our election.
The Convertible Notes are general unsecured senior obligations and will mature on March 1, 2025, unless earlier repurchased, redeemed, or converted, subject to satisfaction of certain conditions and during the periods described below. The initial conversion rate for the Convertible Notes is 20.9161 shares of common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, per $1,000 principal amount of Convertible Notes (which is equivalent to an initial conversion price of approximately $47.81 per share). The conversion rate will be subject to adjustment in some events but will not be adjusted for any accrued and unpaid interest. In addition, following certain corporate events that may occur prior to the maturity date or if we issue a notice of redemption, we will increase the conversion rate for a holder who elects to convert our Convertible Notes in connection with such corporate event or in connection with such redemption, as the case may be, in certain circumstances.
Prior to the close of business on the business day immediately preceding December 1, 2024, the Convertible Notes will be convertible only under the following circumstances: (1) during any calendar quarter commencing after the calendar quarter ending on June 30, 2020 (and only during such calendar quarter), if the last reported sale price of the common stock for at least 20 trading days (whether or not consecutive) during a period of 30 consecutive trading days ending on, and including, the last trading day of the immediately preceding calendar quarter is greater than or equal to 130% of the conversion price on each
applicable trading day; (2) during the five business-day period after any five consecutive trading-day period in which the trading price per $1,000 principal amount of Convertible Notes for each trading day of such period was less than 98% of the product of the last reported sale price of the common stock and the conversion rate on each such trading day; (3) if we call any or all of the Convertible Notes for redemption, the Convertible Notes called for redemption (or, in the case of a partial redemption, if we make an election to redeem all Convertible Notes, irrespective of whether they are called for redemption, to be convertible, all Convertible Notes) may be submitted for conversion at any time prior to the close of business on the scheduled trading day immediately preceding the redemption date as set forth in the related redemption notice; or (4) upon the occurrence of specified corporate events. On or after December 1, 2024, until the close of business on the business day immediately preceding the maturity date, holders of the Convertible Notes may convert all or any portion of their Convertible Notes at any time, regardless of the foregoing circumstances.
We may not redeem the Convertible Notes prior to March 5, 2023, and no sinking fund is provided for the Convertible Notes. On or after March 5, 2023, we may redeem for cash all or any portion of the Convertible Notes, at our option, if the last reported sale price of the common stock has been at least 130% of the conversion price then in effect for at least 20 trading days (whether or not consecutive) during any 30 consecutive trading-day period (including the last trading day of such period) ending on, and including, the trading day immediately preceding the date on which we provide a notice of redemption at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the Convertible Notes to be redeemed, plus any accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the redemption date.
Upon the occurrence of a fundamental change (as defined in the indenture governing the Convertible Notes) prior to the maturity date, subject to certain conditions, holders may require us to repurchase all or a portion of the Convertible Notes in increments of $1,000 for cash at a price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the Convertible Notes to be repurchased, plus any accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the fundamental change repurchase date.
The Convertible Notes do not contain any financial or operating covenants or any restrictions on the issuance of other indebtedness or the issuance or repurchase of securities by us. The Convertible Notes indenture contains customary events of default, including that upon certain events of default, 100% of the principal and accrued and unpaid interest on the Convertible Notes will automatically become due and payable.
Term Loan Agreement
In October 2018, we entered into an amended and restated term loan agreement, or the 2018 Term Loan, with Capital Royalty Group under which we could borrow up to $100.0 million, which was due and payable in September 2024.
In March 2020, we terminated the 2018 Term Loan agreement. We used $88.6 million of the proceeds from the Convertible Notes to repay in full all outstanding principle, interest and fees owed associated with termination of the loan.
2018 Revolving Loan Facility
In January 2018, we entered into a $15.0 million secured revolving loan facility, with availability subject to a borrowing base consisting of eligible accounts receivable. In November 2018, we entered into an amended and restated loan and security agreement to increase the borrowing capacity under the facility to $20.0 million, amend the borrowing base to include finished goods inventory, and extend the final maturity under the facility to November 2021.
In March 2020, we terminated the revolving loan facility and paid termination fees of $0.5 million. There were no amounts outstanding under the revolving loan facility at the time of termination.
2019 Sale of Business
In December 2019, we entered into a License and Asset Purchase Agreement, or LAPA, and service and supply agreements, or SSAs, with Veracyte, Inc, or Veracyte. Pursuant to the LAPA, we completed a license of intellectual property and a sale of certain assets to Veracyte relating to our nCounter FLEX system for use in clinical diagnostic applications. Veracyte also acquired certain intellectual property rights and worldwide distribution rights relating to our Prosigna Breast Cancer Assay and our LymphMark assay and certain clinical diagnostic assay software modules that operate with the nCounter FLEX system.
Pursuant to the terms of the LAPA, Veracyte paid us total consideration of $50.0 million, consisting of $40.0 million in cash, paid in connection with the entry into the LAPA, and 376,732 shares of Veracyte common stock valued at $10.0 million, which shares were issued in connection with the entry into the LAPA. Additionally, we may receive future potential milestone payments of up to $10.0 million in the aggregate, to be paid upon the launch of additional clinical diagnostic tests by Veracyte for our nCounter FLEX platform.
Use of Funds
Our principal uses of cash are funding our operations, capital expenditures, working capital requirements and satisfaction of any outstanding obligations under our debt agreements, respectively. Over the past several years, our product and service revenue has increased significantly from year to year and, as a result, our cash flows from customer collections have increased. Our operating expenses have also increased as we have invested in our sales and marketing activities and in research and development of new product platforms and technologies that we believe have the potential to drive the long-term growth of our business.
Our operating cash requirements may increase in the future as we invest in research and development related to existing or new product platforms, as well as in sales and marketing and administrative activities. We cannot be certain our revenue will grow sufficiently to offset our operating expense increases. As a result, we may need to raise additional funds to support our operations, and such funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. If we are unable to raise additional funds when needed, our operations and ability to execute our business strategy could be adversely affected.
Historical Cash Flow Trends
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Operating Cash Flows
We derive operating cash flows from cash collected from the sale of our products and services and, historically, from collaborations. These cash flows received are offset by our use of cash for operating expenses to support the growth of our business. We have historically experienced negative cash flows from operating activities, with such negative cash flows likely to continue for the foreseeable future.
Net cash used in operating activities in 2020 consisted of our net loss of $110.1 million and net increases in our operating assets and liabilities of $14.5 million. Included in our 2020 net loss were $43.0 million of net non-cash expense items such as the loss on extinguishment of debt, payment of accrued interest on the 2018 Term Loan, stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization, amortization of our right-of-use assets, deferred interest costs; and provisions for inventory obsolescence and bad debt.
Net cash used in operating activities for 2019 consisted of our net loss of $40.7 million, and net increases in our operating assets and liabilities of $28.2 million, coupled with $20.5 million of net non-cash income and expense items, such as the gain on sale of business to Veracyte, stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization, amortization of our right-of-use assets, deferred interest converted to principal pursuant to our term loan agreement and provisions for inventory obsolescence.
Net cash used in operating activities for 2018 consisted of our net loss of $77.4 million, partially offset by $8.9 million of changes in our operating assets and liabilities and $14.4 million of net non-cash expense items, such as stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization, deferred interest converted to principal pursuant to our term loan agreement and provisions for bad debt and inventory obsolescence.
Investing Cash Flows
Our most significant investing activities for 2020, 2019 and 2018, were related to the purchase, maturity and sale of short-term investments. Additionally, for 2019 we had significant investing activity related to the proceeds received pursuant to the sale of business to Veracyte. Because we manage our cash usage with respect to our total cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments, we do not consider cash flows related to management of our short-term investments to be important to an understanding of our liquidity and capital resources.
In the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we purchased property and equipment totaling $7.5 million, $7.9 million and $4.5 million respectively, which we believe will be required to support the growth and expansion of our operations.
Financing Cash Flows
Historically, we have funded our operations through the issuance of equity securities and various forms of debt borrowings.
Net cash provided by financing activities in 2020 consisted primarily of net proceeds of $222.6 million from the issuance of 2.625% Convertible Senior Notes, net proceeds of $215.8 million from an underwritten public offering of our common stock, and $18.9 million of net proceeds from the vesting and exercise of employee stock awards and from proceeds associated with our Employee Stock Purchase Plan. These cash inflows were partially offset by payments related to the termination of our term loan agreement and revolving loan facility of $84.8 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities for 2019 consisted primarily of net proceeds of $68.3 million from an underwritten public offering of our common stock, borrowings of $20.0 million under our term loan agreement and $18.9 million of net proceeds from the vesting and exercise of employee stock awards and from proceeds associated with our Employee Stock Purchase Plan.
Net cash provided by financing activities for 2018 consisted of net proceeds of $53.8 million from an underwritten public offering, $13.5 million of net proceeds from our 2018 Term Loan, $4.8 million of proceeds from the vesting and exercise of employee stock awards and from proceeds associated with our Employee Stock Purchase Plan.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table reflects a summary of our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020.
(1) Excludes royalty obligations based on net sales of products as any such amounts are not currently determinable.
(2) Includes principal on our convertible notes.
(3) Lease costs are primarily for office, laboratory and manufacturing space.
(4) Purchase obligations consist of contractual and legally binding commitments under outstanding purchase orders to purchase long lead time inventory and other research and development items.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities, revenue and expenses at the date of the financial statements. Generally, we base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions in accordance with GAAP that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Critical accounting policies and estimates are those that we consider the most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations because they require our most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Our critical accounting policies and estimates include those related to:
•revenue recognition;
•stock-based compensation;
•inventory valuation;
•fair value measurements; and
•income taxes.
Revenue Recognition
We generate the majority of our revenue from sales of products and services. Our products consist of our nCounter Analysis System and GeoMx DSP system, and related consumables. Services consist of instrument service contracts and service fees for assay processing.
Revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration expected to be received in exchange for those products and services. This process involves identifying the contract with a customer, determining the performance obligations in the contract, determining the contract price, allocating the contract price to the distinct performance obligations in the contract, and recognizing revenue when the performance obligations have been satisfied. A performance obligation is considered distinct from other obligations in a contract when it provides a benefit to the customer either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available to the customer and is separately identified in the contract. Performance obligations are considered satisfied once control of a product or service has transferred to the customer, meaning the customer has the ability to use and obtain the benefit of the product or service. Revenue is recognized for satisfied performance obligations only when there are no uncertainties regarding payment terms or transfer of control.
Revenue from instruments and consumables, including in vitro diagnostic kits, is recognized generally upon shipment to the end customer, which is when control of the product has been transferred to the customer. Performance obligations related to instrument sales are reviewed on a contract-by-contract basis, as individual contract terms may vary, and may include installation and calibration services. Performance obligations for consumable products are generally completed upon shipment to the customer. Instrument revenue related to installation and calibration services is recognized when the customer has possession of the instrument and the services have been performed. Such services can also be provided by our distribution partners and other third parties.
Instrument service contracts are sold with contract terms ranging from 12-36 months and cover periods after the end of the initial 12-month warranty. These contracts include services to maintain performance within our designed specifications and a minimum of one preventative maintenance service procedure during the contract term. Revenue from services to maintain designed specifications is considered a stand-ready obligation and recognized evenly over the contract term and service revenue related to preventative maintenance of instruments is recognized when the procedure is completed. Revenue from service fees for assay processing is recognized upon the rendering of the related performance obligation.
For arrangements with multiple performance obligations, we allocate the contract price in proportion to its stand-alone selling price. We use our best estimate of stand-alone selling price for our products and services based on historical sales and adjusted for similar products, geographies, and differences in customers and review our stand-alone prices annually.
Product and service revenues from sales to customers through distributors are recognized consistent with the policies and practices for direct sales to customers, as described above.
We have historically entered into collaboration agreements that may generate upfront fees, and may enter into such agreements in the future, and in some cases subsequent milestone payments that may be earned upon completion of certain product development milestones or other designated activities. We are able to estimate the total expected cost of product development and other services under these arrangements and recognize collaboration revenue using a contingency-adjusted proportional performance model. Costs incurred to date compared to total expected costs are used to determine proportional performance, as this is considered to be representative of the delivery of outputs under the arrangements. Revenue recognized at any point in time is limited to cash received, amounts contractually due, or the amounts of any product development or other contractual milestone payments when achievement of a milestone is deemed to be probable. Changes in estimates of total expected collaboration product development or other costs are accounted for prospectively as a change in estimate. From period to period, collaboration revenue can fluctuate substantially based on the achievement or probable achievement of product development or other milestones, or as estimates of total expected collaboration product development or other costs are changed or updated. We may recognize revenue from collaboration agreements that do not include upfront or milestone-based payments. Amounts due to collaboration partners are recognized when the related activities have occurred and are classified in the statement of operations, generally as research and development expense, based on the nature of the related activities.
Stock-based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation at fair value. Stock-based compensation costs for restricted stock units, or RSUs, are recognized based on their grant date fair value estimated using the intrinsic method. Stock-based compensation costs for stock option awards are recognized based on their grant date fair value estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. Stock-based compensation expense recognized in the consolidated statements of operations is based on awards ultimately expected to vest using actual forfeitures when incurred. We use the straight-line method of allocating compensation cost over the requisite service period of the related award, for awards with only service-based vesting requirements. For awards
with service and performance-based vesting requirements, we use an accelerated method of allocating compensation cost, over the vesting period.
Determining the fair value of stock-based awards at the grant date under the Black-Scholes option pricing model requires judgment, including estimating the value per share of our common stock, risk-free interest rate, expected term and dividend yield and volatility. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of stock-based awards represent our best estimates based on management judgment and subjective future expectations. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties. If any of the assumptions used in the Black-Scholes option pricing model significantly change, stock-based compensation for future awards may differ materially from the awards granted previously.
The expected term of options granted is based on historical experience of similar awards and expectations of future employee behavior. The risk-free interest rate for the expected term of the option is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant. We have not paid and do not anticipate paying cash dividends on our common stock; therefore, the expected dividend yield is assumed to be zero. We calculated volatility based on our share price activity throughout the year.
Inventory Valuation
Inventory consists of raw materials, certain component parts to be used in manufacturing our products and finished goods. Inventory is stated at the lower of cost or market. Cost is determined using a standard cost system, whereby the standard costs are updated periodically to reflect current costs and market represents the lower of replacement cost or estimated net realizable value. We record adjustments to inventory for potentially excess, obsolete, slow-moving or impaired items. The business environment in which we operate is subject to rapid changes in technology and customer demand. We regularly review inventory for excess and obsolete products and components, taking into account product life cycle and development plans, product expiration and quality issues, historical experience and our current inventory levels. If actual market conditions are less favorable than anticipated, additional inventory adjustments could be required.
Fair value of financial instruments
The recorded amounts of certain financial instruments, including cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, prepaid expenses and other assets, accounts payable and accrued liabilities approximate fair value due to their relatively short maturities. Investments that are classified as available-for-sale are recorded at fair value. The fair value for debt securities held is determined using quoted market prices, broker or dealer quotations, or alternative pricing sources with reasonable levels of price transparency. The recorded amount of our long-term debt approximates fair value because the related interest rates approximate rates currently available to us.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under the liability method. Under the liability method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the differences between the financial reporting and income tax bases of assets and liabilities and are measured using the tax rates that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. A valuation allowance is recorded when it is more likely than not that some of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
We determine whether a tax position is more likely than not to be sustained upon examination based on the technical merits of the position. For tax positions meeting the more-likely-than-not threshold, the tax amount recognized in the financial statements is reduced by the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with the relevant tax authority.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For information regarding recent accounting pronouncements, see Note 2 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements of this report.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or for any other contractually narrow or limited purpose.