Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations together with the audited consolidated financial statements and notes to the financial statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. The forward-looking statements are not historical facts, but rather are based on current expectations, estimates, assumptions and projections about our industry, business and future financial results. Our actual results could differ materially from the results contemplated by these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed under “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A above.
Business and Executive Overview
We are a global company that delivers innovative, advanced high-performance networking technologies and Internet connected products to consumers, businesses, and service providers. Our products are designed to simplify and improve people’s lives. Our goal is to enable people to collaborate and connect to a world of information and entertainment. We are dedicated to delivering innovative and advanced connected solutions ranging from mobile and cloud-based services for enhanced control and security, to smart networking products, video over Ethernet for Pro AV applications, easy-to-use WiFi solutions and performance gaming routers to enhance console, online and cloud game play. Our products are built on a variety of technologies such as wireless (WiFi and 4G/5G mobile), Ethernet and powerline, with a focus on reliability and ease-of-use. Additionally, we continually invest in research and development to create new technologies and to capitalize on technological inflection points and trends, such as WiFi 6, 5G and Pro AV. Our product lines consist of devices that create and extend wired and wireless networks, devices that attach to the network, such as smart digital canvasses as well as services that complement and enhance our product line offerings. These products are available in multiple configurations to address the changing needs of our customers in each geographic region.
On February 6, 2018, we announced that the Board of Directors had unanimously approved the pursuit of a separation of our smart camera business, Arlo, from NETGEAR (the “Separation”) to be effected by way of an initial public offering ("IPO") and spin-off ("the Spin-Off"). On December 31, 2018, we completed the Spin-Off of Arlo Technologies, Inc. (“Arlo”), a majority owned subsidiary and reporting segment of NETGEAR at the time. Arlo’s historical financial results for periods prior to the Spin-Off are reflected in our consolidated financial statements as discontinued operations for the periods presented. For further details, refer to Note 3, Discontinued Operations, in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We operate and report in two segments: Connected Home, and Small and Medium Business ("SMB"). We believe that this structure reflects our current operational and financial management, and that it provides the best structure for us to focus on growth opportunities while maintaining financial discipline. The leadership team of each segment is focused on product and service development efforts, both from a product marketing and engineering standpoint, to service the unique needs of their customers. The Connected Home segment is focused on consumers and consists of high-performance, dependable and easy-to-use WiFi internet networking solutions such as WiFi mesh systems, routers, 4G/5G mobile products, smart devices such as Meural digital canvasses, and subscription services, offering consumers a range of parental controls and cyber security for their home networks. The SMB segment is focused on small and medium-sized businesses and consists of business networking, wireless LAN, storage, and security solutions that bring enterprise-class functionality to small and medium-sized businesses at an affordable price. We conduct business across three geographic regions: Americas; Europe, Middle-East and Africa (“EMEA”) and Asia Pacific (“APAC”).
Business Overview
The markets in which our segments operate are intensely competitive and subject to rapid technological change. We believe that the principal competitive factors in the consumer and small and medium business markets for networking products include product breadth, price points, size and scope of the sales channel, brand name, timeliness of new product introductions, product availability, performance, features, functionality and reliability, ease-of-installation, maintenance and use, security, and customer service and support. To remain competitive, we believe we must continue to aggressively invest resources in developing new products and subscription services, enhancing our current products, expanding our channels including our direct to consumer capabilities, increasing engagement with our customers and maintaining customer satisfaction worldwide. Our investments reflect our enhanced focus on cybersecurity relating to our products and systems, as the threat of cyber-attacks and exploitation of potential security vulnerabilities in our industry is on the rise and is increasingly a significant consumer concern.
We sell our products through multiple sales channels worldwide, including traditional retailers, online retailers, wholesale distributors, direct market resellers (“DMRs”), value-added resellers (“VARs”), broadband service providers and through our online platform at www.netgear.com. Our retail channel includes traditional retail locations domestically and internationally, such as Best Buy, Costco, Walmart, Staples, Office Depot, Target, FNAC (Europe), MediaMarkt (Europe), JB HiFi (Australia), Elkjop (Norway) and Sunning and Guomei (China). Online retailers include Amazon.com worldwide, Newegg.com (U.S.), JD.com and Alibaba (China), as well as Coolblue.com (Netherlands). Our DMRs include CDW Corporation, Insight Corporation and PC Connection in domestic markets. Our main wholesale distributors include Ingram Micro, D&H, Tech Data, Exertis (U.K.) and Synnex. In addition, we also sell our products through broadband service providers, such as multiple system operators (“MSOs”), xDSL, mobile, and other broadband technology operators domestically and internationally. Some of these retailers and broadband service providers purchase directly from us, while others are fulfilled through wholesale distributors around the world. A substantial portion of our net revenue is derived from a limited number of wholesale distributors, service providers and retailers. While we expect these channels to continue to be a significant part of our sales strategy, we believe that the proportion of sales through e-commerce platforms will continue to grow in the foreseeable future.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, our net revenue and income from operations increased by $256.4 million and $49.4 million, respectively, compared to the prior year. The strong increase in net revenue was primarily due to the robust demand for Connected Home products powered by unprecedented bandwidth consumption in the home where people transitioned to conducting the majority of their daily lives as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The increase was partially offset by lower net revenue from SMB products resulting from enforced business closures and delays to infrastructure investment by businesses experienced during the second and third fiscal quarters of 2020 as a result of COVID-19 pandemic. The increase in net revenue generated an increase in gross profit of $77.9 million, partially offset by an increase of $28.6 million in operating expenses to support the higher net revenue achievement. Higher variable compensation and freight out incurred to support the higher net revenue contributed to the increase in operating expenses.
On a geographic basis, net revenue increased in Americas and EMEA and decreased in APAC during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year. The increases in Americas and EMEA were both mainly attributable to home wireless and mobile products, partially offset by lower net revenue of our switch products. The decrease in APAC net revenue was primarily due to lower net revenue of broadband modem and gateway and switch products, partially offset by higher net revenue of home wireless products.
COVID-19 Pandemic
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 outbreak a pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted the global economy, disrupted global supply chains and work force participation and created significant volatility and disruption in financial markets. The onset of the COVID-19 pandemic initially impacted our supply chain partners, lowering finished good receipts by approximately 30% compared to planned receipts in the first quarter of 2020. At the same time, we saw a significant increase in airfreight rates to transport supply as a result of reduced capacity by carriers. Starting in March 2020, the spread of the pandemic to the U.S. and mainland Europe resulted in a surge in demand for Connected Home products as consumers responded to work from home and shelter-in-place measures. This surge in demand continued throughout 2020 and contributed to Connected Home net revenue growth of 41.6%, compared to the prior year. By contrast, demand for SMB products began to weaken as businesses faced closures and reacted to the uncertainty caused by the pandemic. Demand for SMB products continued to remain challenged until the third fiscal quarter of 2020, resulting in an overall decrease of 13.8% in SMB net revenue, compared to the prior year.
Commencing early in the first quarter of 2020, we enabled our crisis management team and put in place travel restrictions initially to/from Mainland China and Hong Kong, and subsequently restricted all international travel, while limiting domestic travel to essential travel in order to protect the health and well-being of our workforce and prevent the spread of the virus. In the middle of March 2020, the majority of our offices worldwide had enacted shelter-in-place measures, with employees being mandated to work from home. In addition, as part of our community outreach efforts, we donated a significant number of mobile hotspots to school districts in the U.S. for student use. The majority of our customers have continued to operate throughout the pandemic, adapting their
operating models to the changing conditions with significant disruptions heretofore limited to the VAR channel, through which we fulfill a significant portion of SMB demand.
The COVID-19 pandemic has brought about a considerable shift in our business while increasing uncertainty. We continue to experience an increase in demand for our Connected Home products as customers seek flexible networking solutions for their day to day needs. We expect the shift to remote working to increase relative to the experience pre-pandemic, thus maintaining the demand for high performance and dependable WiFi networks with a sustained increase in our target addressable market. As a result of the on-going pandemic, our supply chain partners are limited by production capacity, constrained by material availability, factory uptime and freight capacity, which constrains our ability to capitalize fully on end market demand. We expect supply chain constraints to exist through the first half of 2021. Looking forward, we are targeting mid to high single digit growth in fiscal 2021 for both Connected Home and SMB combined. We anticipate increased demand for Connected Home products from consumer channels, increased demand for SMB products, partially offset by lower net revenue from Connected Home product sales to service provider customers. We will look to continue to execute on our strategy of capitalizing on technological inflection points of WiFi 6, WiFi 6E, 5G and Pro-AV switching to develop and expand the premium WiFi market through new product introductions and to develop and roll out service offerings to build recurring service revenue streams. While we expect supply chain partners to operate in line with their fourth fiscal quarter performance, any further disruption brought about by the COVID-19 pandemic to supply chain partners, production schedules, material availability or freight carriers could have a significant negative impact on our net revenue, gross and operating margin performance.
The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our ongoing operational and financial performance, including our ability to execute our business strategies and initiatives in the expected time frame, will depend on future developments, including the duration of the pandemic, any related disruptions to channel partners and restrictions on travel and transport, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. The impact of the pandemic on our employees, their health and well-being and our ability to continue to instill our company culture and maintain productivity is uncertain and cannot be predicted. With the increase in work from home and distance learning mandates since the commencement of the pandemic, we believe we will continue to see a move to greater participation by companies and employees in remote working and learning increasing the demand for high performance, dependable WiFi networks. Refer to Item 1A, Risk Factors, of Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for various risks and uncertainties associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America and pursuant to the rules and regulations of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC"). The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make assumptions, judgments and estimates that can have a significant impact on the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions believed to be applicable and reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ significantly from these estimates. These estimates may change as new events occur, as additional information is obtained and as our operating environment changes. On a regular basis we evaluate our assumptions, judgments and estimates and make changes accordingly. We also discuss our critical accounting estimates with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors. Note 1, The Company and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K describes the significant accounting policies used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements. We have listed below our critical accounting policies that we believe to have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements. Historically, our assumptions, judgments and estimates relative to our critical accounting policies have not differed materially from actual results.
Revenue Recognition
We enter into contracts with customers to sell products and services, and while some sales agreements contain standard terms and conditions, there are agreements that contain non-standard terms and conditions and include promises to transfer multiple goods or services. As a result, significant interpretation and judgment is sometimes required to determine the appropriate accounting for these transactions including: (1) whether performance obligations are considered distinct and required to be accounted for separately or combined, including allocation of
transaction price; (2) developing an estimate of the stand-alone selling price, or SSP, of each distinct performance obligation; (3) combining contracts that may impact the allocation of the transaction price between product and services; and (4) estimating and accounting for variable consideration, including rights of return, rebates, price protection, expected penalties or other price concessions as a reduction of the transaction price.
Judgment is required to determine the SSP for each distinct performance obligation. We consider multiple factors, including, but not limited to, historical discounting trends for products and services, pricing practices in different geographies and through different sales channels, gross margin objectives, internal costs, competitor pricing strategies, and industry technology lifecycles. We typically estimate SSP of services based on observable transactions when the services are sold on a standalone basis and those prices fall within a reasonable range. As our business offerings evolve over time, we may be required to modify our estimated standalone selling prices, and as a result the pattern and timing of our revenue could be affected.
Our standard obligation to our direct customers generally provides for a full refund in the event that such product is not merchantable or is found to be damaged or defective. In determining estimates for future returns, we estimate variable consideration at the expected value amount which is based on management's analysis of historical data, channel inventory levels, current economic trends and changes in customer demand for our products. Sales incentives and price protection are determined based on a combination of the actual amounts committed and through estimating future expenditure based upon historical customary business practice. We continue to assess variable consideration estimates such that it is probable that a significant reversal of revenue will not occur.
We record revenue at the transaction price, net of allowances for customer right of returns, program and sales incentive offerings, price protection, promotions and other credits, which are accounted for as variable consideration. Variable consideration includes future channel warranty returns typically incurred due to buyer’s remorse, stock rotations, price protection and sales channel incentive programs. Future channel warranty returns are recorded as a reduction of revenue in the amount of the expected credit or refund to be provided. At the time we record the reduction to revenue, we include within cost of revenue a write-down to reduce the carrying value of such products to net realizable value. In addition to channel warranty-related returns, certain distributors and retailers generally have the right to return product for stock rotation purposes. We accrue for goods/services received from customers within operating expenses or cost of revenue as appropriate, if a distinct good or service is received in exchange for payment; otherwise, these expenditures are recorded as a reduction of revenue. Our estimated variable considerations can vary from actual results and we may have to record additional revenue reductions, which could materially impact our financial position and results of operations.
For products sold with third-party services where we obtain control of the products and/or service before transferring it to the customer, we recognize revenue based on the gross amount billed to customers. We recognize revenue on a net basis when we are acting as an agent between the customer and the vendor. Certain judgments are involved in determining when we obtain control, such as determining the responsible party for fulfillment of the services, whether we have inventory risk before the service is transferred or if we have discretion to establish pricing for the third-party services.
Allowances for Warranty Obligations
Within cost of revenue, we record an estimate to reflect our standard warranty obligation to end-users to provide for replacement of a defective product for one or more years. Factors that affect the warranty obligation include product failure rates, material usage, and service delivery costs incurred in correcting product failures. The estimated cost associated with fulfilling the warranty obligation to end-users is recorded in cost of revenue. Because our products are manufactured by third-party manufacturers, in certain cases we have recourse to the third-party manufacturer for replacement or credit for the defective products. We give consideration to amounts recoverable from our third-party manufacturers in determining our warranty liability. Our estimated allowances for product warranties can vary from actual results and we may have to record additional charges to cost of revenue, which could materially impact our financial position and results of operations.
Inventory Valuation
We value our inventory at the lower of cost and net realizable value, cost being determined using the first-in, first-out method.
Provisions for Excess and Obsolete Inventory
On a quarterly basis we assess the value of our inventory and write down its value for estimated excess and obsolete inventory based upon assumptions about the future demand by reviewing inventory quantities on hand and on order under non-cancelable purchase commitments in comparison to our estimated forecast of product demand to determine what inventory, if any, is not saleable at or above cost. Our analysis is based on the demand forecast which takes into account market conditions, product development plans, product life expectancy and other factors. Based on this analysis, we write down the affected inventory value for estimated excess and obsolescence charges. At the point of loss recognition, a new, lower cost basis for that inventory is established, and subsequent changes in facts and circumstances do not result in the restoration or increase in that newly established cost basis. As demonstrated during prior years, demand for our products can fluctuate significantly. If actual demand is lower than our forecasted demand and we fail to reduce our manufacturing accordingly, we could be required to write down the value of additional inventory, which would have a negative effect on our gross profit.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the purchase price over estimated fair value of net assets of businesses acquired in a business combination. Goodwill acquired in a business combination is not amortized, but instead tested for impairment at least annually on the first day of the fourth quarter. Should certain events or indicators of impairment occur between annual impairment tests, we will perform the impairment test as those events or indicators occur. Examples of such events or circumstances include the following: a significant decline in our expected future cash flows, a sustained, significant decline in our stock price and market capitalization, a significant adverse change in the business climate, slower growth rates, and a more-likely-than-not expectation of selling or disposing of all, or a portion, of a reporting unit.
Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level by first performing a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not (that is, a likelihood of more than 50%) that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value. The qualitative assessment considers the following factors: macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors, overall company financial performance, events affecting the reporting units, and changes in our share price. If the reporting unit does not pass the qualitative assessment, we estimate our fair value and compare the fair value with the carrying value of the reporting unit, including goodwill. If the fair value is greater than the carrying value of our reporting unit, no impairment results. If the fair value is less than the carrying value, an impairment loss is recognized for the amount that the carrying amount of a reporting unit, including goodwill, exceeds its fair value, limited to the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. The impairment charge would be recorded to earnings in the consolidated statements of operations.
We completed our annual impairment test of goodwill as of the first day of the fourth fiscal quarter of 2020, or September 28, 2020. We identified the reporting units for the purpose of goodwill impairment testing as Connected Home and SMB and performed a qualitative test for goodwill impairment of the two reporting units as of September 28, 2020. Based upon the results of the qualitative testing, the respective fair values of the two reporting units were substantially in excess of these reporting units’ carrying values. We believed that it was more-likely-than-not that the fair value of each of these reporting units was greater than its respective carrying value and therefore performing the next step of impairment test for these reporting units was unnecessary. No goodwill impairment was recognized for our reporting units in the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 or 2018.
For Connected Home, and SMB reporting units, we do not believe it is likely that there will be a material change in the estimates or assumptions we use to test for impairment losses on goodwill. However, if the actual results are not consistent with our estimates or assumptions, we may be exposed to a future impairment charge that could be material.
Long-Lived Assets Excluding Goodwill
Our long-lived assets primarily include goodwill, purchased intangibles with finite lives, operating lease right-of-use (“ROU”) assets, and property and equipment. Purchased intangibles with finite lives are amortized using the straight-line method over the estimated economic lives of the assets, which range from three to nine years. ROU assets represent our right to use an underlying asset for the lease term, which range from one to ten years, and
amortized over the respective term. Property and equipment are stated at historical cost, less accumulated depreciation. Depreciation is computed using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets, which range from 2 to 5 years. Long lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. Examples of such events or circumstances include the following: a significant decrease in the market price of the asset, a significant decline in our expected future cash flows, significant changes or planned changes in our use of the assets, a sustained, significant decline in our stock price and market capitalization and a significant adverse change in the business climate. Determination of recoverability is based on an estimate of undiscounted future cash flows resulting from the use of the asset and its eventual disposition. If the carrying amount of the asset exceeds its estimated undiscounted future net cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized in the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset. The carrying value of the asset is reviewed on a regular basis for the existence of facts, both internal and external, that may suggest impairment.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, there were no events or changes in circumstances that indicated the carrying amount of our long-lived assets may not be recoverable from their undiscounted cash flows. Consequently, we did not perform an impairment test. We reviewed the depreciation and amortization policies for the long-lived asset groups and ensured the remaining useful lives are appropriate. We did not record any impairments to our long-lived assets during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
We will continue to evaluate the carrying value of our long-lived assets and if we determine in the future that there is a potential impairment, we may be required to record additional charges to earnings which could affect our financial results.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under an asset and liability approach. Under this method, income tax expense is recognized for the amount of taxes payable or refundable for the current year. In addition, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences resulting from different treatments for tax versus accounting of certain items, such as accruals and allowances not currently deductible for tax purposes. These differences result in deferred tax assets and liabilities, which are included within the consolidated balance sheets. We must then assess the likelihood that our deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income and to the extent we believe that recovery is not more likely than not, we must establish a valuation allowance. Our assessment considers the recognition of deferred tax assets on a jurisdictional basis. Accordingly, in assessing our future taxable income on a jurisdictional basis, we consider the effect of its transfer pricing policies on that income. We have recorded a valuation allowance against certain federal and California deferred tax assets since the recovery of the assets is uncertain. We believe that all of our other deferred tax assets are recoverable; however, if there were a change in our ability to recover our deferred tax assets, we would be required to take a charge in the period in which we determined that recovery was not more likely than not.
Uncertain tax provisions are recognized under guidance that provides that a company should use a more-likely-than-not recognition threshold based on the technical merits of the income tax position taken. Income tax positions that meet the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold should be measured in order to determine the tax benefit to be recognized in the financial statements. We include interest expense and penalties related to uncertain tax positions as additional tax expense.
The Company made an accounting policy election related to accounting for the tax effects of Global Intangible Low-Taxed Income (“GILTI”) that was implemented as part of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (the “Tax Act”), enacted on December 22, 2017. With regard to GILTI, the Company accounts for the tax effects as a period cost, if and when incurred.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth, for the periods presented, the consolidated statements of continuing operations data, which is derived from the accompanying consolidated financial statements:
Net Revenue by Geographic Region
Our net revenue consists of gross product shipments and service revenue, less allowances for estimated sales returns, price protection, end-user customer rebates and other channel sales incentives deemed to be a reduction of net revenue per the authoritative guidance for revenue recognition, and net changes in deferred revenue.
We conduct business across three geographic regions: Americas, EMEA and APAC. For reporting purposes, revenue is generally attributed to each geographic region based upon the location of the customer.
2020 vs 2019
Net revenue in Americas increased for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year, largely due to increased demand for our Connected Home products in response to work and schooling from home mandates resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. The surge in demand that began in March 2020 continued throughout the fiscal year and resulted in strong growth in both the consumer and service provider channels. The increase was partially offset by lower SMB net revenue as the pandemic negatively impacted demand in the SMB segment, partially due to enforced business closures and delays to infrastructure investment experienced in the second and third fiscal quarters of 2020. Connected Home net revenue in Americas increased by 48.8% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year. We experienced strong consumer demand for our home wireless
products, especially WiFi 6 mesh systems, WiFi 6 routers and extenders across all channels, including our own direct platforms on netgear.com. Growth in service provider channels was mainly driven by mobile products as a direct response to the pandemic to support applications such as distance learning and first responders’ activities. SMB net revenue in Americas decreased by 10.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year, primarily due to lower net revenue of our switch products.
Net revenue in EMEA increased for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year. Connected Home in EMEA net revenue increased by 41.9% mainly driven by higher net revenue in both consumer and service provider channels from mobile and home wireless products in response to work from home and shelter-in-place measures. SMB net revenue in EMEA declined by 15.5% mainly attributable to lower net revenue of switch products. Demand for SMB products in EMEA was weaker than the prior year partly due to enforced business closures and uncertainties created by the pandemic.
Net revenue in APAC decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year. The decrease was mainly attributable to lower net revenue from our service provider channels of $19.4 million, which was largely driven by our service provider customers in Australia where we experienced declines in order volume in part due to COVID-19 pandemic induced lockdowns. From a product perspective, the decrease in APAC net revenue was primarily due to lower net revenue of broadband modem and gateway and switch products, partially offset by higher net revenue of home wireless products.
2019 vs 2018
Net revenue in Americas decreased for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the prior year. The decline was precipitated by a contraction of the North American WiFi market on a year over year basis and lower net revenue from service provider channels. The lower net revenue was primarily attributable to lower net revenue of our home wireless and mobile products, partially offset by higher net revenue of our broadband modem and gateway products. The contraction in the North American WiFi market in fiscal 2019 impacted demand for home wireless products from customer channels. The mobile product decrease was mainly attributable to net revenue from service provider channels. Net revenue from service provider channels declined by $28.8 million across all products in fiscal 2019, primarily driven by the culmination of a supply agreement with one of our North American partners. Additionally, net revenue was negatively impacted by increased channel promotional activities and sales returns deemed to be a reduction of revenue compared to the prior year. On a segment basis, net revenue from Connected Home and SMB in Americas fell by 8.1% and 1.0% compared to the prior year, respectively.
Net revenue in EMEA decreased for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the prior year. Net revenue in EMEA was negatively impacted by $8.3 million due to the strengthening of the U.S. dollar compared to the prior year. The decrease in EMEA was primarily attributable to lower net revenue of our home wireless products, partially offset by increased net revenue of our mobile products. On a segment basis, net revenue from Connected Home and SMB in EMEA fell by 6.5% and 1.0% compared to the prior year, respectively.
APAC net revenue decreased for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the prior year. Net revenue in the Greater China region declined in the second half of 2019 impacted by geopolitical challenges. The fall in APAC was primarily attributable to lower net revenue of our broadband modem and gateway and home wireless products, partially offset by higher net revenue of mobile and switch products. On a segment basis, net revenue from Connected Home and SMB in APAC fell by 7.0% and increased by 3.6% compared to the prior year, respectively.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Cost of revenue consists primarily of the following: the cost of finished products from our third party manufacturers; overhead costs, including purchasing, product planning, inventory control, warehousing and distribution logistics; third-party software licensing fees; inbound freight; import duties/tariffs; warranty costs associated with returned goods; write-downs for excess and obsolete inventory; amortization of certain acquired intangibles and capitalized software development cost; and costs attributable to the provision of service offerings.
We outsource our manufacturing, warehousing and distribution logistics. We believe this outsourcing strategy allows us to better manage our product costs and gross margin. Our gross margin can be affected by a number of factors, including fluctuation in foreign exchange rates, sales returns, changes in average selling prices, end-user customer rebates and other channel sales incentives, changes in our cost of goods sold due to fluctuations in prices paid for components, net of vendor rebates, warranty and overhead costs, inbound freight and duty/tariffs, conversion costs, charges for excess or obsolete inventory, amortization of acquired intangibles and capitalized software development costs. The following table presents costs of revenue and gross margin, for the periods indicated:
2020 vs 2019
Cost of revenue increased for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year, mainly due to higher net revenue.
Gross margin was flat for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year. We experienced an improvement in product margins associated with Connected Home products, partially offset by a lower mix of SMB products as a percentage of net revenue as SMB products typically carry a higher gross margin than Connected Home products. In addition, we experienced increases in freight expenses to support increased demand and to mitigate supply chain shortages, mainly offset by reductions to channel promotional activities.
2019 vs 2018
Cost of revenue decreased for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the prior year, primarily due to net revenue declining.
Gross margin decreased for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the prior year. Gross margin was negatively impacted by the imposition of Section 301 tariffs originally announced in late 2018 and cost inefficiencies experienced in our new manufacturing locations outside of China, an increase in channel promotional activities as a percentage of net revenue as well as foreign exchange headwinds due to the strengthening of the U.S. dollar.
For fiscal 2021, we expect gross margins to be in line or slightly above fiscal 2020 levels. We have experienced disruptions to our supply chain since the onset of the pandemic, with partners being affected by factory uptime, scarcity of component materials and limited capacity to transport cargo via sea and air. These disruptions have resulted in the elongation of our supply chain. If such disruptions become widespread, they could significantly hamper our ability to fulfill the heightened demand for our products. Forecasting gross margin percentages is difficult, and there are a number of risks related to our ability to maintain or improve our current gross margin levels. Our cost of revenue as a percentage of net revenue can vary significantly based upon factors such as: uncertainties surrounding revenue levels, including future pricing and/or potential discounts as a result of the economy or in response to the strengthening of the U.S. dollar in our international markets, competition, the timing of sales, and related production level variances; import customs duties and imposed tariffs; changes in technology; changes in product mix; variability of stock-based compensation costs; royalties to third parties; fluctuations in freight costs; manufacturing and purchase price variances; changes in prices on commodity components; and warranty costs. We expect that revenue derived from paid subscription service plans will continue to increase in the future, which may have a positive impact on our gross margin. However, we may experience fluctuations in our gross margin as a result of the factors discussed above.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expense consists primarily of personnel expenses, payments to suppliers for design services, safety and regulatory testing, product certification expenditures to qualify our products for sale into specific markets, prototypes, IT and facility allocations, and other consulting fees. Research and development expenses are recognized as they are incurred. Our research and development organization is focused on enhancing our ability to introduce innovative and easy-to-use products and services. The following table presents research and development expense, for the periods indicated:
2020 vs 2019
Research and development expense increased for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year, mainly due to increases in personnel-related expenditures of $5.8 million, driven primarily by higher variable compensation, and engineering projects and outside professional services of $5.2 million, driven primarily by higher spending on development of initiatives to support product and services growth. Research and development headcount increased to 311 as of December 31, 2020, from 273 as of December 31, 2019. The increase in research and development headcount was mainly attributable to the growth in our software service engineering team.
2019 vs 2018
Research and development expense decreased for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the prior year, due to a decline in IT and facility allocation of $6.2 million, partially offset by an increase of $1.7 million in engineering projects and outside professional services. The decline in IT and facility allocations primarily resulted from reduced expenditures post separation with Arlo. The increased expenditures on engineering projects and outside professional services were due to continuous investment in strategic focus areas as we seek to expand our product portfolio and service offerings. Research and development headcount was 273 as of December 31, 2019 as compared with 274 as of December 31, 2018.
We believe that innovation and technological leadership is critical to our future success, and we are committed to continuing a significant level of research and development to develop new technologies, products and services. We continue to invest in research and development to grow our cloud platform capabilities, our services and mobile applications and to expand our hardware product offerings focused on WiFi 6, WiFi 6E, Advanced 4G/5G mobile and 5G coverage solutions, Pro-AV, web-managed, app-managed, 10Gig and PoE switch products. We expect research and development expense as a percentage of net revenue in fiscal 2021 to be in line or slightly above fiscal year 2020 levels. Research and development remains critical to our future success and we expect to continue to allocate resources to help accelerate growth in key strategic areas such as the continued development of our WiFi 6 product portfolio as well as services capabilities and offerings. Research and development expenses will fluctuate depending on the timing and number of development activities in any given quarter and could vary significantly as a percentage of net revenue, depending on actual revenues achieved in any given quarter.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense consists primarily of advertising, trade shows, corporate communications and other marketing expenses, product marketing expenses, outbound freight costs, amortization of certain intangibles, personnel expenses for sales and marketing staff, technical support expenses, and IT and facility allocations. The following table presents sales and marketing expense, for the periods indicated:
2020 vs 2019
Sales and marketing expense increased for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year, primarily due to increases in outbound freight costs of $8.1 million, personnel-related expenditures of $2.5 million and outside professional services of $2.3 million, partially offset by a decrease of $1.4 million in marketing expenditures, mainly resulting from fewer marketing campaigns. The increase in outbound freight was due to higher net revenue compared to the prior year. The increase in personnel-related expenditures was due to higher variable compensation expenses mainly as a result of the increased sales for the year ended December 31, 2020. Sales and marketing headcount decreased from 283 as of December 31, 2019 to 261 as of December 31, 2020, primarily associated with restructuring activities during the latter part of fiscal 2019 as we reduced headcount in China and a number of other countries in APAC and EMEA. In addition, we closed offices in some of the affected locations.
2019 vs 2018
Sales and marketing expense decreased for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the prior year, primarily driven by decreases in personnel-related expenditures of $8.9 million, marketing expenditures of $3.1 million and IT and facility allocations of $1.6 million. Marketing expenditure decreased primarily due to fewer brand marketing campaigns. Sales and marketing headcount fell to 283 as of December 31, 2019 from 312 as of December 31, 2018, primarily associated with restructuring activities during the latter part of fiscal 2019 as mentioned above.
We expect our sales and marketing expense as a percentage of net revenue in fiscal 2021 to be slightly below fiscal 2020 levels. Expenses may fluctuate depending on revenue levels achieved as certain expenses, such as commissions, are determined based upon the revenues achieved. Forecasting sales and marketing expenses is highly dependent on expected revenue levels and could vary significantly depending on actual revenues achieved in any given quarter. Marketing expenses will also fluctuate depending upon the timing, extent and nature of marketing programs. Marketing expenditure committed with a customer is generally recorded as a reduction of net revenue per authoritative guidance.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense consists of salaries and related expenses for executives, finance and accounting, human resources, information technology, professional fees, including legal costs associated with defending claims against us, allowance for doubtful accounts, IT and facility allocations, and other general corporate expenses. The following table presents general and administrative expense, for the periods indicated:
2020 vs 2019
General and administrative expense increased for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year, primarily due to increases in personnel-related expenditures of $8.3 million and other general corporate expenses of $3.3 million. The increase in personnel-related expenditures was mainly due to increases in variable compensation primarily attributable to higher bonuses resulting from improved profitability year over year, stock-based compensation and other employee costs. The increase in other general corporate expenses was primarily the result of the prior year period benefitting from a recovery pertaining to value-added taxes previously incurred. General and administrative headcount was 142 as of December 31, 2020, as compared to 144 as of December 31, 2019.
2019 vs 2018
The decrease in general and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the prior year was primarily attributable to declines in personnel-related expenditures of $6.3 million, legal and professional services of $3.3 million, other general corporate expenses of $3.4 million and IT and facility allocations
of $1.7 million. The decrease in personnel-related expenditures was mainly due to lower average headcount and lower variable compensation during fiscal 2019 as compared with the prior year. The reduction in other general corporate expenses primarily related to value-added tax previously incurred and subsequently refunded as well as changes to estimates for value added tax payable. General and administrative headcount was 144 as of December 31, 2019 as compared with 143 as of December 31, 2018.
We expect our general and administrative expenses as a percentage of net revenue in fiscal 2021 to be in line or slightly below fiscal 2020 levels. General and administrative expenses could fluctuate depending on a number of factors, including the level and timing of expenditures associated with litigation defense costs in connection with the litigation matters described in Note 10, Commitments and Contingencies, in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Future general and administrative expense increases or decreases in absolute dollars are difficult to predict due to the lack of visibility of certain costs, including legal costs associated with defending claims against us, as well as legal costs associated with asserting and enforcing our intellectual property portfolio and other factors.
Other operating expenses, net
Other operating expenses, net consists of restructuring and other charges, litigation reserves, net, change in the fair value of contingent consideration and separation expense.
**
Percentage change not meaningful.
The change in Other operating expenses, net for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year, was primarily due to reduction in contingent consideration liability for prior acquisition given lower probability of achievement of milestones. The change in Other operating expenses, net for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the prior year, was not material.
Interest Income and Other Income (Expense), Net
Interest income represents amounts earned on our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments. Other income (expense), net primarily represents gains and losses on transactions denominated in foreign currencies, gains and losses on investments, and other non-operating income and expenses. The following table presents interest income and other income (expense), net for the periods indicated:
**
Percentage change not meaningful.
Interest income decreased for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, as compared to the prior years, respectively, mainly due to lower yield on invested balances in each year as compared to the prior year.
The change in other income (expense), net in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year, was primarily due to $6.2 million of impairment charges brought about by triggering events impacting the valuation of a number of our privately held long-term investments. The change in Other income (expense), net, for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the prior year, was not material. Our foreign currency hedging program effectively reduced volatility associated with hedged currency exchange rate movements. For a detailed discussion of our hedging program and related foreign currency contracts, refer to Note 6, Derivative Financial Instruments, in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Provision for Income Taxes
**
Percentage change not meaningful.
2020 vs 2019
The increase in tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, results primarily from an increase in pre-tax earnings coupled with the negative impact of stock-based compensation related to shortfalls that occurred during the year as well as the impact of limitations on current and future deductions for certain executive officers under IRC section 162(m). The increase in tax expense is partially offset by the release of a valuation allowance that was previously recorded against California deferred tax assets.
During fiscal year 2020, we evaluated the impact of the Global Intangible Low-Tax Income “GILTI”, Foreign Derived Intangible Income “FDII” and Base Erosion and Anti-abuse Tax “BEAT” provisions. These provisions resulted in a net reduction of tax of $1.6 million.
We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Our future foreign tax rate could be affected by changes in the composition in earnings in countries with tax rates differing from the U.S. federal rate. We are currently under examination by the Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) for our fiscal year ended December 31, 2018. We are also under examination in various other U.S. and foreign jurisdictions.
2019 vs 2018
The decrease in tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, resulted primarily from a decline in pre-tax earnings coupled with favorable benefits from the settlement of international tax audits and changes in estimate in tax expense recorded upon finalizing U.S. tax returns. These benefits were partially offset by the impact of stock-based compensation related to shortfalls that occurred during the year as well as the impact of limitations on current and future deductions for certain executive officers under IRC section 162(m).
During fiscal year 2019, we evaluated the impact of the Global Intangible Low-Taxed Income “GILTI”, Foreign Derived Intangible Income “FDII” and Base Erosion and Anti-abuse Tax “BEAT” provisions. These provisions resulted in a net addition to tax of $1.7 million. This amount is comprised of BEAT of $2.1 million offset by the impact of GILTI and FDII of $(0.4) million. For fiscal year 2018, the company estimated that these provisions would result on a net benefit of $(0.3) million. Included in the 2019 tax expense is a benefit of $(0.7) million related to the net impact of these provisions as reported on the final U.S. tax return for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Segment Information
A description of our products and services, as well as segment financial data, for each segment and a reconciliation of segment contribution income to income before income taxes can be found in Note 13, Segment Information, in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Connected Home Segment
2020 vs 2019
The increase in Connected Home net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to prior year, was primarily due to robust demand powered by unprecedented bandwidth consumption in the home where people have transitioned to conducting the majority of their daily lives as a result of the pandemic. This increase in demand was experienced across both our consumer and service provider channels. Connected Home net revenue from consumer channels increased by 39.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year, driven by increased demand for home wireless products, mainly WiFi 6 mesh systems, and WiFi 6 routers, partially offset by a decline in net revenue from AC router products. Connected Home net revenue from service provider channels increased by 49.6% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year, mainly due to increased demand for mobile products as a direct response to the pandemic to support applications such as distance learning and first responders’ activities. Geographically, the increase in demand from consumer channels was experienced across all regions while the increase in service provider was attributable to the U.S. and EMEA.
Connected Home contribution income increased for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year, primarily due to higher net revenue, higher gross margin attainment and lower operating expenses as a proportion of net revenue.
2019 vs 2018
Net revenue in Connected Home decreased for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the prior year. Net revenue from service provider channels fell $27.8 million compared with the prior year. In addition, the North American home WiFi market contracted in fiscal 2019 affecting net revenue from consumer channels. The lower revenue was primarily due to declined net revenue of our home wireless, mobile and broadband modem and gateway products. Within home wireless, we experienced declines in net revenue from AC router products, WiFi mesh systems and extenders, partially offset by net revenue generated from the introduction of WiFi 6 routers. On a geographic basis, we experience net revenue declines across all three regions.
Contribution income decreased for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the prior year, primarily due to lower net revenue and lower gross margin attainment. Contribution margin decreased for the year ended December 31, 2019 compare to the prior year primarily due to higher product acquisition costs resulting from the burden of Section 301 tariffs and inefficiencies associated with commencing manufacturing in new locations, increased channel promotion activities and foreign exchange headwinds due to the strengthening of the U.S. dollar.
SMB Segment
2020 vs 2019
SMB net revenue decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year, primarily due to enforced business closures and delays to infrastructure investment experienced in the second and third fiscal
quarters of 2020 upon onset of the pandemic. The decline in SMB net revenue was mainly attributable to lower net revenue from our switch products for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year. Geographically, SMB net revenue declined across all three regions for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year.
SMB contribution income decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year, primarily as a result of lower SMB net revenue, lower gross margin attainment and higher operating expenses as a proportion of net revenue.
2019 vs 2018
SMB net revenue was flat for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the prior year, primarily due to a decline in net revenue of our network storage products, substantially offset by growth in net revenue of our switch products. Geographically, net revenue grew in APAC, but declined in Americas and EMEA.
Contribution income decreased for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the prior year, primarily as a result of lower gross margin attainment, partially offset by lower operating expenses as a proportion of net revenue. Contribution margin decreased for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the prior year, primarily due to lower gross margin attainment mainly resulting from foreign exchange headwinds due to the strengthening of the U.S. dollar as well as higher provisions for sales returns.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of liquidity are cash, cash equivalents, short-term investments and cash generated from operations. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and short-term investment of $353.3 million, an increase of $157.6 million from December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to higher net income and positive working capital movements.
As of December 31, 2020, approximately 37% of our cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments were outside of the U.S. The cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments balances outside of the U.S. are subject to fluctuation based on the settlement of intercompany balances. As we repatriate these funds in accordance with our designation of funds not permanently reinvested outside of the U.S., we will be required to pay income taxes in certain U.S. states and applicable foreign withholding taxes during the period when such repatriation occurs. We have recorded deferred taxes for the tax effect of repatriating the funds to the U.S.
The following table presents our cash flows for the periods presented:
Continuing operating activities
Net cash provided by continuing operating activities was $181.2 million for fiscal 2020, compared to $13.5 million in fiscal 2019, primarily due to higher net income and favorable working capital movements. The higher net cash inflow from working capital was mainly driven by lower inventory holding, lower payments to trade suppliers and other accrued liabilities, partially offset by higher accounts receivable. Net cash provided by continuing operating activities was $13.5 million for fiscal 2019 as compared to net cash used in continuing operating activities of $15.1 million in fiscal 2018. The increase in cash inflows from continuing operating activities was primarily due to favorable working capital movements and higher net income. The lower net cash outflow from working capital
was mainly driven by lower account receivables and lower inventory holding, partially offset by higher payments to trade suppliers.
Our days sales outstanding ("DSO") decreased to 87 days as of December 31, 2020 as compared to 102 days and 97 days as of December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The improvement for 2020 compared with 2019 was a result of timing of shipments and a more favorable channel revenue mix. The increase in DSO for 2019 compared with 2018 was primarily attributable to the timing of shipments as well as mix of receivable balances with longer dated payment terms being higher proportionately to the prior year. Our accounts payable amounted to $90.9 million, $80.5 million and $139.7 million as of December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Inventory amounted to $172.1 million, $235.5 million and $243.9 million as of December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The increase in accounts payable as of December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year was due to timing of inventory receipts from our trade suppliers. The decrease in inventory year over year was due to higher net revenue. Comparing the year ended December 31, 2019 with the prior year, we experienced increases in accounts payable and inventory at the end of 2018 as a response to imposition of Section 301 tariffs which began to normalize by the end of 2019. Ending inventory turns were 5.9, 3.1 and 3.3 in the three months ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Looking forward, we expect to use cash to purchase inventory in the first half of 2021 to increase our inventory holding.
Continuing investing activities
Net cash used in continuing investing activities was $16.8 million for fiscal 2020, compared to $49.5 million of cash provided in fiscal 2019. The movement was mainly due to $70.8 million of cash received from maturities of short-term investments in fiscal 2019 with no corresponding inflow in fiscal 2020. Net cash provided by continuing investing activities increased by $21.3 million for fiscal 2019 as compared to fiscal 2018, primarily due to higher net proceeds from maturities of short-term investments, partially offset by increased long-term investments. In addition, we had a cash outflow of $14.4 million in connection with the acquisition of Meural in 2018 with no corresponding outflow in 2019.
Continuing financing activities
Net cash used in continuing financing activities decreased by $65.8 million in fiscal 2020 as compared to fiscal 2019, primarily due to lower stock repurchase activity, and higher proceeds from exercise of stock options. Net cash used in continuing financing activities increased by $48.2 million in fiscal 2019 as compared to fiscal 2018, primarily due to increased repurchases of common stock.
From time to time, our Board of Directors has authorized programs under which we may repurchase shares of our common stock. Under the authorizations, the timing and actual number of shares subject to repurchase are at the discretion of management and are contingent on a number of factors, such as levels of cash generation from operations, cash requirements for acquisitions and the price of our common stock. As of December 31, 2020, 2.6 million shares remained authorized for repurchase under the repurchase program. During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, we repurchased, as reported based on trade date, approximately 0.9 million, 2.4 million, and 0.5 million shares of common stock at a cost of $23.8 million, $75.9 million, and $30.0 million, respectively. We also repurchased, as reported based on trade date, approximately 198,000, 198,000, and 138,000 shares of common stock at a cost of $5.1 million, $6.5 million, and $8.1 million, to help administratively facilitate the withholding and subsequent remittance of personal income and payroll taxes for individuals receiving Restricted Stock Units. For a detailed discussion of our common stock repurchases, refer to Note 11, Stockholders’ Equity, in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We enter into foreign currency forward-exchange contracts, which typically mature within six months, to hedge a portion of our exposure to foreign currency fluctuations of foreign currency-denominated revenue, costs of revenue, certain operating expenses, receivables, payables, and cash balances. We record on the consolidated balance sheets at each reporting period the fair value of our forward-exchange contracts and record any fair value adjustments in our consolidated statements of operations and on our consolidated balance sheets. Gains and losses associated with currency rate changes on hedge contracts that are non-designated under the authoritative guidance for derivatives and hedging are recorded within other income (expense), net, offsetting foreign exchange gains and losses on our monetary assets and liabilities. Gains and losses associated with currency rate changes on hedge contracts that are designated cash flow hedges under the authoritative guidance for derivatives and hedging are recorded within accumulated other comprehensive income until the related revenue, costs of revenue, or expenses are recognized.
Based on our current plans and market conditions, we believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments, together with cash generated from operations, will be sufficient to satisfy our anticipated cash requirements for at least the next twelve months. However, we may require or desire additional funds to support our operating expenses and capital requirements or for other purposes, such as acquisitions, and may seek to raise such additional funds through public or private equity financing or from other sources. We cannot assure you that additional financing will be available at all or that, if available, such financing would be obtainable on terms favorable to us and would not be dilutive. Our future liquidity and cash requirements will depend on numerous factors, including the introduction of new products and potential acquisitions of related businesses or technology.
Backlog
As of December 31, 2020, we had a backlog of approximately $78.7 million, compared to approximately $35.3 million as of December 31, 2019, primarily due to product demand required in the future. Our backlog consists of hardware products for which customer purchase orders have been received and that are scheduled or in the process of being scheduled for shipment and is stated at purchase order price. As we typically fulfill orders received within a relatively short period (e.g., within a few weeks for our top three customers) after receipt, our revenue in any fiscal year depends primarily upon orders booked and the availability of supply of our products in that year. In addition, most of our backlog is subject to rescheduling or cancellation with minimal penalties. As a result, our backlog as of any particular date may not be an indicator of revenue for any succeeding period. Similarly, there is a lack of meaningful correlation between year-over-year changes in backlog as compared with year-over-year changes in revenue. Accordingly, we do not believe that backlog information is material to an understanding of our overall business, and backlog as of any particular date should not be considered a reliable indicator of our ability to achieve any particular level of revenue or financial performance.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our non-cancelable operating lease commitments, purchase obligations, other non-trade purchase commitments, and the Tax Act payables as of December 31, 2020:
We have entered into various master purchase agreements for inventory with suppliers. Generally, under these agreements, 50% of orders are cancelable by giving notice 46 to 60 days prior to the expected shipment date and 25% of orders are cancelable by giving notice 31 to 45 days prior to the expected shipment date. In fiscal 2020, we experienced an elongation of the time from order placement to production primarily due to component shortages and supply chain disruption brought about by the COVID-19 pandemic. We have responded by extending our ordering horizon to as long as 15 months. We may become liable for non-cancellable material components, such as chipsets purchased by the supplier to meet our purchase order, which is subsequently cancelled. Orders are non-cancelable within 30 days prior to the expected shipment date. For those orders not governed by master purchase agreements the commitments are governed by the commercial terms on our purchase orders subject to acknowledgment from our suppliers. As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $126.1 million in non-cancelable purchase commitments with suppliers. We establish a loss liability for all products we do not expect to sell for which we have committed purchases from suppliers. Such loss liability was included in Other accrued liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets. Our suppliers procure unique complex components on our behalf. If these components do not meet specified technical criteria or are defective, we should not be obligated to purchase the materials. However, disputes may arise as a result and significant resources may be spent resolving such disputes.
We lease office space, cars, distribution centers and equipment under non-cancelable operating leases with various expiration dates through December 2026. As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $37.8 million in
non-cancelable operating lease commitments. The terms of certain of our facility leases provide for rental payments on a graduated scale. Lease expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. Refer to Note 15, Leases, in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The amounts presented are consistent with contractual terms and are not expected to differ significantly, unless a substantial change in our headcount needs requires us to exit an office facility early or expand our occupied space.
As of December 31, 2020, we had long term, non-cancellable purchase commitments of $15.8 million pertaining to non-trade activities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had estimated long term liability of $8.9 million related to a one-time transaction tax that resulted from the passage of the Tax Act.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had $11.8 million and $11.1 million, respectively, of total gross unrecognized tax benefits and related interest and penalties. The timing of any payments that could result from these unrecognized tax benefits will depend upon a number of factors. The unrecognized tax benefits have been excluded from the contractual obligations table because reasonable estimates cannot be made of whether, or when, any cash payments for such items might occur. The possible reduction in liabilities for uncertain tax positions in multiple jurisdictions that may impact the statements of operations in the next 12 months is approximately $0.5 million, excluding the interest, penalties and the effect of any related deferred tax assets or liabilities.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of SEC Regulation S-K.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a complete description of recent accounting pronouncements, including the expected dates of adoption and estimated effects on financial condition and results of operations, refer to Note 1, The Company and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.