Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis provides material historical and prospective disclosures intended to enable investors and other users to assess NTIC’s financial condition and results of operations. Statements that are not historical are forward-looking and involve risks and uncertainties discussed under the heading “Part I. Item 1. Business-Forward-Looking Statements” and under the heading “Part I. Item 1A. Risk Factors.” The following discussion of the results of the operations and financial condition of NTIC should be read in conjunction with NTIC’s consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included under “Part II. Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis is organized in the following major sections:
●
Business Overview. This section provides a brief overview description of NTIC’s business, focusing in particular on developments during the most recent fiscal year.
●
NTIC’s Subsidiaries and Joint Venture Network. This section provides a brief overview of NTIC’s subsidiaries and its joint venture network, the joint ventures which are considered individually significant to NTIC’s consolidated assets and income, and how NTIC’s joint ventures are accounted for by NTIC.
●
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic. This section provides a brief summary of the impacts to date and potential future impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
●
Worldwide Supply Chain Disruptions. This section provides a brief summary of the impacts to date and potential future impacts of worldwide supply chain disruptions.
●
Financial Overview. This section provides a brief summary of NTIC’s financial results and financial condition for fiscal 2021 compared to 2020.
●
Sales and Expense Components. This section provides a brief description of the significant line items in NTIC’s consolidated statements of operations.
●
Results of Operations. This section provides an analysis of the significant line items in NTIC’s consolidated statements of operations.
●
Liquidity and Capital Resources. This section provides an analysis of NTIC’s liquidity and cash flows and a discussion of NTIC’s financial condition and financial commitments.
●
Inflation and Seasonality. This section describes the effects of inflation and seasonality, if any, on NTIC’s business and operating results.
●
Market Risk. This section describes material market risks to which NTIC is subject.
●
Related Party Transactions. This section describes any material related party transactions to which NTIC is a party.
●
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements. This section describes NTIC’s material off-balance sheet arrangements.
●
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates. This section discusses NTIC’s critical accounting policies and estimates, which require NTIC to exercise subjective or complex judgments in their application. NTIC’s significant accounting policies, including its critical accounting estimates, are summarized in Note 1 to NTIC’s consolidated financial statements.
●
Recent Accounting Pronouncements. This section references Note 2 to NTIC’s consolidated financial statements, which summarizes the effect of recently issued accounting pronouncements on NTIC’s results of operations and financial condition.
Business Overview
NTIC develops and markets proprietary, environmentally beneficial products and services in over 65 countries either directly or via a network of subsidiaries, joint ventures, independent distributors, and agents. NTIC’s primary business is corrosion prevention, marketed mainly under the ZERUST® brand. NTIC has been selling its proprietary ZERUST® products and services to the automotive, electronics, electrical, mechanical, military, and retail consumer markets for over 45 years and, in recent years, has targeted and expanded into the oil and gas industry. NTIC also markets and sells a portfolio of bio-based and certified compostable (fully biodegradable) polymer resin compounds and finished products under the Natur-Tec® brand. These products are intended to reduce NTIC’s customers’ carbon footprint and provide environmentally sound waste disposal options.
NTIC’s ZERUST® rust and corrosion inhibiting products include plastic and paper packaging, liquids, coatings, rust removers, cleaners, and diffusers as well as engineered solutions designed specifically for the oil and gas industry. NTIC also offers worldwide, on-site, technical consulting for rust and corrosion prevention issues. NTIC’s technical service consultants work directly with the end users of NTIC’s ZERUST® rust and corrosion inhibiting products to analyze their specific needs and develop systems to meet their performance requirements. In North America, NTIC sells its ZERUST® corrosion prevention solutions through a network of independent distributors and agents supported by a direct sales force.
Internationally, NTIC sells its ZERUST® corrosion prevention solutions through its wholly-owned subsidiary in China, NTIC (Shanghai) Co., Ltd. (NTIC China), starting September 1, 2021 its wholly-owned subsidiary in India, Harita-NTI Ltd., its majority-owned joint venture holding company for NTIC’s joint venture investments in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) region, NTI Asean LLC (NTI Asean), certain majority-owned and wholly-owned subsidiaries, and joint venture arrangements in North America, Europe, and Asia. NTIC also sells products directly to its European joint venture partners through its wholly-owned subsidiary in Germany, NTIC Europe GmbH (NTI Europe).
One of NTIC’s strategic initiatives is to expand into and penetrate other markets for its ZERUST® corrosion prevention technologies. Consequently, for the past several years, NTIC has focused significant sales and marketing efforts on the oil and gas industry, as the infrastructure that supports that industry is typically constructed using metals that are highly susceptible to corrosion. NTIC believes that its ZERUST® corrosion prevention solutions will minimize maintenance downtime on critical oil and gas industry infrastructure, extend the life of such infrastructure, and reduce the risk of environmental pollution due to leaks caused by corrosion.
NTIC markets and sells its ZERUST® rust and corrosion prevention solutions to customers in the oil and gas industry in a continuously increasing number of countries either directly, through its subsidiaries, or through its joint venture partners and other strategic partners. The sale of ZERUST® corrosion prevention solutions to customers in the oil and gas industry typically involves long sales cycles, often including multi-year trial periods with each customer and a slow integration process thereafter.
Natur-Tec® bio-based and compostable plastics are manufactured using NTIC’s patented and/or proprietary technologies and are intended to replace conventional petroleum-based plastics. The Natur-Tec® biopolymer resin compound portfolio includes formulations that have been optimized for a variety of applications, including blown-film extrusion, extrusion coating, injection molding, and engineered plastics. These resin compounds are certified to be fully biodegradable in a composting environment and are currently being used to produce finished products, including can liners, shopping and grocery bags, lawn and leaf bags, branded apparel packaging bags and accessories, and various foodservice items, such as disposable cutlery, drinking straws, food-handling gloves, and coated paper products. In North America, NTIC markets its Natur-Tec® resin compounds and finished products primarily through a network of regional and national distributors as well as independent agents. NTIC continues to see significant opportunities for finished bioplastic products and, therefore, continues to strengthen and expand its North American distribution network for finished Natur-Tec® bioplastic products.
Internationally, NTIC sells its Natur-Tec® resin compounds and finished products both directly and through its wholly-owned subsidiary in China and majority-owned subsidiaries in India and Sri Lanka, and through distributors and certain joint ventures.
NTIC’s Subsidiaries and Joint Venture Network
NTIC has ownership interests in 10 operating subsidiaries in North America, South America, Europe, and Asia, which are listed in “Part I. Item 1. Business” of this annual report on Form 10-K. The results of these subsidiaries are fully consolidated in NTIC’s consolidated financial statements, except for Harita-NTI Limited, which will be consolidated commencing September 1, 2021. On September 21, 2021, NTIC announced that it acquired the remaining 50% ownership interest in its Indian joint venture, Harita-NTI Limited, for $6.25 million in cash, effective as of September 1, 2021.
NTIC participates in 19 active joint venture arrangements in North America, Europe, and Asia. NTIC has historically funded its investments in joint ventures with cash generated from operations. NTIC’s receives funds from its joint ventures as fees for services that NTIC provides to its joint ventures and as dividend distributions. The fees for services provided to joint ventures are determined based on either a flat fee or a percentage of sales depending on local laws and tax regulations. With respect to NTIC’s joint venture in Germany (EXCOR), NTIC recognizes an agreed upon quarterly fee for services. NTIC recognizes equity income from each joint venture based on the overall profitability of the joint venture. Such profitability is subject to variability from quarter to quarter, which, in turn, subjects NTIC’s earnings to variability from quarter to quarter. The profits of each joint venture are shared by the respective joint venture owners in accordance with their respective ownership percentages. NTIC typically directly or indirectly owns 50% or less of each of its joint venture entities and, thus, does not control the decisions of these entities regarding whether to pay dividends and, if paid, what amount is paid in a given year. The payment of a dividend by an entity is determined by a joint vote of the owners and is not at the sole discretion of NTIC.
NTIC accounts for the investments and financial results of its joint ventures in its financial statements utilizing the equity method of accounting. NTIC considers EXCOR to be individually significant to NTIC’s consolidated assets and income as of August 31, 2021. NTIC considers EXCOR, ACOBAL SAS, ZERUST OY, ZERUST SPECIALTY TECH CO. LTD. and its former joint venture, Harita-NTI Limited, to be individually significant to NTIC’s consolidated assets and income as of August 31, 2020. Therefore, NTIC provides certain additional information regarding these entities in the notes to NTIC’s consolidated financial statements and in this section of this report. Additional information related to NTIC’s joint ventures is available in “Part I. Item 1. Business” of this annual report on Form 10-K.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak a global pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted the global economy, disrupted global supply chains and shipping, created significant volatility and disruption in financial markets and has resulted in an economic recession. The outbreak and continuing rapid spread of COVID-19 has resulted in a substantial curtailment of business activities worldwide and is causing weakened economic conditions, both in the United States and abroad.
As part of efforts to contain the spread of COVID-19, federal, state, local and foreign governments imposed various restrictions on the conduct of business and travel, some of which remain in place in whole or in part and some of which have been or may be reinstated. Government restrictions, such as stay-at-home orders, quarantines and worker absenteeism as a result of COVID-19, led to a significant number of business closures and slowdowns. These business closures and slowdowns adversely impacted and may continue to adversely impact NTIC directly and caused some of NTIC’s customers and suppliers to operate at a fraction of their capacities or wholly lock down, which disrupted and may continue to disrupt NTIC’s sales and production.
As the events surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic unfolded, NTIC’s primary focus was, and continues to be, the health, safety and wellbeing of its employees, customers and suppliers. In order to continue its operations, as permitted by respective state, local and foreign governments, NTIC has adopted numerous safety measures in accordance with U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, World Health Organization, and federal, state, local and foreign guidance in order to protect its employees, customers and suppliers. These safety measures include, but are not limited to, adhering to social distancing protocols, enabling the majority of its employees to work from home, suspending non-essential travel, disinfecting facilities and workspaces extensively and frequently, suspending all non-essential visitors and requiring employees who must be present at NTIC’s facilities to wear face coverings. NTIC expects to continue such safety measures for the foreseeable future and may take further actions, or adapt these existing policies, as government authorities may require or recommend or as it may determine to be in the best interests of its employees, customers and suppliers.
NTIC has been balancing its safety-focused approach with the needs of its customers. Government mandated measures resulting in the substantial curtailment of business activities generally have excluded certain essential businesses and services, including certain manufacturing. With the exception of the temporary closures of NTIC’s facilities in China and India during the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 and again sporadically during 2021, NTIC’s manufacturing activities are generally considered part of the “critical sector” with respect to state and local government orders. This has allowed NTIC to continue to receive orders and provide uninterrupted order fulfillment to its customers. However, its facilities have been operating at a reduced capacity in order to abide by local government requirements and recommendations, such as social distancing practices, and in response to reduced demand. During fiscal 2021, certain of NTIC’s facilities were impacted by reduced levels of production, manufacturing inefficiencies due to the reconfiguration of certain of its manufacturing processes in order to implement social distancing protocols and reduced demand. NTIC has engaged and continues to engage in communications with its suppliers in an attempt to identify and mitigate supply chain risks and shipping delays and proactively manage inventory levels in order to align production with demand. While domestic and international governmental measures may be modified or extended, NTIC currently expects that its global facilities will remain operational, although operating at reduced production capacity at certain of its facilities. However, such expectation is dependent upon future governmental actions and demand for NTIC’s products, the stability of its global supply chain and the ability of carriers to transport supplies to its facilities and products to its customers.
As a result of the global economic slowdown caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, NTIC experienced softened demand in various regions and markets during fiscal 2021, which had an adverse effect on NTIC’s operating results and financial condition. In addition, NTIC has experienced supply shortages and price increase on raw materials which have adversely affected its margins. NTIC has also experienced increased shipping costs and shipping delays as a result of freight container shortages. These issues are expected to persist into fiscal 2022. Due to the international reach of COVID-19, NTIC’s international joint ventures have also been adversely impacted. It is not possible to predict how long the pandemic will last or the time that it will take for economic activity to return to prior levels for all business units.
Any of these events could materially adversely affect NTIC’s business, operating results and financial condition.
Worldwide Supply Chain Disruptions
Worldwide supply chain disruptions, which were initially brought about by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, have persisted despite the recovery in the global economy and financial markets, and these issues are expected to continue in fiscal 2022. In fiscal 2021, NTIC experienced longer lead times for raw materials, was forced to find new suppliers of certain raw materials, and experienced raw material cost increases compared to prior fiscal years. Additionally, NTIC experienced significantly longer shipping times and significant price increases per shipping container compared to prior fiscal years due to ocean freight capacity issues resulting from increased demand for shipping and reduced capacity and equipment. These and other issues resulting from worldwide supply chain disruptions are expected to continue in fiscal 2022 and could continue to have a material adverse effect on NTIC’s business, operating results and financial condition. The precise financial impact and duration, however, cannot be reasonably estimated at this time.
Financial Overview
NTIC’s management, including its chief executive officer, who is NTIC’s chief operating decision maker, reports and manages NTIC’s operations in two reportable business segments based on products sold, customer base, and distribution center: ZERUST® products and services and Natur-Tec® products.
NTIC’s consolidated net sales increased 18.6% during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. NTIC’s consolidated net sales for fiscal 2021 were positively affected by increased demand globally as a result of the recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. During fiscal 2021, 80.6% of NTIC’s consolidated net sales were derived from sales of ZERUST® products and services, which increased 32.1% to $45,554,434 during fiscal 2021 compared to $34,474,535 during fiscal 2020. This increase was due to increased sales to new and existing customers in all countries in addition to the recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. During fiscal 2021, 19.4% of NTIC’s consolidated net sales were derived from sales of Natur-Tec® products compared to 27.6% during fiscal 2020. Net sales of Natur-Tec® products decreased 16.9% to $10,939,385 during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to a decrease in finished product sales in North America and at NTIC’s majority-owned subsidiary in India, Natur-Tec India Private Limited (Natur-Tec India).
Cost of goods sold as a percentage of net sales decreased to 65.4% during fiscal 2021 compared to 66.4% during fiscal 2020 primarily as a result of a decreased percentage of product sales from Natur-Tec® products, which have lower gross margins than NTIC’s traditional ZERUST® industrial products and services or its oil and gas products, partially offset by price increases on raw materials used in NTIC’s products.
NTIC’s equity in income from joint ventures increased 74.8% to $7,465,214 during fiscal 2021 compared to $4,270,327 during fiscal 2020. This increase was primarily due to a corresponding 39.0% increase in net sales at the joint ventures, which were $120,954,550 during fiscal 2021, compared to $87,030,062 during fiscal 2020. The majority of the increase in sales at the joint ventures is attributable to the increase in net sales at EXCOR, which were $46,522,688 during fiscal 2021, compared to $32,546,402 during fiscal 2020. The increase in the net sales of NTIC’s joint ventures was due primarily to increased sales to existing customers as a result of increased demand for existing products.
NTIC’s total operating expenses increased $1,355,173, or 5.8%, to $24,679,626 during fiscal 2021 compared to $23,324,453 during fiscal 2020. These increases were primarily due to increased expenses due to the resumption of travel and other activities as a result of the recovery associated with COVID-19 pandemic and increased research and development expenses. NTIC spent $4,400,479 in fiscal 2021 in connection with its research and development activities, compared to $3,979,455 in fiscal 2020.
NTIC had net income attributable to NTIC of $6,281,238, or $0.64 per diluted common share, for fiscal 2021, compared to net loss attributable to NTIC of $(1,337,709), or $(0.15) per diluted common share, for fiscal 2020. This increase was primarily a result of increased demand globally as a result of the recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic, although NTIC anticipates that its earnings may continue to be somewhat adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic during fiscal 2022. Additionally, NTIC anticipates that its quarterly net income or loss will continue to remain subject to significant volatility primarily due to the financial performance of its subsidiaries and joint ventures, sales of its ZERUST® products and services into the oil and gas industry, and sales of its Natur-Tec® bioplastics products, which fluctuate more on a quarterly basis than the traditional ZERUST® business.
NTIC’s working capital, defined as current assets less current liabilities, was $25,230,893 at August 31, 2021, including $7,680,641 in cash and cash equivalents and $4,634 in available for sale securities, compared to $27,104,746 at August 31, 2020, including $6,403,032 in cash and cash equivalents and $5,544,722 in available for sale securities. NTIC expects its working capital to decrease at the end of first quarter of fiscal 2022 as compared to August 31, 2021 due to the $6.25 million payment by NTIC for the remaining 50% ownership interest in Harita-NTI in September 2021.
During fiscal 2020, NTIC’s Board of Directors declared cash dividends of $0.065 per share during its first and second quarters. On April 23, 2020, NTIC announced the temporary suspension of its quarterly cash dividend pending clarity on the financial impact of COVID-19 on NTIC. On January 15, 2021, NTIC announced the reinstatement of its quarterly cash dividend. During fiscal 2021, NTIC’s Board of Directors declared cash dividends of $0.065 per share during its second, third and fourth quarters. On October 20, 2021, NTIC’s Board of Directors declared a cash dividend of $0.07 per share of NTIC’s common stock, payable on November 17, 2021 to stockholders of record on November 3, 2021. The declaration of future dividends is not guaranteed and will be determined by NTIC’s Board of Directors in light of conditions then existing, including NTIC’s earnings, financial condition, cash requirements, restrictions in financing agreements, business conditions, and other factors, including without limitation the effect of COVID-19 on its business, operating results, and financial condition.
Sales and Expense Components
The following is a description of the primary components of net sales and expenses:
Net Sales, Excluding Joint Ventures. NTIC derives net sales from the sale of its ZERUST® products and services and its Natur-Tec® products. NTIC sells its ZERUST® products and services and its Natur-Tec® products either directly, through its subsidiaries, or via a network of joint ventures, independent distributors, and agents. Net sales, excluding joint ventures represents net sales by NTIC either directly to end users or to distributors worldwide, but not sales to NTIC’s joint ventures and not sales by NTIC’s joint ventures. NTIC recognizes revenue from the sale of its products primarily upon shipment of the products.
Net Sales, To Joint Ventures. Net sales, to joint ventures represents net sales by NTIC to NTIC’s joint ventures, but not sales by NTIC either directly to end users or to distributors or sales by NTIC’s joint ventures. NTIC’s revenue recognition policy for sales to its joint ventures is the same as NTIC’s policy for sales to unaffiliated customers. NTIC recognizes revenue from the sale of its products to joint ventures primarily upon shipment of the products.
Cost of Goods Sold. Most of NTIC’s products are manufactured by third parties, and its cost of goods sold for those products consists primarily of the price invoiced by its third-party vendors. For the portion of products that NTIC manufactures, NTIC’s cost of goods sold for those products consists primarily of direct labor, allocated manufacturing overhead, raw materials, and components. NTIC’s margins on its Natur-Tec® resin compounds and finished products are generally smaller than its margins on its ZERUST® products and services, and NTIC’s margins on its ZERUST® products and services sold into the oil and gas industry are generally greater than its margins on its traditional ZERUST® products and services.
Equity in Income from Joint Ventures. NTIC’s equity in income from joint ventures consists of NTIC’s share of equity in income from each joint venture based on the overall profitability of the joint ventures. Such profitability is subject to variability from quarter to quarter, which, in turn, subjects NTIC’s earnings to variability from quarter to quarter. Traditionally, a portion of the equity income recorded in a given fiscal year is paid to the owners of the joint venture entity during the following fiscal year through a dividend. The payment of a dividend by a joint venture entity is determined by a vote of the joint venture owners and is not at the sole discretion of NTIC. NTIC typically owns only 50% or less of its joint venture entities and, thus, does not control the decisions of these entities regarding whether to pay dividends and, if paid, how much they should be in a given year.
Fees for Services Provided to Joint Ventures. NTIC provides certain services to its joint ventures, including consulting, legal, travel, insurance, technical, and marketing services based on licensing or other agreements with its joint ventures. NTIC receives fees for these services it provides to its joint ventures based primarily on the net sales by NTIC’s joint ventures, the latter of which are not included in NTIC’s net sales reflected on NTIC’s consolidated statements of operations. The fees for services received by NTIC from its joint ventures are generally determined based on either a flat fee or a percentage of net sales by NTIC’s joint ventures depending on local laws and tax regulations. With respect to EXCOR, NTIC receives an agreed upon fixed quarterly fee for such services. Under NTIC’s agreements with its joint ventures in which the fees for services is described, amounts are earned when product is shipped from joint venture facilities, at which point a sale is deemed to have occurred and results in obligation of the joint venture to pay the royalty and recognition of the fee by NTIC.
Selling Expenses. Selling expenses consist primarily of sales commissions and support costs for NTIC’s direct sale and distribution system and marketing costs.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and benefits and other costs for NTIC’s executives, accounting, stock-based compensation, finance, legal, information technology, and human resources functions.
Research and Development Expenses. Research and development expenses include costs associated with the design, development, market analysis, lab testing, and field trials and enhancements of NTIC’s products and services. NTIC expenses all costs related to product research and development as incurred. Research and development expenses reflect the net amount after being reduced by reimbursements related to certain research and development contracts. With respect to such research and development contracts, NTIC accrues proceeds received under the contracts and offsets research and development expenses incurred in equal installments over the timelines associated with completion of the contracts’ specific objectives and milestones.
Interest Income. Interest income consists of interest earned on investments, which typically consist of investment-grade, interest-bearing securities and money market accounts.
Interest Expense. Interest expense results primarily from interest associated with any borrowings under NTIC’s line of credit with PNC Bank.
Income Tax Expense. Income tax expense includes federal income taxes, foreign withholding taxes, income tax of consolidated entities in foreign jurisdictions, state income tax, and changes to NTIC’s deferred tax valuation allowance. NTIC utilizes the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes, which requires an asset and liability approach to financial accounting and reporting for income taxes. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are computed annually for differences between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities that will result in taxable or deductible amounts in the future, based on enacted tax laws and rates applicable to the periods in which the differences are expected to affect taxable income. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized. NTIC records a tax valuation allowance when it is more likely than not that some portion or all of its deferred tax assets will not be realized. NTIC makes this determination based on all available evidence, including historical data and projections of future results. Income tax expense is the tax payable or refundable for the period plus or minus the change during the period in deferred tax assets and liabilities.
Results of Operations
Fiscal Year 2021 Compared to Fiscal Year 2020
The following table sets forth NTIC’s results of operations for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020.
Net Sales. NTIC’s consolidated net sales increased 18.6% to $56,493,819 during fiscal 2021 compared to $47,638,691 during fiscal 2020. NTIC’s consolidated net sales to unaffiliated customers excluding NTIC’s joint ventures increased 17.1% to $53,470,623 during fiscal 2021 compared to $45,666,045 during fiscal 2020. Net sales to joint ventures increased 53.3% to $3,023,196 during fiscal 2021 compared to $1,972,646 during fiscal 2020. These increases were primarily a result of increased demand globally as a result of the recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic.
The following table sets forth NTIC’s net sales by product segment for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020:
During fiscal 2021, 80.6% of NTIC’s consolidated net sales were derived from sales of ZERUST® products and services, which increased 32.1% to $45,554,434 compared to $34,474,535 during fiscal 2020. NTIC has strategically focused its sales efforts for ZERUST® products and services on customers with sizeable corrosion problems in industry sectors that offer sizable growth opportunities, including the oil and gas sector. Overall, demand for ZERUST® products and services depends heavily on the overall health of the market segments to which NTIC sells its products, including the automotive, oil and gas, agriculture, and mining markets in particular. Beginning in fiscal 2021, the automotive industry experienced a microchip shortage that has decreased the production of vehicles. This decreased production has decreased demand for ZERUST® products and services within the automotive industry. The microchip shortage and the corresponding decrease in the production of vehicles is anticipated to continue into fiscal 2022. The increase in NTIC’s consolidated net sales derived from sales of ZERUST® products and services was primarily a result of increased demand across all geographies, partially offset by decreased demand from the automotive industry.
The following table sets forth NTIC’s net sales of ZERUST® products for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020:
NTIC’s total ZERUST® net sales increased during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to overall increased demand for ZERUST® industrial products and services. Overall demand for ZERUST® products and services depends heavily on the overall health of the markets in which NTIC sells its products, including the automotive, oil and gas, agriculture, and mining markets in particular.
ZERUST® oil and gas net sales increased 36.3% during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily as a result of new opportunities with new customers, partially offset by reduced demand as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. NTIC anticipates that its sales of ZERUST® products and services into the oil and gas industry will continue to remain subject to significant volatility from quarter to quarter as sales are recognized, specifically due to the volatility of oil prices. Demand for oil and gas products around the world depends primarily on market acceptance and the reach of NTIC’s distribution network. Because of the typical size of individual orders and overall size of NTIC’s net sales derived from sales of oil and gas products, the timing of one or more orders can materially affect NTIC’s quarterly sales compared to prior fiscal year quarters.
During fiscal 2021, 19.4% of NTIC’s consolidated net sales were derived from sales of Natur-Tec® products, compared to 27.6% during fiscal 2020. Sales of Natur-Tec® products decreased 16.9% to $10,939,385 during fiscal 2021 compared to $13,164,156 during fiscal 2020. The COVID pandemic has adversely impacted demand for Natur-Tec® products from across the apparel industry, as well as many large users of bioplastics, including college campuses, stadiums, arenas, restaurants, and corporate office complexes. NTIC currently expects these customers will be some of the last businesses to fully re-open, and accordingly, anticipates that the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to significantly adversely affect sales of Natur-Tec® products during fiscal 2022.
Cost of Goods Sold. Cost of goods sold increased 16.8% in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily as a result of the increase in net sales, as described above. Cost of goods sold as a percentage of net sales decreased to 65.4% during fiscal 2020 compared to 66.4% during fiscal 2020 primarily due to changes in product mix. Sales from Natur-Tec® products have lower gross margins than NTIC’s traditional ZERUST® oil and gas products. This decrease was partially offset by price increases on raw materials used in NTIC’s products.
Equity in Income from Joint Ventures. NTIC’s equity in income from joint ventures increased 74.8% to $7,465,214 during fiscal 2021 compared to $4,270,327 during fiscal 2020. This increase was primarily a result of increased profitability of the joint ventures, which fluctuates based on net sales, during the fiscal 2021. Of the total equity in income from joint ventures, NTIC had equity in income from joint ventures of $4,400,403 attributable to EXCOR during fiscal 2021 compared to $2,622,423 attributable to EXCOR during fiscal 2020. NTIC had equity in income of all other joint ventures of $3,064,811 during fiscal 2021 compared to $1,647,904 during fiscal 2020.
Fees for Services Provided to Joint Ventures. NTIC recognized fee income for services provided to joint ventures of $5,964,260 during fiscal 2021 compared to $4,612,885 during fiscal 2020, representing an increase of 29.3%, or $1,351,375. Fee income for services provided to joint ventures is traditionally a function of the sales made by NTIC’s joint ventures; however, at various joint ventures, the fee income for services is a fixed amount that does not fluctuate with the increases in sales which was experienced by certain joint ventures during fiscal 2021. Total net sales of NTIC’s joint ventures increased $33,924,488 to $120,954,550 during fiscal 2021 compared to $87,030,062 during fiscal 2020, representing an increase of 39.0%. Net sales of NTIC’s joint ventures are not included in NTIC’s product sales and are not included in NTIC’s consolidated financial statements. Of the total fee income for services provided to joint ventures, fees of $920,902 were attributable to EXCOR during fiscal 2021 compared to $843,752 attributable to EXCOR during fiscal 2020.
Selling Expenses. NTIC’s selling expenses increased 12.8% in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 due primarily to increased travel expenses and personnel expense compared to the expenses incurred during fiscal 2020. Selling expenses as a percentage of net sales decreased to 21.3% for fiscal 2021 compared to 22.4% in fiscal 2020 primarily due to the fluctuations in net sales and selling expenses, as previously described.
General and Administrative Expenses. NTIC’s general and administrative expenses decreased 4.9% in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to decreased travel expenses and other expenses due to work from home arrangements necessitated by the COVID-19 pandemic. As a percentage of net sales, general and administrative expenses decreased to 14.6% for fiscal 2021 from 18.2% for fiscal 2020 primarily due to the decrease in general and administrative expenses, as well as the increase in net sales, as previously described.
Research and Development Expenses. NTIC’s research and development expenses increased 10.6% in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to increased personnel and development efforts, partially offset by decreased travel expenses and other expenses due to work from home arrangements necessitated by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Interest Income. NTIC earned net interest income of $151,875 in fiscal 2021 compared to $167,733 in fiscal 2020 due primarily to volatile changes to the invested cash in a conservative bond fund.
Income Before Income Tax Expense. NTIC had income before income tax expense of $8,458,642 for fiscal 2021 compared to income before income tax expense of $1,739,875 for fiscal 2020.
Income Tax Expense. Income tax expense was $1,461,905 during fiscal 2021 compared to $2,674,635 during fiscal 2020 for an effective tax rate of 17.3% and 153.7%, respectively. Income tax expense during fiscal 2020 includes $1,626,251 related to the impact of a tax valuation allowance recorded with respect to NTIC’s domestic deferred tax assets during fiscal 2020.
Net Income (Loss) Attributable to NTIC. Net income attributable to NTIC was $6,281,238, or $0.64 per diluted common share, for fiscal 2021 compared to a net loss attributable to NTIC of $(1,337,709), or $(0.15) per diluted common share, for fiscal 2020, an increase of $7,618,947 or $0.79 per diluted share. This increase was primarily the result of increased income from joint venture operations and increased gross profit during fiscal 2021.
NTIC anticipates that its earnings will be adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic throughout fiscal 2022 and that its quarterly net income or loss will continue to remain subject to significant volatility primarily due to the financial performance of its subsidiaries and joint ventures, sales of its ZERUST® products and services into the oil and gas industry, and sales of its Natur-Tec® bioplastics products, which fluctuate more on a quarterly basis than the traditional ZERUST® business.
Other Comprehensive Income - Foreign Currency Translations Adjustment. The changes in the foreign currency translations adjustment were due to the fluctuation of the U.S. dollar compared to the Euro and other foreign currencies during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Cash and Working Capital. As of August 31, 2021, NTIC’s working capital, defined as current assets less current liabilities, was $25,230,893, including $7,680,641 in cash and cash equivalents and $4,634 in available for sale securities, compared to working capital of $27,104,746, including $6,403,032 in cash and cash equivalents and $5,544,722 in available for sale securities, as of August 31, 2020. The decrease in NTIC’s working capital is primarily the result of the purchase of property and equipment partially offset by an increase of dividends received from joint ventures and the collection of outstanding receivables.
As of August 31, 2021, NTIC has a revolving line of credit with PNC Bank of $5.0 million, which was increased from $3.0 million effective as of August 31, 2021. No amounts were outstanding under the line of credit as of August 31, 2021. Outstanding advances under the line of credit bear interest at the daily London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) plus 250 basis points (2.50%). The revolving line of credit matures on February 22, 2022. The line of credit is governed under an amended and restated loan agreement. The loan agreement contains standard covenants, including affirmative financial covenants, such as the maintenance of a minimum fixed charge coverage ratio, and negative covenants, which, among other things, limit the incurrence of additional indebtedness, loans and equity investments, disposition of assets, mergers and consolidations and other matters customarily restricted in such agreements. Under the loan agreement, NTIC is subject to a minimum fixed charge coverage ratio of 1.10:1.00. As of August 31, 2021, NTIC was in compliance with all debt covenants. As of August 31, 2021, NTIC did not have any letters of credit outstanding with respect to the letter of credit sub-facility available under the revolving line of credit with PNC Bank.
NTIC believes that a combination of its existing cash and cash equivalents, available for sale securities, forecasted cash flows from future operations, anticipated distributions of earnings, anticipated fees to NTIC for services provided to its joint ventures, and funds available through existing or anticipated financing arrangements will be adequate to fund its existing operations, investments in new or existing joint ventures or subsidiaries, capital expenditures, debt repayments, cash dividends, and any stock repurchases for at least the next 12 months. During fiscal 2022, NTIC expects to continue to invest directly and through its use of working capital in Harita NTI Limited, NTIC China, Zerust Mexico, NTI Europe, its joint ventures, research and development, marketing efforts, resources for the application of its corrosion prevention technology in the oil and gas industry, and its Natur-Tec® bio-plastics business, although the amounts of these various investments are not known at this time. In order to take advantage of such new product and market opportunities to expand its business and increase its revenues, NTIC may decide to finance such opportunities by borrowing under its revolving line of credit or raising additional financing through the issuance of debt or equity securities. There is no assurance that any financing transaction will be available on terms acceptable to NTIC or at all or that any financing transaction will not be dilutive to NTIC’s current stockholders.
NTIC traditionally has used the cash generated from its operations, distributions of earnings from joint ventures, and fees for services provided to its joint ventures to fund NTIC’s new technology investments and capital contributions to new and existing subsidiaries and joint ventures. NTIC’s joint ventures traditionally have operated with little or no debt and have been self-financed with minimal initial capital investment and minimal additional capital investment from their respective owners. Therefore, NTIC believes there is limited exposure by NTIC’s joint ventures that could materially impact their respective operations and/or liquidity.
Uses of Cash and Cash Flow. Net cash provided by operating activities during fiscal 2021 was $2,892,940, which resulted principally from NTIC’s net income, dividends received from joint ventures, stock-based compensation, depreciation, amortization and increases in accounts payable and accrued liabilities, partially offset by NTIC’s equity in income from joint ventures and an increase in accounts receivable and prepaid expenses and other. Net cash provided by operating activities during fiscal 2020 was $4,912,070, which resulted principally from dividends received from joint ventures, stock-based compensation, depreciation, amortization and deferred income taxes, partially offset by NTIC’s net loss, equity in income from joint ventures, and decreases in accrued liabilities and accounts payable.
NTIC’s cash flows from operations are impacted by significant changes in certain components of NTIC’s working capital, including inventory turnover and changes in receivables and payables. NTIC considers internal and external factors when assessing the use of its available working capital, specifically when determining inventory levels and credit terms of customers. Key internal factors include existing inventory levels, stock reorder points, customer forecasts, and customer requested payment terms. Key external factors include the availability of primary raw materials and sub-contractor production lead times. NTIC’s typical contractual terms for trade receivables, excluding joint ventures, are traditionally 30 days and 90 days for trade receivables from its joint ventures. Before extending unsecured credit to customers, excluding NTIC’s joint ventures, NTIC reviews customers’ credit histories and will establish an allowance for uncollectible accounts based upon factors surrounding the credit risk of specific customers and other information. Accounts receivable over 30 days are considered past due for most customers. NTIC does not accrue interest on past due accounts receivable. If accounts receivables in excess of the provided allowance are determined uncollectible, they are charged to selling expense in the period that the determination is made. Accounts receivable are deemed uncollectible based on NTIC exhausting reasonable efforts to collect. NTIC’s typical contractual terms for receivables for services provided to its joint ventures are 90 days. NTIC records receivables for services provided to its joint ventures on an accrual basis, unless circumstances exist that make the collection of the balance uncertain, in which case the fee income will be recorded on a cash basis until there is consistency in payments. This determination is handled on a case-by-case basis.
NTIC experienced an increase in trade receivables and an increase in inventory as of August 31, 2021 compared to August 31, 2020. Trade receivables, excluding joint ventures, as of August 31, 2021 increased $3,056,593 compared to August 31, 2020, primarily related to an increase in sales.
Outstanding trade receivables, excluding joint ventures balances, as of August 31, 2021 increased by an average of 11 days to an average of 76 days from balances outstanding from these customers as of August 31, 2020.
Outstanding trade receivables from joint ventures as of August 31, 2021 increased $148,908 compared to August 31, 2020 primarily due to the timing of payments. Outstanding balances from trade receivables from joint ventures decreased by an average of 13 days as of August 31, 2021 to an average of 75 days from an average of 88 days from balances outstanding from these customers compared to August 31, 2020. The average days outstanding of trade receivables from joint ventures as of August 31, 2021 were primarily due to the receivable balances at NTIC’s joint ventures in Indonesia, Thailand and India.
Outstanding receivables for services provided to joint ventures as of August 31, 2021 increased $577,841 compared to August 31, 2020, and the average days to pay increased from an average of 73 days to an average of 92 days, compared to August 31, 2020.
Net cash used in investing activities during fiscal 2021 was $103,316, which was primarily the result of the purchase of available for sale securities, purchases of property and equipment and investments in patents, partially offset by proceeds from the sale of available for sale securities. Net cash used in investing activities during fiscal 2020 was $2,784,682, which was primarily the result of the purchase of available for sale securities, purchases of property and equipment and investments in patents, partially offset by proceeds from the sale of available for sale securities.
Net cash used in financing activities for fiscal 2021 was $1,522,209, which resulted from dividends paid on NTIC common stock and dividends paid to a non-controlling interest, partially offset by proceeds from NTIC’s employee stock purchase plan and proceeds from stock option exercises. Net cash used in financing activities for fiscal 2020 was $1,518,005, which resulted from dividends paid on NTIC common stock and a dividend paid to a non-controlling interest, partially offset by proceeds from NTIC’s employee stock purchase plan.
Share Repurchase Plan. On January 15, 2015, NTIC’s Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to $3,000,000 in shares of NTIC common stock through open market purchases or unsolicited or solicited privately negotiated transactions. This program has no expiration date but may be terminated by NTIC’s Board of Directors at any time. As of August 31, 2021, up to $2,640,548 in shares of NTIC common stock remained available for repurchase under NTIC’s stock repurchase program. No shares of NTIC common stock were repurchased during fiscal 2021 or fiscal 2020.
Cash Dividends. During fiscal 2021, NTIC’s Board of Directors declared cash dividends on the following dates in the following amounts to holders of record of NTIC’s common stock as of the following record dates:
On October 20, 2021, NTIC’s Board of Directors declared a cash dividend of $0.07 per share of NTIC’s common stock, payable on November 17, 2021 to stockholders of record on November 3, 2021.
During fiscal 2020, NTIC’s Board of Directors declared cash dividends on the following dates in the following amounts to holders of record of NTIC’s common stock as of the following record dates:
On April 23, 2020, NTIC announced the temporary suspension of its quarterly cash dividend pending clarity on the financial impact of COVID-19 on NTIC. Therefore, NTIC’s Board of Directors did not declare a cash dividend during the quarter ended May 31, 2020, the quarter ended August 31, 2020, or the quarter ended November 30, 2020. On January 15, 2021, NTIC announced the reinstatement of its quarterly cash dividend.
The declaration of future dividends is not guaranteed and will be determined by NTIC’s Board of Directors in light of conditions then existing, including NTIC’s earnings, financial condition, cash requirements, restrictions in financing agreements, business conditions, and other factors, including without limitation the effect of COVID-19 on its business, operating results, and financial condition.
Capital Expenditures and Commitments. NTIC spent $5,532,750 on capital expenditures during fiscal 2021, which related primarily to the purchase of real estate, a building and equipment in China. On July 7, 2021, NTIC (Shanghai) Co., Ltd., a wholly-owned subsidiary of NTIC, entered into a Real Estate Purchase and Sales Contract with Shanghai FASTO Investment Group Limited Company, pursuant to which NTIC (Shanghai) Co., Ltd. agreed to acquire an approximately 1,950 square meter industrial building and the right to use certain real estate in the Qingpu District of Shanghai, China for a purchase price of approximately RMB 32.6 million yuan (approximately USD $5.1 million), not including approximately RMB 10 million yuan (approximately USD $1.6 million) in anticipated renovation, equipment, transaction and other costs and expenses. The property will be used as the new corporate headquarters of NTIC (Shanghai) Co., Ltd.
NTIC expects to spend an aggregate of approximately $2,200,000 to $2,500,000 on capital expenditures during fiscal 2022, which it expects will relate primarily to anticipated renovation and equipment costs, as described above.
Contractual Obligations. Set forth below is information concerning NTIC’s known contractual obligations as of August 31, 2021 that are fixed and determinable by year starting with the twelve months ending August 31, 2022.
Inflation and Seasonality
Inflation in the United States and abroad historically has had little effect on NTIC. Although NTIC’s business historically has not been seasonal, NTIC believes there is now some seasonality in its business. NTIC believes its net sales in the second fiscal quarter were adversely affected by the long Chinese New Year, the North American holiday season, and overall less corrosion taking place at lower winter temperatures worldwide.
Market Risk
NTIC is exposed to some market risk stemming from changes in foreign currency exchange rates, commodity prices, and interest rates.
Because the functional currency of NTIC’s foreign operations and investments in its foreign joint ventures is the applicable local currency, NTIC is exposed to foreign currency exchange rate risk arising from transactions in the normal course of business. NTIC’s principal exchange rate exposure is with the Euro, the Japanese Yen, the Indian Rupee, the Chinese Renminbi, the South Korean Won, and the English Pound against the U.S. Dollar. NTIC’s fees for services provided to joint ventures and dividend distributions from these foreign entities are paid in foreign currencies and, thus, fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates could result in declines in NTIC’s reported net income. Since NTIC’s investments in its joint ventures are accounted for using the equity method, any changes in foreign currency exchange rates would be reflected as a foreign currency translation adjustment and would not change NTIC’s equity in income from joint ventures reflected in its consolidated statements of operations. NTIC does not hedge against its foreign currency exchange rate risk.
Some raw materials used in NTIC’s products are exposed to commodity price changes. The primary commodity price exposures are with a variety of plastic resins.
Any outstanding advances under NTIC’s $5,000,000 amended and restated revolving line of credit with PNC Bank bear interest at an annual rate based on daily LIBOR plus 2.50%. As of August 31, 2021, NTIC had no borrowings under the line of credit. This line of credit was increased from $3,000,000 to $5,000,000 effective as of August 31, 2021.
Related Party Transactions
Since NTIC’s joint ventures are considered related parties, NTIC recorded sales to its joint ventures as a separate line item on the face of NTIC’s consolidated statements of operations and recorded fees for services provided to its joint ventures as separate line items on the face of NTIC’s consolidated statements of operations. NTIC also records trade receivables from joint ventures, receivables for fees for services provided to joint ventures, and NTIC’s investments in joint ventures as separate line items on its consolidated balance sheets.
NTIC established its joint venture network approximately 30 years ago as a method to increase its worldwide distribution network for ZERUST® rust and corrosion inhibiting products and services. NTIC participates, either directly or indirectly, in 18 active joint venture arrangements in North America, Europe, and Asia. Each of these joint ventures generally manufactures and markets finished products in the geographic territory to which it is assigned. NTIC’s joint venture partners are knowledgeable in the applicable environmental, labor, tax, and other requisite regulations and laws of the respective foreign countries in which they operate, as well as the local customs and business practices. NTIC’s revenue recognition policy for sales to its joint ventures is the same as its policy for sales to unaffiliated customers.
The fees for services provided to joint ventures are determined based on either a flat fee or a percentage of sales depending on local laws and tax regulations. With respect to NTIC’s joint venture in Germany, EXCOR, NTIC recognizes an agreed upon quarterly fee for such services. NTIC records revenue related to fees for services provided to joint ventures when earned, amounts are determinable, and collectability is reasonably assured. Under NTIC’s agreements with its joint ventures, fee amounts are earned when product is shipped from joint venture facilities. NTIC reviews the financial situation of each joint venture to assist in the likelihood of collections on amounts earned. From time to time, NTIC elects to account for such fees on a cash basis for certain joint ventures when uncertainty exists surrounding the collections of such fees. There are no fees being accounted for in this manner at present. The expenses incurred in support of its joint ventures are direct expenses that NTIC incurs related to its joint ventures and include such items as employee compensation and benefit expenses, travel expense, insurance, consulting expense, legal expense, and lab supplies and testing expense.
See Note 13 to NTIC’s consolidated financial statements for other related party transaction disclosures.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
NTIC does not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, which are established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet financial arrangements. As such, NTIC is not materially exposed to any financing, liquidity, market, or credit risk that could arise if NTIC had engaged in such arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of NTIC’s consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amount of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. The Securities and Exchange Commission has defined a company’s most critical accounting policies as those that are most important to the portrayal of its financial condition and results of operations and those which require the company to make its most difficult and subjective judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates of matters that are inherently uncertain. Based on this definition, NTIC has identified the following critical accounting policies. Although NTIC believes that its estimates and assumptions are reasonable, they are based upon information available when they are made. Actual results may differ significantly from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Principles of Consolidation
NTIC evaluates its voting and variable interests in entities on a qualitative and quantitative basis. NTIC consolidates entities in which it concludes it has the power to direct the activities that most significantly impact an entity’s economic success and has the obligation to absorb losses or the right to receive benefits that could be significant to the entity. All such relationships are evaluated on an ongoing basis. The consolidated financial statements included in this report include the accounts of Northern Technologies International Corporation, its wholly-owned subsidiaries, Northern Technologies Holding Company, LLC, NTIC (Shanghai) Co., Ltd., NTIC Europe GmbH and ZERUST-EXCOR MEXICO, S. de R.L. de C.V., NTIC’s majority-owned subsidiary in Brazil, Zerust Prevenção de Corrosão S.A., NTIC’s majority-owned holding company, NTI Asean LLC, and NTIC’s majority-owned subsidiary in India, Natur-Tec India Private Limited, Natur-Tec Lanka, Zerust Singapore Pte Ltd (Zerust Singapore) and Zerust Vietnam Co. Ltd (Zerust Vietnam). NTIC’s consolidated financial statements do not include the accounts of any of its joint ventures. Effective as of September 1, 2021, Harita-NTI Limited will be consolidated in NTIC’s consolidated financial statements.
Investments in Joint Ventures and Recoverability of Investments in Joint Ventures
NTIC’s investments in its joint ventures are accounted for using the equity method. NTIC assesses its joint ventures for impairment on an annual basis as of August 31 of each year as part of its fiscal year end analysis. In addition to the annual review for impairment, NTIC reviews the operating results of each joint venture on a quarterly basis in comparison to its historical operating results and its accrual for fees for services provided to joint ventures. If the operating results of a joint venture do not meet NTIC’s financial performance expectations, an additional evaluation is performed on the joint venture. In addition to the annual assessments for impairment, non-periodic assessments for impairment may occur if cash remittances are less than accrued balances, a joint venture’s management requests capital, or other events occur suggesting anything other than temporary decline in value. If an investment were determined to be impaired, then a reserve would be created to reflect the impairment on the financial results of NTIC. NTIC’s evaluation of its investments in joint ventures requires NTIC to make assumptions about future cash flows of its joint ventures. These assumptions require significant judgment, and actual results may differ from assumed or estimated amounts.
Investment at Carrying Value
If NTIC is no longer able to exercise significant influence over operating and financial policy of a joint venture previously accounted for under the equity method, it maintains the investment at the carrying value as of the date that significant influence no longer exists and discontinues accruing the proportionate earnings or losses of the investment.
Investments are considered to be impaired when a decline in fair value is judged to be other-than-temporary. Fair value is calculated based on publicly available market information or other estimates determined by management. NTIC employs a systematic methodology on a quarterly basis that considers available quantitative and qualitative evidence in evaluating potential impairment of its investments. If the cost of an investment exceeds its fair value, NTIC evaluates, among other factors, general market conditions, credit quality of debt instrument issuers, the duration and extent to which the fair value is less than cost, and for equity securities, its intent and ability to hold, or plans to sell, the investment. NTIC also considers specific adverse conditions related to the financial health of and business outlook for the investee, including industry and sector performance, changes in technology, and operational and financing cash flow factors. Once a decline in fair value is determined to be other-than-temporary, an impairment charge is recorded to other income (expense), and a new cost basis in the investment is established.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is measured based on consideration specified in the contract with a customer, adjusted for any applicable estimates of variable consideration and other factors affecting the transaction price, including noncash consideration, consideration paid or payable to customers, and significant financing components. While most of NTIC’s revenue is contracted with customers through one-time purchase orders and short-term contracts, NTIC does have long-term arrangements with certain customers. Revenue from all customers is recognized when a performance obligation is satisfied by transferring control of a distinct good or service to a customer. The transaction price for NTIC’s products is the invoiced amount. Revenue is recognized when transfer of control occurs as defined by the terms in the customer agreement, generally upon shipment of product.
With respect to recording revenue related to fees earned for services provided to NTIC’s joint ventures, amounts are earned when product is shipped from joint venture facilities, at which point a sale is deemed to have occurred and results in obligation for the joint venture to pay the royalty and recognition of the fee by NTIC. The support and services NTIC provides its joint ventures include consulting, travel, insurance, technical and marketing services to existing joint ventures, legal fees incurred in the establishment of new joint ventures, registration and promotion and legal defense of worldwide trademarks, and legal fees incurred in connection with the filing of patent applications based on licensing or other agreements with its joint ventures. NTIC receives fees for the services it provides to its joint ventures based primarily on the net sales by NTIC’s joint ventures. The fees for support services received by NTIC from its joint ventures are generally determined based on either a flat fee or a percentage of net sales by NTIC’s joint ventures depending on local laws and tax regulations. Under NTIC’s agreements with its joint ventures, amounts are earned when product is shipped from joint venture facilities. NTIC reviews the financial situation of each of its joint ventures to assist in the likelihood of collections on amounts earned. NTIC elects to account for these fees on a cash basis for certain joint ventures when uncertainty exists surrounding the collections of such fees.
Accounts Receivable
Trade receivables arise from sales of NTIC’s products and services to NTIC’s joint ventures and to unaffiliated customers. Trade receivables from joint ventures arise from sales NTIC makes to its joint ventures of products and the essential additives required to make ZERUST® industrial corrosion inhibiting products functional. Receivables for services to NTIC’s joint ventures are contractually based primarily on a percentage of the sales of the joint ventures and are intended to compensate NTIC for services NTIC provides to its joint ventures, including consulting, legal, travel, insurance, technical, and marketing services.
Payment terms for NTIC’s unaffiliated customers are determined based on credit risk and vary by customer. NTIC typically offers standard payment terms of net 30 days to unaffiliated customers. Payment terms for NTIC’s joint ventures also are determined based on credit risk; however, additional consideration is given to the individual joint venture due to the transportation time associated with ocean delivery of most products and certain other factors. NTIC typically offers payment terms to joint ventures of net 90 days. NTIC does not accrue interest on past due accounts receivable. NTIC reviews the credit histories of its customers, including its joint ventures, before extending unsecured credit. NTIC values accounts and notes receivable net of an allowance for doubtful accounts. Each quarter, NTIC prepares an analysis of its ability to collect outstanding receivables that provides a basis for an allowance estimate for doubtful accounts. In doing so, NTIC evaluates the age of its receivables, past collection history, current financial conditions of key customers and its joint ventures, and economic conditions. Based on this evaluation, NTIC establishes a reserve for specific accounts and notes receivable that it believes are uncollectible, as well as an estimate of uncollectible receivables not specifically known. Deterioration in the financial condition of any key customer or joint venture or a significant slowdown in the economy could have a material negative impact on NTIC’s ability to collect a portion or all of the accounts and notes receivable. NTIC believes that an analysis of historical trends and its current knowledge of potential collection problems provide NTIC with sufficient information to establish a reasonable estimate for an allowance for doubtful accounts. However, since NTIC cannot predict with certainty future changes in the financial stability of its customers or joint ventures, NTIC’s actual future losses from uncollectible accounts may differ from its estimates. In the event NTIC determined that a smaller or larger uncollectible accounts reserve is appropriate, NTIC would record a credit or charge to selling expense in the period that it made such a determination.
Recoverability of Long-Lived Assets
NTIC reviews its long-lived assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable and determines potential impairment by comparing the carrying value of the assets with expected net cash flows expected to be provided by operating activities of the business or related products. If the sum of the expected undiscounted future net cash flows were less than the carrying value, NTIC would determine whether an impairment loss should be recognized. An impairment loss would be measured by comparing the amount by which the carrying value exceeds the fair value of the asset.
Foreign Currency Translation (Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss)
The functional currency of each international joint venture and subsidiary is the applicable local currency. The translation of the applicable foreign currencies into U.S. dollars is performed for balance sheet accounts using exchange rates in effect at the balance sheet date and for revenue and expense accounts using an average monthly exchange rate. Translation gains or losses are reported as an element of accumulated other comprehensive income (loss).
NTIC (excluding NTIC China, Zerust Brazil, Natur-Tec India, Natur-Tec Lanka, NTI Asean, Zerust Singapore, Zerust Vietnam, Zerust Mexico, NTI Europe, and NTIC’s joint ventures) conducts all foreign transactions based on the U.S. dollar. Since NTIC’s investments in its joint ventures are accounted for using the equity method, any changes in foreign currency exchange rates would be reflected as a foreign currency translation adjustment and would not change the equity in income from joint ventures reflected in NTIC’s consolidated statements of operations.
Stock-Based Compensation
NTIC recognizes compensation cost relating to share-based payment transactions, including grants of employee stock options and transactions under NTIC’s employee stock purchase plan, in its consolidated financial statements. That cost is measured based on the fair value of the equity or liability instruments issued. NTIC measures the cost of employee services received in exchange for stock options or other stock-based awards based on the grant-date fair value of the award and recognizes the cost over the period the employee is required to provide services for the award.
Inventory Valuation
NTIC’s inventories consist primarily of production materials and finished goods. NTIC purchases production materials and finished goods based on forecasted demand and records inventory at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is determined by the first-in, first-out (FIFO) method. Management regularly assesses inventory valuation based on current and forecasted usage, demand and pricing, shelf life, customer inventory-related contractual obligations, and other considerations. If actual results differ from management estimates with respect to the actual or projected selling of inventories at amounts less than their carrying amounts, NTIC would adjust its inventory balances accordingly.
Income Taxes
NTIC utilizes the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes, which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the consolidated financial statements. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the differences between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. The effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in operations in the period that includes the enactment date.
NTIC records net deferred tax assets to the extent NTIC believes these assets will more likely than not be realized. In making such a determination, NTIC considers all available positive and negative evidence, including future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable income, tax-planning strategies, and results of recent operations, including the prior three-year history. In the event NTIC determines that it would be able to realize its deferred income tax assets in the future in excess of their net recorded amount, NTIC makes an adjustment to the deferred tax asset valuation allowance, which would reduce the provision for income taxes.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to NTIC’s consolidated financial statements for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.