Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which have been prepared by us in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”) and with Regulation S-X, promulgated under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with these consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Information pertaining to fiscal year 2018 was included in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 on pages 97 through 111 under Part II, Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Position and Results of Operations,” which was filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) on February 27, 2020.
Management Overview
Intellia Therapeutics, Inc. (“we,” “us,” “our,” “Intellia,” or the “Company”) is a leading clinical-stage genome editing company, focused on developing proprietary, potentially curative CRISPR/Cas9-based therapeutics. CRISPR/Cas9, an acronym for Clustered, Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats (“CRISPR”)/CRISPR associated 9 (“Cas9”), is a technology for genome editing, the process of altering selected sequences of genomic deoxyribonucleic acid (“DNA”). We believe the breakthrough CRISPR/Cas9 technology has the potential to transform medicine by both producing therapeutics that permanently edit and/or correct disease-associated genes in the human body with a single treatment course and creating enhanced engineered cell therapies. Our combination of deep scientific, technical and clinical development experience, and proprietary innovations in genome editing and delivery technologies, along with our intellectual property (“IP”) portfolio, puts us in a position to unlock broad therapeutic applications of the CRISPR/Cas9 technology and create new classes of therapeutic products. For more information regarding our business, mission and pipeline, see above sections in Part I entitled “Overview”, “Strategy” and “Our Pipeline”.
Financial Overview
Collaboration Revenue
Our revenue consists of collaboration revenue, including amounts recognized related to upfront technology access payments for licenses, technology access fees, research funding and milestone payments earned under our collaboration and license agreements with Regeneron and Novartis.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist of expenses incurred in performing research and development activities, such as compensation and benefits, which includes equity-based compensation, for full-time research and development employees, allocated facility-related expenses, overhead expenses, license and milestone fees, contract research, development and manufacturing services, and other related costs.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of compensation and benefits, including equity-based compensation, for our executive, finance, legal, business development and support functions. Also included in general and administrative expenses are allocated facility-related costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses, travel expenses and professional fees for auditing, tax and legal services, including IP-related legal services, and other consulting fees and expenses.
Interest Income
Interest income is income earned on our cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash equivalents and marketable securities.
Results of Operations
The following discussion of the financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the accompanying consolidated financial statements and the related footnotes thereto.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Collaboration Revenue
Collaboration revenue increased by $14.9 million to $58.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $43.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in collaboration revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020 is primarily caused by an $8.4 million one-time cumulative catch-up adjustment related to the modification of the 2016 Regeneron Agreement as well as $15.3 million related to the transfer of control of the license to develop the Factor VIII target for hemophilia A, partially offset by a decrease in revenue related to the Novartis collaboration as the research portion of the collaboration ended in 2019. Refer to Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased by $42.0 million to $150.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $108.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2019.
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, together with the changes in those items in dollars (in thousands) and the respective percentages of change.
The increase in research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily attributable to:
•
approximately $25.4 million in increased pipeline and platform development expenses driven by increased manufacturing and related costs as we prepared to file our CTA and enter the clinic for NTLA-2001, increased preclinical studies for NTLA-2002 and NTLA-5001, and upfront payments associated with a research collaboration and licensing agreement;
•
approximately $10.9 million in employee-related expenses driven by an increase in the size of our workforce due to the advancement of our programs;
•
approximately $3.0 million in increased facility-related expenses primarily related to rent, depreciation and technology expense allocated to research and development; and
•
approximately $3.2 million in increased stock-based compensation driven by our larger workforce.
During 2021, we expect research and development expenses to increase as we continue to grow our development team, execute clinical trials for ATTR and progress our AML and HAE programs into the clinic.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased by $3.1 million to $44.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $41.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily related to a $5.7 million increase in employee-related expenses to support our growth and advancement into the clinic, offset by a decrease in legal expenses of $2.2 million.
Interest Income
Interest income decreased by approximately $4.5 million to $2.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $6.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was due to a decline in investment income due to unfavorable market conditions.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception through December 31, 2020, we have raised an aggregate of $1,117.6 million to fund our operations, of which $272.6 million was through our collaboration agreements, $170.5 million was from our initial public offering and concurrent private placements, $438.3 million was from follow-on public offerings, $151.2 million was from at-the-market offerings and $85.0 million was from the sale of convertible preferred stock.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $597.4 million in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities.
We are entitled to receive research payments under our collaboration with Novartis and are also eligible to earn a significant amount of milestone payments and royalties, in each case, on a per-product basis under our collaboration with Novartis and on a per-target basis under our collaboration with Regeneron. Our ability to earn these milestone payments and the timing of achieving these milestones is dependent upon the outcome of our research and development activities and is uncertain at this time. Our rights to payments under our collaboration agreements are our only committed external source of funds.
Follow-on Offerings
On June 1, 2020, we entered into an underwriting agreement related to a public offering of 6,301,370 shares of our common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, including the exercise in full by the underwriters of their option to purchase an additional 821,917 shares, at the public offering price of $18.25 per share. The offering closed on June 5, 2020 and we received net proceeds of $107.7 million, after deducting the underwriting discount, commissions and offering expenses.
On December 1, 2020, we entered into an underwriting agreement related to a public offering of 5,513,699 shares of our common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, including the exercise in full by the underwriters of their option to purchase an additional 719,178 shares, at the public offering price of $36.50 per share. The offering closed on December 4, 2020 and we received net proceeds of $188.9 million, after deducting the underwriting discount, commissions and offering expenses.
At-the-Market Offering Programs
In October 2018, we entered into an Open Market Sale Agreement (the “2018 Sales Agreement”) with Jefferies LLC (“Jefferies”), under which Jefferies was able to offer and sell, from time to time in “at-the-market” offerings, shares of our common stock having aggregate gross proceeds of up to $100.0 million. We paid to Jefferies cash commissions of 3.0% of the gross proceeds of sales of common stock under the 2018 Sales Agreement. We issued 5,890,648 shares of our common stock at an average price of $16.98 per share in accordance with the 2018 Sales Agreement for aggregate net proceeds of $96.4 million, after payment of cash commissions to Jefferies and approximately $0.6 million related to legal, accounting and other fees in connection with the sales. All shares related to the 2018 Sales Agreement had been sold as of December 31, 2019.
In August 2019, we entered into an Open Market Sale Agreement (the “2019 Sales Agreement”) with Jefferies, under which Jefferies is able to offer and sell, from time to time in “at-the-market” offerings, shares of our common stock having aggregate gross proceeds of up to $150.0 million. We agreed to pay to Jefferies cash commissions of 3.0% of the gross proceeds of sales of common stock under the 2019 Sales Agreement. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we issued 287,231 shares of our common stock, in a series of sales, at an average price of $16.48 per share, in accordance with the 2019 Sales Agreement for aggregate net proceeds of $4.4 million, after payment of cash commissions to Jefferies and approximately $0.2 million related to legal, accounting and other fees in connection with the sales. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we issued 2,270,161 shares of our common stock in a series of sales at an average price of $22.53 per share in accordance with the 2019 Sales Agreement, for aggregate net proceeds of $49.5 million after payment of cash commissions to Jefferies and approximately $0.2 million related to legal, accounting and other fees in connection with the sales.
As of December 31, 2020, $94.1 million in shares of common stock remain eligible for sale under the 2019 Sales Agreement.
Shares Issued in Private Placement to Regeneron
As described in Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, in May 2020 we entered into the 2020 Regeneron Amendment. Simultaneously with the 2020 Regeneron Amendment, we and Regeneron entered into the 2020 Stock Purchase Agreement, under which we sold to Regeneron 925,218 shares of our common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, for aggregate cash consideration of $30.0 million, or $32.42 per share, representing a 100% premium over the volume-weighted average trading price of our common stock during the 30-day period prior to the closing. Under the 2020 Stock Purchase Agreement, Regeneron will not dispose of any shares of common stock it beneficially owns in Intellia until the termination of the Technology Collaboration Term (see Note 9). After applying equity accounting guidance to measure the
issuance of the shares, $12.6 million was recorded as fair value in the consolidated statement of stockholders’ equity for the shares.
Funding Requirements
Our primary uses of capital are, and we expect will continue to be, research and development contracted services, compensation and related expenses, laboratory and office facilities, research supplies, legal and regulatory expenses, patent prosecution filing and maintenance costs for our licensed IP and general overhead costs. During 2021, we expect our expenses to increase compared to prior periods in connection with our ongoing activities as we continue to grow our research and development team and clinical development in TTR and advance additional programs into clinical development.
Because our lead programs are still in the preclinical or early clinical stage and the outcome of these efforts is uncertain, we cannot estimate the actual amounts necessary to successfully complete the development and commercialization of any future product candidates or whether, or when, we may achieve profitability. Until such time as we can generate substantial product revenues, if ever, we expect to finance our ongoing cash needs through equity financings and collaboration arrangements. We receive cost reimbursements from Regeneron for the ATTR and hemophilia programs. Additionally, we are eligible to earn milestone payments and royalties, in each case, on a per-product basis under our collaboration with Novartis and on a per-target basis under our collaboration with Regeneron, subject to the provisions of our agreements with each of them. Except for these sources of funding, we will not have any committed external source of liquidity. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the future sale of equity, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our existing stockholders. If we raise additional funds through collaboration arrangements in the future, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Outlook
Based on our research and development plans and our expectations related to the progress of our programs, we expect that our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities as of December 31, 2020, as well as research and cost reimbursement funding from Regeneron, will enable us to fund our ongoing operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements at least through the next twenty-four months, excluding any potential milestone payments or extension fees that could be earned and distributed under the collaboration agreements with Regeneron and Novartis or any strategic use of capital not currently in the base case planning assumptions. We have based this estimate on current assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could use our capital resources sooner than we expect.
Our ability to generate revenue and achieve profitability depends significantly on our success in many areas, including: developing our delivery technologies and our CRISPR/Cas9 technology platform; selecting appropriate product candidates to develop; completing research and preclinical and clinical development of selected product candidates; obtaining regulatory approvals and marketing authorizations for product candidates for which we complete clinical trials; developing a sustainable and scalable manufacturing process for product candidates; launching and commercializing product candidates for which we obtain regulatory approvals and marketing authorizations, either directly or with a collaborator or distributor; obtaining market acceptance of our product candidates; addressing any competing technological and market developments; negotiating favorable terms in any collaboration, licensing, or other arrangements into which we may enter; maintaining good relationships with our collaborators and licensors; maintaining, protecting, and expanding our portfolio of IP rights, including patents, trade secrets, and know-how; and attracting, hiring, and retaining qualified personnel.
Cash Flows
The following is a summary of cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Net cash used in operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities of $49.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily reflects the receipt of a $70.0 million up-front payment and $12.2 million in additional payments under our collaboration with Regeneron and $6.0 million in payments from Novartis, offset in part by increased spend in our research and development activities. Net cash used in operating activities of $103.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily reflects increased spend in our research and development and general and administrative activities, offset in part by the receipt of $18.9 million in payments from our collaboration partners during those periods.
Net cash (used in) provided by investing activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, our investing activities used net cash of $214.5 million. The decrease in the year ended December 31, 2020 is primarily related to a decrease of $210.9 million from marketable securities activity during the period, as $473.7 million in marketable securities were purchased and $262.8 million in marketable securities matured, as well as the use of $3.6 million in cash for the purchase of property and equipment. During the year ended December 31, 2019, our investing activities provided net cash of $25.2 million. The increase in the year ended December 31, 2019 is primarily due to an increase of $32.0 million from marketable securities activity during the period, as $329.0 million in marketable securities matured and $297.0 million in marketable securities were purchased. This increase was offset in part by the use of $6.8 million related to purchases of property and equipment as we continue to grow our operations.
Net cash provided by financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of $371.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 includes $296.6 million in proceeds from follow-on offerings, $49.5 million in net proceeds from at-the-market offerings, $12.6 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock to Regeneron in a private placement, $11.6 million in cash received from the exercise of stock options and $1.6 million in cash received from the issuance of shares through our employee stock purchase plan. Net cash provided by financing activities of $76.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 includes $72.3 million in net proceeds from at-the-market offerings, $3.1 million in cash received from the exercise of stock options and $1.1 million in cash received from the issuance of shares through our employee stock purchase plan.
Contractual Obligations
The following summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
Property Leases - Commenced
The amounts reported for property leases represent future minimum lease payments under non-cancelable operating leases in effect as of December 31, 2020. The minimum lease payments do not include common area maintenance charges or real estate taxes.
Property Leases - Not yet Commenced
In March 2020, we entered into a lease agreement for office and laboratory space at 281 Albany Street in Cambridge, Massachusetts, which is described in further detail in Note 10 of the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In connection therewith, we have committed to making at least $44.3 million in rental payments over a lease term of 120 months.
Other Arrangements
Other arrangements represent agreements with certain vendors for supply manufacturing, clinical research organizations and other services and products that are enforceable and legally binding.
Other contractual obligations
The contractual obligations table does not include any potential future pass-through milestone payments or royalty payments we may be required to make under our existing license agreements due to the uncertainty of the occurrence of the events requiring payment under those agreements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the balance sheets and the reported amounts of collaboration revenue and expenses during the reporting periods. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances at the time such estimates are made. Actual results and outcomes may differ materially from our estimates, judgments and assumptions. We periodically review our estimates in light of changes in circumstances, facts and experience. The effects of material revisions in estimates are reflected in the consolidated financial statements prospectively from the date of the change in estimate.
We define our critical accounting policies as those accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. that require the most significant estimates and judgments about matters that are uncertain and are likely to have a material impact on our financial condition and results of operations as well as the specific manner in which we apply those principles. We believe the critical accounting policies used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements which require significant estimates and judgments are as follows:
Revenue Recognition
We adopted Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606), and its related amendments (collectively known as “ASC 606”) on January 1, 2018 using the modified retrospective method. The adoption of ASC 606 represented a change in accounting principle that more closely aligns revenue recognition with the delivery of our goods and services and provides financial statement readers with enhanced disclosures.
At inception, we determine whether contracts are within the scope of ASC 606 or other topics. For contracts that are determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, revenue is recognized when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services. The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled to receive in exchange for these goods and services. To achieve this core principle, we apply the following five steps (i) identify the contract with the customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine
the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when or as we satisfy a performance obligation. We only apply the five-step model to contracts when we determine that collection of substantially all consideration for goods and services that are transferred is probable based on the customer’s intent and ability to pay the promised consideration.
Performance obligations promised in a contract are identified based on the goods and services that will be transferred to the customer that are both capable of being distinct and are distinct in the context of the contract. To the extent a contract includes multiple promised goods and services, we apply judgment to determine whether promised goods and services are both capable of being distinct and distinct in the context of the contract. If these criteria are not met, the promised goods and services are accounted for as a combined performance obligation.
The transaction price is determined based on the consideration to which we will be entitled in exchange for transferring goods and services to the customer. To the extent the transaction price includes variable consideration, we estimate the amount of variable consideration that should be included in the transaction price utilizing either the expected value method or the most likely amount method, depending on the nature of the variable consideration. Variable consideration is included in the transaction price if, in our judgment, it is probable that a significant future reversal of cumulative revenue under the contract will not occur. Any estimates, including the effect of the constraint on variable consideration, are evaluated at each reporting period for any changes. Determining the transaction price requires significant judgment, which is discussed in further detail for each of our collaboration agreements in Note 9. In addition, none of our contracts as of December 31, 2020 contained a significant financing component.
If the contract contains a single performance obligation, the entire transaction price is allocated to the single performance obligation. Contracts that contain multiple performance obligations require an allocation of the transaction price to each performance obligation on a relative standalone selling price basis unless the transaction price is variable and meets the criteria to be allocated entirely to a performance obligation or to a distinct service that forms part of a single performance obligation. The consideration to be received is allocated among the separate performance obligations based on relative standalone selling prices. We typically determine standalone selling prices using an adjusted market assessment approach model.
We satisfy performance obligations either over time or at a point in time. Revenue is recognized over time if either (i) the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits provided by the entity’s performance, (ii) the entity’s performance creates or enhances an asset that the customer controls as the asset is created or enhanced, or (iii) the entity’s performance does not create an asset with an alternative use to the entity and the entity has an enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date. If the entity does not satisfy a performance obligation over time, the related performance obligation is satisfied at a point in time by transferring the control of a promised good or service to a customer. We evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjust the measure of performance and related revenue recognition.
As of December 31, 2020, our only revenue recognized is related to collaboration agreements with third parties which are either within the scope of ASC 606, under which we license certain rights to our product candidates to third parties, or within the scope of ASC 808, Collaborative Arrangements (“ASC 808”) if it involves a joint operating activity pursuant to which we are an active participant and are exposed to significant risks and rewards with respect to the arrangement. As discussed in further detail in Note 9, we enter into out-licensing agreements which are within the scope of ASC 606, under which we license certain rights to our product candidates to third parties. The terms of these arrangements typically include payment to us of one or more of the following: nonrefundable, upfront fees; development, regulatory, and commercial milestone payments; research and development funding payments; and royalties on the net sales of licensed products. Each of these payments results in collaboration revenues, except for revenues from royalties on the net sales of licensed products, which are classified as royalty revenues. For arrangements within the scope of ASC 808, the terms of these arrangements typically include payments received or made under the cost sharing provisions which are recognized as a component of revenues in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
Licenses of intellectual property: If the license to our IP is determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the arrangement, we recognize revenues from consideration allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the customer and the customer is able to use and benefit from the licenses. For licenses that are combined with other promises, we utilize judgment to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue.
Milestone payments: At the inception of each arrangement that includes development milestone payments, we evaluate the probability of reaching the milestones and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur in the future, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. Milestone payments that are not within our control or the licensee’s control, such as regulatory approvals, are not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received and therefore revenue recognized is constrained as management is unable to assert that a reversal of revenue would not be probable. The transaction price is then allocated to each performance obligation on a relative standalone selling price basis, for which we recognize revenue as or when the performance obligations under the contract are satisfied. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we re-evaluate the probability of achievement of such development milestones and any related constraint, and if necessary, adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect collaboration revenues and earnings in the period of adjustment.
Royalties: For arrangements that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on levels of sales, if the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied). To date, we have not recognized any royalty revenue resulting from any of our collaboration agreements.
We receive payments from our customers based on billing schedules established in each contract. Our contract liabilities consist of deferred revenue. Upfront payments and fees are recorded as deferred revenue upon receipt or when due and may require deferral of revenue recognition to a future period until we satisfy our obligations under these arrangements.
We also consider the nature and contractual terms of an arrangement and assess whether the arrangement involves a joint operating activity pursuant to which we are an active participant and exposed to significant risks and rewards with respect to the arrangement. If we are an active participant and exposed to the significant risks and rewards with respect to the arrangement, we account for the arrangement under ASC 808. Based on this consideration, we account for our Co/Co agreement with Regeneron under ASC 808. Because ASC 808 does not provide recognition and measurement guidance for collaborative arrangements, we have analogized to ASC 606.
Costs to obtain and fulfill a contract
We did not incur any expenses to obtain collaboration agreements and costs to fulfill those contracts do not generate or enhance our resources. As such, no costs to obtain or fulfill a contract have been capitalized in any period.
Equity-Based Compensation
We measure employee equity-based compensation based on the grant date fair value of the equity awards using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. Equity-based compensation expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the awards and is adjusted for pre-vesting forfeitures in the period in which the forfeitures occur. For equity awards that have a performance condition, we recognize stock-based compensation expense using the accelerated attribution method, based on our assessment of the probability that the performance condition will be achieved.
We classify equity-based compensation expense in our consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss in the same manner in which the award recipient’s salary and related costs are classified or in which the award recipient’s service payments are classified.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Please read Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15, “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements,” of this Annual report on Form 10-K for a description of recent accounting pronouncements applicable to our business.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined under the rules and regulations of the SEC.