ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
THIS FILING CONTAINS FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS. THE WORDS “ANTICIPATED,” “BELIEVE,” “EXPECT,” “PLAN,” “INTEND,” “SEEK,” “ESTIMATE,” “PROJECT,” “WILL,” “COULD,” “MAY,” AND SIMILAR EXPRESSIONS ARE INTENDED TO IDENTIFY FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS. THESE STATEMENTS INCLUDE, AMONG OTHERS, INFORMATION REGARDING FUTURE OPERATIONS, FUTURE CAPITAL EXPENDITURES, AND FUTURE NET CASH FLOW. SUCH STATEMENTS REFLECT THE COMPANY’S CURRENT VIEWS WITH RESPECT TO FUTURE EVENTS AND FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE AND INVOLVE RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, GENERAL ECONOMIC AND BUSINESS CONDITIONS, CHANGES IN FOREIGN, POLITICAL, SOCIAL, AND ECONOMIC CONDITIONS, REGULATORY INITIATIVES AND COMPLIANCE WITH GOVERNMENTAL REGULATIONS, THE ABILITY TO ACHIEVE FURTHER MARKET PENETRATION AND ADDITIONAL CUSTOMERS, AND VARIOUS OTHER MATTERS, MANY OF WHICH ARE BEYOND THE COMPANY’S CONTROL. SHOULD ONE OR MORE OF THESE RISKS OR UNCERTAINTIES OCCUR, OR SHOULD UNDERLYING ASSUMPTIONS PROVE TO BE INCORRECT, ACTUAL RESULTS MAY VARY MATERIALLY AND ADVERSELY FROM THOSE ANTICIPATED, BELIEVED, ESTIMATED, OR OTHERWISE INDICATED. CONSEQUENTLY, ALL OF THE FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS MADE IN THIS FILING ARE QUALIFIED BY THESE CAUTIONARY STATEMENTS AND THERE CAN BE NO ASSURANCE OF THE ACTUAL RESULTS OR DEVELOPMENTS.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and plan of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere herein. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements including information about possible or assumed results of our financial conditions, operations, plans, objectives, and performance that involve risk, uncertainties, and assumptions. The actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in such forward-looking statements. For example, when we indicate that we expect to increase our product sales and potentially establish additional license relationships, these are forward-looking statements. The words expect, anticipate, estimate or similar expressions are also used to indicate forward-looking statements.
Background of our Company
Neutra Corp. was incorporated in Florida on January 11, 2011. On October 5, 2015, we reincorporated from Florida to Nevada. On August 16, 2019, Neutra Corp. reincorporated from Nevada to Wyoming. The reincorporation was approved by our board of directors and by a majority of the holders of voting rights in our stock. Our authorized shares increased to unlimited shares of common stock and 20,000,000 shares of preferred stock.
We have established a fiscal year end of January 31.
As the global cannabis market grows exponentially, it is constantly in need of better technologies and products to be more efficient in how it grows, what it grows and how it consumes cannabis and its related products. From lighting to dosage devices, from pesticide replacements to plant enhancers, Neutra Corp. is constantly combing the industry for the latest and greatest to test, prove and bring to market.
- 8 -
We have generated limited revenues to date and our activities have been limited primarily to developing our business plan and research and development of products. We will not have the necessary capital to fully develop or execute our business plan until we are able to secure additional financing. There can be no assurance that such financing will be available on suitable terms. We need to raise additional funds in order to implement our business plan. Our current cash on hand is insufficient to commercialize our products or fully develop our business strategy. If we are unable to raise adequate additional funds or if those funds are not available on terms that are acceptable to us, we will not be able to execute our business plan and we may cease operations.
Plan of Operations
We believe we do not have adequate funds to fully execute our business plan for the next twelve months unless we obtain additional funding. However, should we not raise this capital, we will allocate our funding to first assure that all State, Federal and SEC requirements are met.
As of January 31, 2021, we had cash on hand of $23,308.
We intend to pursue capital through public or private financing, as well as borrowing and other sources in order to finance our business activities. We cannot guarantee that additional funding will be available on favorable terms, if at all. If adequate funds are not available, then our ability to continue our operations may be significantly hindered.
Results of Operations
We incurred a net loss of $538,892 for the year ended January 31, 2021. We had a working capital deficit of $977,000 as of January 31, 2021. We do not anticipate having positive net income in the immediate future. Net cash used by operating activities for the year ended January 31, 2021 was $412,378.
We continue to rely on advances to fund operating shortfalls and do not foresee a change in this situation in the immediate future. There can be no assurance that we will continue to have such advances available. We will not be able to continue operations without them. We are pursuing alternate sources of financing, but there is no assurance that additional capital will be available to the Company when needed or on acceptable terms.
Fiscal year ended January 31, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended January 31, 2020.
Revenue
We recognized revenue of $9,687 and $6,395 for the years ended January 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Revenue was generated from the sale of our CBD sports creams and other products.
Cost of Goods Sold
We incurred cost of goods sold of $42,944 for the year ended January 31, 2021.
Depreciation
We recognized depreciation of $30,666 for the years ended January 31, 2021 as a result of the acquisition of property and equipment during the period.
General and Administrative Expenses
We recognized general and administrative expenses in the amount of $414,742 and $400,640 for the years ended January 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased from $340,701 for the year ended January 31, 2020 to $121,648 for the year ended January 31, 2021 as a result of the decrease in convertible notes payable.
- 9 -
Net Loss
We incurred a net loss of $538,892 for the year ended January 31, 2021 as compared to $695,621 for the comparable period of 2020. The decrease in the net loss was primarily the result of lower interest expense as discussed above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of the date of this filing, we had yet to generate significant revenues from our business operations.
We anticipate needing additional financing to fund our operations and to effectively execute our business plan over the next eighteen months. Currently available cash is not sufficient to allow us to commence full execution of our business plan. Our business expansion will require significant capital resources that may be funded through the issuance of common stock or of notes payable or other debt arrangements that may affect our debt structure. Despite our current financial status, we believe that we may be able to issue notes payable or debt instruments in order to start executing our business plan. However, there can be no assurance that we will be able to raise money in this fashion and have not entered into any agreements that would obligate a third party to provide us with capital.
We raised the cash amounts to be used in these activities from convertible notes payable. We currently have negative working capital of $977,000.
As of January 31, 2021, we had $23,308 of cash on hand. This amount of cash will be adequate to fund our operations for less than twelve months.
We have no known demands or commitments and are not aware of any events or uncertainties as of January 31, 2021 that will result in or that are reasonably likely to materially increase or decrease our current liquidity.
Capital Resources
We had no material commitments for capital expenditures as of January 31, 2021 and 2020. However, should we execute our business plan as anticipated, we would incur substantial capital expenditures and require financing in addition to what is required to fund our present operation.
Additional Financing
Additional financing is required to continue operations. Although actively searching for available capital, the Company does not have any current arrangements for additional outside sources of financing and cannot provide any assurance that such financing will be available.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our financial statements in conformity with GAAP, which requires management to make certain estimates and assumptions and apply judgments. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience, current trends, and other factors that management believes to be important at the time the financial statements are prepared; actual results could differ from our estimates and such differences could be material. We have identified below the critical accounting policies, which are assumptions made by management about matters that are highly uncertain and that are of critical importance in the presentation of our financial position, results of operations and cash flows. Due to the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain, materially different amounts could be reported under different conditions or using different assumptions. On a regular basis, we review our critical accounting policies and how they are applied in the preparation our financial statements.
USE OF ESTIMATES - The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
- 10 -
GOING CONCERN - The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern. For the year ended January 31, 2021, the Company had a net loss of $538,892 and generated negative cash flow from operations in the amount of $412,378. In view of these matters, the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon its ability to achieve a level of profitability or to obtain additional capital to finance its operations. The Company intends on financing its future activities and its working capital needs largely from the sale of public equity securities with some additional funding from other traditional financing sources, including term notes until such time that funds provided by operations are sufficient to fund working capital requirements. The financial statements of the Company do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded assets, or the amounts and classifications of liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
New Accounting Pronouncements
For a description of recent accounting standards, including the expected dates of adoption and estimated effects, if any, on our financial statements, see “Note 3: Significant Accounting Polices: Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements” in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K.