ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of financial statements may require us to make estimates and assumptions that may affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the related disclosures at the date of the financial statements. We do not currently have any estimates or assumptions where the nature of the estimates or assumptions is material due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment necessary to account for highly uncertain matters or the susceptibility of such matters to change or the impact of the estimates and assumptions on financial condition or operating performance is material, except as described below.
Principles of Consolidation
Our consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and its wholly owned subsidiaries, Clinigence Health, Inc., and HealthDatix Inc. All intercompany accounts and transactions have been eliminated.
Use of Estimates in the Preparation of Financial Statements
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Fair Value Measurements
We adopted the provisions of ASC Topic 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures, which defines fair value as used in numerous accounting pronouncements, establishes a framework for measuring fair value and expands disclosure of fair value measurements.
The estimated fair value of certain financial instruments, including cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, accounts payable and accrued expenses are carried at historical cost basis, which approximates their fair values because of the short-term nature of these instruments. The carrying amounts of our short- and long-term credit obligations approximate fair value because the effective yields on these obligations, which include contractual interest rates taken together with other features such as concurrent issuances of warrants and/or embedded conversion options, are comparable to rates of returns for instruments of similar credit risk. The Company’s investment in AHA was valued at level 3 input.
ASC 820 defines fair value as the exchange price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date. ASC 820 also establishes a fair value hierarchy, which requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value. ASC 820 describes three levels of inputs that may be used to measure fair value:
Level 1 - quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities
Level 2 - quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities in active markets or inputs that are observable
Level 3 - inputs that are unobservable (for example cash flow modeling inputs based on assumptions)
Convertible Instruments
We evaluate and account for conversion options embedded in convertible instruments in accordance with ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging Activities.
Applicable GAAP requires companies to bifurcate conversion options from their host instruments and account for them as free-standing derivative financial instruments according to certain criteria. The criteria include circumstances in which (a) the economic characteristics and risks of the embedded derivative instrument are not clearly and closely related to the economic characteristics and risks of the host contract, (b) the hybrid instrument that embodies both the embedded derivative instrument and the host contract is not re-measured at fair value under other GAAP with changes in fair value reported in earnings as they occur and (c) a separate instrument with the same terms as the embedded derivative instrument would be considered a derivative instrument.
We account for convertible instruments (when it has been determined that the embedded conversion options should not be bifurcated from their host instruments) as follows: The Company records, when necessary, discounts to convertible notes for the intrinsic value of conversion options embedded in debt instruments based upon the differences between the fair value of the underlying common stock at the commitment date of the note transaction and the effective conversion price embedded in the note. Debt discounts under these arrangements are amortized over the term of the related debt to their stated date of redemption.
We account for the conversion of convertible debt when a conversion option has been bifurcated using the general extinguishment standards. The debt and equity linked derivatives are removed at their carrying amounts and the shares issued are measured at their then-current fair value, with any difference recorded as a gain or loss on extinguishment of the two separate accounting liabilities.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is generated primarily by software licenses, training, and consulting. Software licenses are provided as SaaS-based subscriptions that grants access to proprietary online databases and data management solutions. Training and consulting are project based and billable to customers on a monthly-basis or task-basis.
Revenue from training and consulting are generally recognized upon delivery of training or completion of the consulting project. The duration of training and consulting projects are typically a few weeks or months and last no longer than 12 months.
SaaS-based subscriptions are generally marketed under multi-year agreements with annual, semi-annual, quarterly, or month-to-month renewals and revenue is recognized ratably over the renewal period with the unearned amounts received recorded as deferred revenue.
On January 1, 2019, we adopted the new revenue recognition standard Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-09, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606)”, using the modified retrospective method. The modified retrospective adoption used by the Company did not result in a material cumulative effect adjustment to the opening balance of accumulated deficit. Revenue from substantially all the Company’s contracts with customers continues to be recognized over time as performance obligations are satisfied.
We provide our customers with software licensing, training, and consulting through SaaS-based subscriptions. This subscription revenue represents revenue earned under contracts in which we bill and collect the charges for licensing and related services. We determine the measurement of revenue and the timing of revenue recognition utilizing the following core principles:
1. Identifying the contract with a customer;
2. Identifying the performance obligations in the contract;
3. Determining the transaction price;
4. Allocating the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
5. Recognizing revenue when (or as) the Company satisfies its performance obligations.
Revenues from subscriptions are deferred when cash payments are received in advance of the satisfaction of the Company’s performance obligations and recognized over the period in which the performance obligations are satisfied. We complete our contractual performance obligations through providing our customers access to specified data through subscriptions for a service period, and training on consulting associated with the subscriptions. We primarily invoice our customers on a monthly basis and does not provide any refunds, rights of return, or warranties to its customers.
Cost of Sales
Our costs of sales primarily consist of cloud computing and storage costs, datasets, and contracted and internal labor costs.
Advertising Costs
We expense advertising costs as incurred. Advertising costs of $41,418 and $115,647 were charged to operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents are comprised of cash and highly liquid investments with original maturities of 90 days or less at the date of purchase. We do not have any cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. We are exposed to credit risk in the event of default by the financial institutions or the issuers of these investments to the extent the amounts on deposit or invested are in excess of amounts that are insured.
Accounts Receivable
We analyze the collectability of accounts receivable from continuing operations each accounting period and adjusts its allowance for doubtful accounts accordingly. A considerable amount of judgment is required in assessing the realization of accounts receivables, including the creditworthiness of each customer, current and historical collection history and the related aging of past due balances. We evaluate specific accounts when it becomes aware of information indicating that a customer may not be able to meet its financial obligations due to deterioration of its financial condition, lower credit ratings, bankruptcy or other factors affecting the ability to render payment.
Inventory
Inventory consisting of finished products is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value.
Property and equipment and depreciation
Property and equipment are stated at cost. Maintenance and repairs are charged to expense when incurred. When property and equipment are retired or otherwise disposed of, the related cost and accumulated depreciation are removed from the respective accounts and any gain or loss is credited or charged to income. Depreciation for both financial reporting and income tax purposes is computed using combinations of the straight line and accelerated methods over the estimated lives of the respective assets as follows:
Amortization
Intangible assets are amortized using the straight-line method over the estimated lives of the respective assets as follows:
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of assets acquired over liabilities assumed of QMX and the fair market value of the common shares issued by the Company for the acquisition of QMX. In accordance with ASC Topic No. 350 “Intangibles - Goodwill and Other”), the goodwill is not being amortized, but instead will be subject to an annual assessment of impairment by applying a fair-value based test, and will be reviewed more frequently if current events and circumstances indicate a possible impairment. An impairment loss is charged to expense in the period identified. If indicators of impairment are present and future cash flows are not expected to be sufficient to recover the asset’s carrying amount, an impairment loss is charged to expense in the period identified. An impairment expense of $3,471,508 was recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020 in connection with the sale of intellectual property.
Long-Lived Assets
We assess the valuation of components of our property and equipment and other long-lived assets whenever events or circumstances dictate that the carrying value might not be recoverable. We base our evaluation on indicators such as the nature of the assets, the future economic benefit of the assets, any historical or future profitability measurements and other external market conditions or factors that may be present. If such factors indicate that the carrying amount of an asset or asset group may not be recoverable, we determine whether an impairment has occurred by analyzing an estimate of undiscounted future cash flows at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows exist. If the estimate of undiscounted cash flows during the estimated useful life of the asset is less than the carrying value of the asset, we recognize a loss for the difference between the carrying value of the asset and its estimated fair value, generally measured by the present value of the estimated cash flows.
Deferred Revenue
Deposits from customers are not recognized as revenues, but as liabilities, until the following conditions are met: revenues are realized when cash or claims to cash (receivable) are received in exchange for goods or services or when assets received in such exchange are readily convertible to cash or claim to cash or when such goods/services are transferred. When such income item is earned, the related revenue item is recognized, and the deferred revenue is reduced. To the extent revenues are generated from our support and maintenance services, we recognize such revenues when services are completed and billed. We received deposits from our various customers that have been recorded as deferred revenue and presented as current liabilities the amount of $76,687 and $165,560 as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Stock-Based Compensation
We accounts for our stock-based awards granted under our employee compensation plan in accordance with ASC Topic No. 718-20, Awards Classified as Equity, which requires the measurement of compensation expense for all share-based compensation granted to employees and non-employee directors at fair value on the date of grant and recognition of compensation expense over the related service period for awards expected to vest. We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to estimate the fair value of its stock options and warrants. The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires the input of highly subjective assumptions including the expected stock price volatility of the Company’s common stock, the risk free interest rate at the date of grant, the expected vesting term of the grant, expected dividends, and an assumption related to forfeitures of such grants. Changes in these subjective input assumptions can materially affect the fair value estimate of the Company’s stock options and warrants.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method in accordance with ASC Topic No. 740, Income Taxes. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on differences between financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that are expected to be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse.
We apply the provisions of ASC Topic No. 740 for the financial statement recognition, measurement and disclosure of uncertain tax positions recognized in our financial statements. In accordance with this provision, tax positions must meet a more-likely-than-not recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position.
Going Concern
The notes accompanying our December 31, 2020 and 2019 audited financial statements, and as noted on the Reports of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm , contain an explanatory paragraph expressing substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern . The financial statements have been prepared “assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern.” Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent on raising additional capital to fund our operations and ultimately on generating future profitable operations. There can be no assurance that we will be able to raise sufficient additional capital or eventually have positive cash flow from operations to address all of our cash flow needs. If we are not able to find alternative sources of cash or generate positive cash flow from operations, our business and shareholders may be materially and adversely affected.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
We have reviewed other recent accounting pronouncements and concluded they are either not applicable to the business, or no material effect is expected on the condensed consolidated financial statements as a result of future adoption.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Introduction
Clinigence is a company focused on the medical technology markets. Our primary focus is the expansion of our medical technology business through our wholly-owned subsidiary Clinigence Health, Inc.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 as Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Assets. At December 31, 2020, we had $ 157,056, in current assets and $169,857 in total assets, compared to $1,243,352 in current assets and $6,692,504 in total assets as of December 31, 2019. There was a decrease in current assets from the decrease in cash, and there was a decrease in total assets primarily as a result of the AHA Asset Purchase Sale and impairment of goodwill.
Liabilities. At December 31, 2020, we had total liabilities of $1,303,652 compared to $4,834,071 at December 31, 2019. The decrease in liabilities was primarily due to a decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses, a decrease in convertible notes payable and a decrease in amount due to related parties as a result of the AHA Asset Purchase Sale, and a decrease in lease liability and notes payable.
Stockholders’ Equity (Deficiency). Our stockholders’ deficiency was $1,133,795 for the year ended December 31, 2020, whereas our stockholders’ equity was $1,858,433 for the years ended December 31, 2019.. This decrease was due to the write down of the Series E Preferred Shares related to the AHA Asset Purchase Sale and impairment of goodwill.
Revenue. We had revenue of $1,585,952 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $1,366,419 for the year ended December 31, 2019. We had a loss from operations of $(5,187,702) and $(6,897,848) for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. The increase in revenue was due to increased customer usage for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Costs and Expenses
Cost of Sales. We had cost of sales of $909,780 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $830,443 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of direct labor costs of $413,361, service hosting costs of $449,990, and third-party software costs of $46,429, whereas our cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of direct labor costs of $288,311, service hosting costs of $363,475, and third-party software costs of $178,657.
Operating Expenses. General and Administrative expense was $3,251,353 and $3,667,178 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. Overall, our General and Administrative expenses decreased by $ 415,825 due primarily to a decrease in payroll headcount. We expect our overall corporate overhead to increase with the merger and acquisitions transactions related to Accountable Healthcare America, Inc. and AHP Management Inc.
The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in social distancing, travel bans and quarantine, and this has limited access to our facilities, customers, management, support staff and professional advisors. These factors, in turn, have had an impact on our operations, financial condition and demand for our goods and services as well as our overall ability to react timely to mitigate the impact of this event. Also, it has hampered our efforts to comply with our filing obligations with the Securities and Exchange Commission. While we have learned from the COVID-19 pandemic and its result on our operations and financial condition, because of the nature of these events, we cannot assure you that we will be well-prepared for similar unforeseen and uncontrollable events that may occur in the future.
Sales and Marketing expense was $166,759 and $577,739 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. The decrease in Sales and Marketing expenses was primarily a result of decreased payroll due to decreased headcount and decrease in trade shows/travel costs.
Research and Development expense was $557,257 and $768,103 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 respectively, and consisted of internal payroll and external consultants continuing to develop and improve our platform.
Impairment of Goodwill. We recorded an impairment charge of the Company’s goodwill of $3,471,508 in the year ended December 31, 2020 arising from goodwill impairment related to certain intellectual property sold to AHA in the IP purchase agreement in May 2021. Accordingly, we do not expect to receive future economic benefits from such goodwill. We recorded an impairment charge of the Company’s goodwill of $2,257,058 for the year ended December 31, 2019 arising from goodwill impairment incurred with the HealthDatix Acquisition. The net assets acquired included significant intangible assets related to our HealthDatix subsidiary. We discontinued operations of our HealthDatix subsidiary in February 2020 and accordingly, we do not expect to receive future economic benefits from such goodwill.
Gain on Sale of Assets. We recorded a gain on the sale of assets of $1,993,424 in the year ended December 31, 2020 related to the AHA IP purchase agreement. Pursuant to AHA IP purchase agreement we received AHA Series E Preferred Stock as part of the purchase price. The Series E Preferred Stock investment in AHA was initially recorded at $6,402,278 based on 1,252,892 shares outstanding at a fair value of $5.11 per share based on an appraised valuation of the Series E Preferred Stock. As of December 31, 2020, we determined that the fair value of the AHA Series E Preferred Stock fell below its’ carrying value based on an independent valuation report and wrote off the investment in AHA. The Preferred Stock was surrendered pursuant to the AHA Merger Agreement.
Other Operating Expenses. For the year ended December 31, 2020 we reported a gain on lease termination of $25,174, a loss on sale of fixed assets of $54,819, a loss on the sale of subsidiary of $158,744 and a gain on lease termination of $25,174.
Other Income (Expense). For the year ended December 31, 2020 we reported, a non-recurring loss on extinguishment of debt related party convertible debt conversions of $167,797, which represents the write off of debt discount of the debt assumed by AHA in the IP purchase agreement. For the year ended December 31, 2019 we reported a non-recurring loss on extinguishment of debt for related party convertible debt conversions of $130,140 based on the difference between the estimated fair value of the stock issued ($0.83 per share) to convert the debt and the net carrying amount of the debt totaling $399,997 on the date of conversion. We had interest expense of $335,450 and $92,158 on outstanding notes and convertible notes payable, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We had interest income of $1,030 and $3,626 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We had income from discontinued operations of $39,752 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
General
As reflected in the accompanying consolidated financial statements, we had cash of $26,931 and $1,065,434 as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had a working capital deficiency and we have operated at a net loss since inception. In order to execute our business plans, including the expansion of operations, our primary capital requirements in 2021 are likely to rise. It is not possible to quantify those costs at this point in time, in that they depend on Clinigence Health’s business opportunities and the state of the overall economy. We anticipate raising capital in the private markets to cover any such costs, though there can be no guaranty we will be able to do so on terms we deem to be acceptable. We do not have any plans at this point in time to obtain a line of credit or other loan facility from a commercial bank.
Cash Flow Activity
Cash used in operating activities was $1,475,075 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $4,040,578 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net cash used in operating activities primarily consisted of our operating revenues not being sufficient to cover our on-going obligations, partially off-set by a non-recurring loss on debt conversion of $167,797. Additional contributing factors to the change were from gain on the sale of assets of $1,993,424, impairment expense of $3,471,508 amortization of $94,761, non-cash interest expense of $474,344, stock-based compensation expense of $2,571,689, gain on lease termination of $25,174, loss on the sale of assets of $54,819, cancellation of common stock of $33,750, a decrease in accounts receivable of $71,900, a decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $648,475, and a decrease in deferred revenue of $88,873.
Cash used in investing activities was $60,900 and $748,196 for the years ended for the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. Net cash provided by continuing investing activities primarily consisted of a decrease in restricted cash of $100,000 from the use of a letter of credit for the termination of our Atlanta operations office facility lease and the sale of property and equipment of $500. Net cash in discontinued investing activities was $161,400 from the sale of the Healthdatix subsidiary
Cash provided by financing activities was $497,472 and $5,734,941 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. We issued shares of common stock for net cash proceeds of $120,000, issued notes and convertible notes for proceeds of $461,125, received a related party loan of $30,000 and made principal payments on previously outstanding notes and convertible notes payable totaling $113,653.
Plan of Operation and Funding
We expect that working capital requirements will continue to be funded through a combination of our existing funds and further issuances of securities. Our working capital requirements are expected to increase in line with the growth of our business. Existing working capital, further advances and debt instruments, and anticipated cash flow are anticipated to be adequate to fund our operations over the next twelve months. We have no lines of credit or other bank financing arrangements. Generally, we have financed operations to date through the proceeds of the private placement of equity and debt instruments. In connection with our business plan, management anticipates additional increases in operating expenses and capital expenditures relating to: (i) developmental expenses associated with a start-up business and (ii) marketing expenses. We intend to finance these expenses with further issuances of securities, and debt issuances. Thereafter, we expect we will need to raise additional capital and generate revenues to meet long-term operating requirements. Additional issuances of equity or convertible debt securities will result in dilution to our current shareholders. Further, such securities might have rights, preferences or privileges senior to our common stock that may have a greater dilutive impact to our current shareholders. Additional financing may not be available upon acceptable terms, or at all. If adequate funds are not available or are not available on acceptable terms, we may not be able to take advantage of prospective new business endeavors or opportunities, which could significantly and materially restrict our business operations.
OFF BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We have no off balance-sheet arrangements.