Item 7.Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
As noted earlier, this Annual Report, including the following discussion and analysis, may contain forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, assumptions and other factors which, if they do not materialize or prove correct, could cause our results to differ from historical results or those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Please review this Annual Report and the following discussion and analysis in light of the forward-looking statements provisions outlined at the outset of Part I.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes to those statements included in this Annual Report.
Overview
We are a global medical technology company focused on developing, manufacturing, selling and providing procedural solutions for spine surgery, with a guiding purpose to transform surgery, advance care and change lives. We offer a comprehensive portfolio of procedurally integrated spine surgery solutions, including surgical access instruments, spinal implants, fixation systems, biologics, and enabling technologies, as well as systems and services for intraoperative neuromonitoring. In addition, we develop and sell magnetically adjustable implant systems for spine and specialized orthopedic procedures. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated net sales of $1.05 billion, including sales in more than 50 countries.
Since our incorporation in 1997, we have grown from a small developer of specialty spinal implants into a leading medical technology company delivering procedurally integrated solutions for spine surgery. A key driver of our growth has been our focus on innovative products and technologies that drive reproducible outcomes for patients, surgeons and providers. In 2003, we introduced the eXtreme Lateral Interbody Fusion procedure, or XLIF, a lateral access spine surgery technique that is less-invasive than traditional, open surgical procedures and clinically proven to enable better patient outcomes. Building off the success of XLIF, we have continued to develop innovative less-invasive techniques and technologies for spine surgery, and we have broadened our portfolio of solutions for traditional, open surgical procedures. Our comprehensive portfolio of solutions can be utilized in procedures for the cervical, thoracic and lumbar spine, supporting surgical approaches from the anterior, including lateral, and posterior. Our solutions are used to treat degenerative conditions and for complex spinal surgery, including adult and pediatric deformities, as well as trauma and tumors.
Underlying our procedurally integrated solutions for spine surgery are innovative technologies designed to enable better clinical, financial, and operational outcomes, including:
•
our differentiated surgical access instruments, including our Maxcess integrated split-blade retractor system, designed to enable less-invasive surgical techniques by minimizing soft tissue disruption during spine surgery;
•
our neuromonitoring systems, which use proprietary software-driven nerve detection and avoidance technology, and our intraoperative neuromonitoring, or IONM, services and support;
•
our Advanced Materials Science portfolio of specialized spinal implants, designed to advance spinal fusion by enhancing the osseointegration and biomechanical properties of implant materials, including porous titanium and porous polyetheretherketone, or PEEK;
•
our comprehensive Reline fixation system, designed to facilitate the preservation and restoration of patient alignment, while addressing a vast array of spinal pathologies from an open or less-invasive approach across all spinal procedures; and
•
our Integrated Global Alignment platform, or iGA, which is comprised of procedurally-based technologies that help increase the predictability of achieving global alignment in spinal procedures, including our Bendini spinal rod bending system that expedites manual rod manipulation for spinal fixation.
We have also invested in enabling technologies, including the development of capital equipment designed to further improve clinical, financial, and operational outcomes of spine surgery. Our capital equipment portfolio currently consists of Lessray and the Pulse platform. Lessray is an image enhancement platform designed to reduce radiation exposure in the operating room by allowing surgeons to take low-quality, low-dose images and improve them to look like conventional full-dose images. Pulse integrates multiple enabling technologies within a single, expandable platform and is engineered to improve workflow, reduce variability, and increase the reproducibility of surgical outcomes. The Pulse platform’s modular architecture is designed to incorporate applications for neuromonitoring, surgical planning, patient-specific rod bending, smart imaging, navigation, and integration with robotics and other smart tools in the future. Selling and leasing of capital equipment do not make up a material portion of our total net sales.
In addition to our procedurally integrated solutions for spine surgery, we also design and sell expandable growing rod implant systems that can be non-invasively lengthened following implantation with precise, incremental adjustments via an external remote controller using magnetic technology called MAGnetic External Control, or MAGEC, which allows for the minimally invasive treatment of early-onset and adolescent scoliosis. This technology is also the basis for our Precice limb lengthening system, which allows for the correction of long bone limb length discrepancy, as well as other products for treating specialized orthopedic procedures.
We intend to continue development on a wide variety of innovation projects to advance our leadership position in less-invasive spine surgery, increase our product offerings and solutions for traditional spine surgery procedures, and further our enabling technologies portfolio. We expect to continue to invest in the Pulse platform to support a full global launch of the technology and to develop and expand its application offerings, including investments related to surgical automation and robotics. In addition, we expect to continue to pursue business and technology acquisition targets and strategic relationships to identify opportunities to broaden participation along the spine care continuum. Top priorities include opportunities that complement our technology leadership position in spine, targeted geographic expansion, technology that makes procedures even safer, as well as opportunities for surgical automation.
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus, which causes COVID-19, was identified. Due to the rapid and global spread of the virus, on March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 outbreak a pandemic. To slow the proliferation of COVID-19, governments have implemented extraordinary measures, which include the mandatory closure of businesses, restrictions on travel and gatherings, and quarantine and physical distancing requirements. In addition, many government agencies in conjunction with hospitals and healthcare systems have, to varying degrees, deferred or suspended elective surgical procedures. While certain spine surgeries are deemed essential and certain surgeries, like in cases of trauma, cannot be delayed, we have seen and may continue to see a significant reduction in procedural volumes as hospital systems and/or patients elect to defer spine surgery procedures. As a result of these measures, we have experienced reductions in procedural volumes during 2020 and anticipate this trend may continue. The cumulative effect of these disruptions had a significant impact on our business in 2020 and it is not possible for us to accurately predict the length or severity of the COVID-19 pandemic or the timing for a broad and sustained resumption of elective surgical procedures. Further discussion of the potential impacts on our business from the COVID-19 pandemic is provided under Part I, Item 1A - Risk Factors.
Net Sales and Operations
The majority of our net sales are derived from the sale of implants and fixation products, biologics, disposables and IONM services and we expect this trend to continue for the foreseeable future. Our implants and fixation products, biologics, and disposables are currently sold and shipped from our distribution and warehousing operations. We generally recognize net sales from implants and fixation products, biologics and disposables upon notice that our products have been used in a surgical procedure or upon shipment to a third-party customer who has assumed control of the products. Net sales from IONM services is recognized in the period the service is performed for the amount of payment we expect to receive. We make available surgical access instrument sets and neuromonitoring systems to hospitals to facilitate surgeon access to the spine to perform restorative and fusion procedures using our implants and fixation products. We sell surgical instrument sets and our proprietary software-driven neuromonitoring systems, however this does not make up a material part of our business. Selling or leasing of capital equipment does not make up a material portion of our total net sales.
A substantial portion of our operations are located in the United States, and the majority of our net sales and cash generation have been made in the United States. We sell our products in the United States through a sales force comprised primarily of directly employed and independent sales representatives. Our sales force provides a delivery and consultative service to surgeon and hospital customers and is compensated based on sales and product placements in their territories. Sales force commissions are reflected in the selling, general and administrative operating expense line item within our Consolidated Statements of Operations. We continue to invest in international expansion with a focus on European, Asia-Pacific and Latin American markets. Our international sales force is comprised of directly-employed sales personnel, independent sales representatives, as well as exclusive and non-exclusive independent third-party distributors.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our audited Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (GAAP). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, net sales and expenses. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates including those related to revenue recognition, credit losses, inventories, valuation of financial instruments, goodwill, intangibles, property and equipment, contingent liabilities, stock-based compensation, income taxes, and legal proceedings. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
The following accounting policies are critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Revenue Recognition
In accordance with Accounting Standards Codification 606 Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”), we recognize revenue upon the transfer of goods or services to a customer at an amount that reflects the expected consideration to be received in exchange for those goods or services. The principles in ASC 606 are applied using the following five steps: (i) identify the contract with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligation(s) in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligation(s) in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) we satisfy our performance obligation(s). Specifically, revenue from the sale of implants, fixation products and disposables is generally recognized at an amount that reflects the expected consideration upon notice that our products have been used in a surgical procedure or upon shipment to a third-party customer assuming control of the products. Revenue from IONM services is recognized in the period the service is performed for the amount of consideration expected to be received. Revenue from the sale of surgical instrument sets is generally recognized upon receipt of a purchase order and the subsequent shipment to a customer who assumes control. In certain cases, we offer the ability for customers to lease surgical instrumentation primarily on a non-sales type basis. Revenue from the sale or lease of capital equipment is recognized when we transfer control to the customer, which is generally at the point when acceptance occurs that indicates customer acknowledgment of delivery or installation, depending on the terms of the arrangement. Revenue from sales and leases of surgical instrument sets and capital equipment represent an immaterial amount of our total revenue in all periods presented. Revenue associated with products holding rights of return or trade-in are recognized when we conclude there is not a risk of significant revenue reversal in future periods for the expected consideration in the transaction. Our costs incurred associated with sales contracts with customers are deferred over the performance obligation period and recognized in the same period as the related revenue, with the exception of contracts that complete within one year or less, in which case the associated costs are expensed as incurred.
Allowance for Credit Losses and Sales Return and Pricing Reserves
We maintain an allowance for credit losses resulting from the inability of our customers, including hospitals, ambulatory surgery centers, and distributors, to make required payments. The allowance for credit losses is calculated quarterly, and is estimated on a region-by-region basis considering a number of factors including age of account balances, collection history, historical account write-offs, third party credit reports, identified trends, current economic conditions, and supportable forecasted economic expectations. The allowance is adjusted on a specific identification basis for certain accounts as well as pooling of accounts with similar characteristics. An increase in the provision for credit losses may be required when the financial condition of our customers or their collection experience deteriorates. An increase to the allowance for credit losses results in a corresponding charge to selling, general and administrative expenses. We have a diverse customer base and no single customer represented greater than ten percent of net sales or accounts receivable. Historically, our reserves have been adequate to cover credit losses.
Our exposure to credit losses may increase if our customers are adversely affected by changes in healthcare laws, coverage and reimbursement, economic pressures or uncertainty associated with local or global economic recessions, disruption associated with the current COVID-19 pandemic, or other customer-specific factors. It is possible that there could be a material adverse impact from potential adjustments of the carrying amount of trade receivables as customers’ cash flows are impacted by their response to the COVID-19 pandemic and the deferral of elective surgical procedures.
In addition, we establish a liability for estimated sales returns and a reserve for price adjustments that are recorded as a reduction to net sales. The liability and reserve are maintained to account for future product returns and price adjustments of products sold in the current period. This reserve is reviewed quarterly and is estimated based on an analysis of our historical experience and expected future trends. Historically, our reserves have been adequate to account for returns and pricing adjustments.
Inventory, net
Net inventory as of December 31, 2020 consisted of $285.4 million of finished goods, $7.3 million of work in progress and $7.9 million of raw materials. Net inventory as of December 31, 2019 consisted of $298.7 million of finished goods, $6.4 million of work in progress, and $7.3 million of raw materials.
Finished goods primarily consists of specialized implants, fixation products and disposables and are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value determined by utilizing a standard cost method, which includes capitalized variances, which approximates the weighted average cost. Work in progress and raw materials represent the underlying material, and labor for work in progress, that ultimately yield finished goods upon completion and are subject to lower of cost or net realizable value. We review the components of inventory on a periodic basis for excess and obsolescence and adjust inventory to its net realizable value as necessary.
We record an inventory reserve for estimated excess and obsolete inventory based upon historical turnover and assumptions about future demand for our products and market conditions. Our allograft products have shelf lives ranging from two to five years and are subject to demand fluctuations based on the availability and demand for alternative products. Our inventory, which consists primarily of disposables, specialized implants and fixation products, is at risk of obsolescence following the introduction and development of new or enhanced products. One of our strategic objectives is to continue to rapidly develop and commercialize new products and product enhancements which increases the risk that existing products will become obsolete prior to the end of their anticipated useful life. Our estimates and assumptions for excess and obsolete inventory are reviewed and updated on a quarterly basis. The estimates we use for demand are also used for near-term capacity planning and inventory purchasing and are consistent with our net sales forecasts. Increases in the reserve for excess and obsolete inventory result in a corresponding charge to cost of sales.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, we recorded a reserve for excess and obsolete inventory of $48.9 million and $14.0 million, respectively. The increase is primarily attributable to updates to our estimates and assumptions about future product demand and product life cycles which have been affected by multiple factors, including the COVID-19 pandemic and general market conditions.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
ASC Topic 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures, defines fair value and requires us to establish a framework for measuring fair value and disclosure about fair value measurements. The framework requires the valuation of assets and liabilities subject to fair value measurements using a three tiered approach and fair value measurement be classified and disclosed in one of the following three categories. Inputs to valuation techniques are observable or unobservable. Observable inputs reflect market data obtained from independent sources, while unobservable inputs reflect our market assumptions.
Level 1: Quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets that are accessible at the measurement date for assets or liabilities.
Level 2: Observable prices that are based on inputs not quoted on active markets, but corroborated by market data.
Level 3: Unobservable inputs are used when little or no market data is available.
Carrying value of the financial instruments measured and classified within Level 1 is based on quoted prices.
The types of instruments that trade in markets that are not considered to be active, but are valued based on quoted market prices, broker or dealer quotations, or alternative pricing sources with reasonable levels of price transparency are generally classified within Level 2 of the fair value hierarchy.
Certain contingent consideration liabilities are classified within Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy because they use unobservable inputs. For those liabilities, fair value is determined using a discounted cash flow model or probability simulation model. The significant inputs of such models that are not observable in the market include financial metric growth rates, volatility rates, projections associated with milestones, the discount rate, and the related probabilities and payment structure in the contingent consideration arrangement.
Valuation of Goodwill and Intangible Assets with Indefinite Lives
Our goodwill represents the excess of the cost over the fair value of net assets acquired from our business combinations. The determination of the value of goodwill and intangible assets arising from business combinations and asset acquisitions requires extensive use of accounting estimates and judgments to allocate the purchase price to the fair value of the net tangible and intangible assets acquired, including capitalized in-process research and development, or IPR&D. Intangible assets acquired in a business combination that are used for IPR&D activities are considered indefinite lived until the completion or abandonment of the associated research and development efforts. Upon commercialization of the relevant research and development project, we will amortize the acquired in-process research and development over its estimated useful life or expense the acquired in-process research and development should the research and development project be unsuccessful with no future alternative use.
Goodwill and IPR&D are not amortized; however, they are assessed for impairment using fair value measurement techniques on an annual basis or more frequently if facts and circumstance warrant such a review. The goodwill or IPR&D are considered to be impaired if we determine that the carrying value of the reporting unit or IPR&D exceeds its respective fair value.
We perform our goodwill impairment analysis at the reporting unit level, which aligns with our reporting structure and availability of discrete financial information. We perform our annual impairment analysis by either doing a qualitative assessment of a reporting unit’s fair value from the last quantitative assessment to determine if there is potential impairment, or comparing a reporting unit’s estimated fair value to its carrying amount. We may do a qualitative assessment when the results of the previous quantitative test indicated the reporting unit’s estimated fair value was significantly in excess of the carrying value of its net assets and we do not believe there have been significant changes in the reporting unit’s operations that would significantly decrease its estimated fair value or significantly increase its net assets. If a quantitative assessment is performed the evaluation includes management estimates of cash flow projections based on internal future projections and/or use of a market approach by looking at market values of comparable companies. Key assumptions for these projections include net sales growth, future gross and operating margin growth, and its weighted cost of capital and terminal growth rates. The net sales and margin growth is based on increased sales of new and existing products as we maintain our investment in research and development. Additional assumed value creators may include increased efficiencies from capital spending. The resulting cash flows are discounted using a weighted average cost of capital. Operating mechanisms and requirements to ensure that growth and efficiency assumptions will ultimately be realized are also considered in the evaluation, including timing and probability of regulatory approvals for our products to be commercialized. Our market capitalization is also considered as a part of this analysis.
Our annual evaluation for impairment of goodwill consists of one reporting unit. In accordance with our policy, we completed our most recent annual evaluation for impairment as of October 1, 2020 using the qualitative method and determined that no impairment existed. In addition, no indicators of impairments were noted through December 31, 2020 and consequently, no impairment charge was recorded during the year.
Valuation of Intangible Assets
Our intangible assets are comprised primarily of purchased technology, customer relationships, manufacturing know-how and trade secrets, and trade name and trademarks. We make significant judgments in relation to the valuation of intangible assets resulting from business combinations and asset acquisitions.
Intangible assets are generally amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives of 2 to 17 years. We base the useful lives and related amortization expense on the period of time we estimate the assets will generate net sales or otherwise be used. We also periodically review the lives assigned to our intangible assets to ensure that our initial estimates do not exceed any revised estimated periods from which we expect to realize cash flows from the technologies. If a change were to occur in any of the above-mentioned factors or estimates, the likelihood of a material change in our reported results would increase.
We evaluate our intangible assets with finite lives for indications of impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Factors that could trigger an impairment review include significant under-performance relative to expected historical or projected future operating results, significant changes in the manner of our use of the acquired assets or the strategy for our overall business or significant negative industry or economic trends. If this evaluation indicates that the value of the intangible asset may be impaired, we make an assessment of the recoverability of the net carrying value of the asset over its remaining useful life. If this assessment indicates that the intangible asset is not recoverable, based on the estimated undiscounted future cash flows of the technology over the remaining amortization period, we reduce the net carrying value of the related intangible asset to fair value and may adjust the remaining amortization period.
Significant judgment is required in the forecasts of future operating results that are used in the discounted cash flow valuation models. It is possible that plans may change and estimates used may prove to be inaccurate. If our actual results, or the plans and estimates used in future impairment analyses, are lower than the original estimates used to assess the recoverability of these assets, we could incur additional impairment charges.
Valuation of Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation expense for equity-classified awards, principally related to restricted stock units, or RSUs, and performance restricted stock units, or PRSUs, is measured at the grant date based on the estimated fair value of the award. The fair value of equity instruments that are expected to vest is recognized and amortized over the requisite service period. We have granted awards with up to five year graded or cliff vesting terms. No exercise price or other monetary payment is required for receipt of the shares issued in settlement of the respective award; instead, consideration is furnished in the form of the participant’s service.
The fair value of RSUs including PRSUs with pre-defined performance criteria is based on the stock price on the date of grant whereas the expense for PRSUs with pre-defined performance criteria is adjusted with the probability of achievement of such performance criteria at each period end. The fair value of the PRSUs that are earned based on the achievement of pre-defined market conditions for total shareholder return, is estimated on the date of grant using a Monte Carlo valuation model. The key assumptions in applying this model are an expected volatility and a risk-free interest rate.
Stock-based compensation expense is adjusted from the grant date to exclude expense for awards that are expected to be forfeited. The forfeiture estimate is adjusted as necessary through the vesting date so that full compensation cost is recognized only for awards that vest. We assess the reasonableness of the estimated forfeiture rate at least annually, with any change to be made on a cumulative basis in the period the estimated forfeiture rates change. We considered our historical experience of pre-vesting forfeitures on awards by each homogenous group of employees as the basis to arrive at our estimated annual pre-vesting forfeiture rates.
We estimate the fair value of stock options issued under our equity incentive plans and shares issued to employees under our employee stock purchase plan, or ESPP, using a Black-Scholes option-pricing model on the date of grant. The Black-Scholes option-pricing model incorporates various assumptions including expected volatility, expected term and risk-free interest rates. The expected volatility is based on the historical volatility of our common stock over the most recent period commensurate with the estimated expected term of our stock options and ESPP offering period which is derived from historical experience. The risk-free interest rate for periods within the contractual life of the option is based on the U.S. Treasury yield in effect at the time of grant. We have never declared or paid dividends and have no plans to do so in the foreseeable future.
Accounting for Income Taxes
The asset and liability approach is used to recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the carrying amounts and the tax bases of assets and liabilities. Tax law and rate changes are reflected in income in the period such changes are enacted. We include interest and penalties related to income taxes, including unrecognized tax benefits, within income tax expense.
Our income tax returns are based on calculations and assumptions that are subject to examination by the Internal Revenue Service and other tax authorities. In addition, the calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax regulations. We recognize liabilities for uncertain tax positions based on a two-step process. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon settlement. While we believe we have appropriate support for the positions taken on our tax returns, we regularly assess the potential outcomes of examinations by tax authorities in determining the adequacy of our provision for income taxes. We continually assess the likelihood and amount of potential revisions and adjust the income tax provision, income taxes payable and deferred taxes in the period in which the facts that give rise to a revision become known.
Significant judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes, our deferred tax assets and liabilities and the valuation allowance recorded against our net deferred tax assets. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined using the enacted tax rates in effect for the years in which those tax assets are expected to be realized. A valuation allowance is established when it is more likely than not the future realization of all or some of the deferred tax assets will not be achieved. The evaluation of the need for a valuation allowance is performed on a jurisdiction-by-jurisdiction basis, and includes a review of all available positive and negative evidence. Factors reviewed include projections of pre-tax book income for the foreseeable future, determination of cumulative pre-tax book income after permanent differences, earnings history, and reliability of forecasting.
Based on our review, we concluded that it was more likely than not that we would be able to realize the future benefits of our domestic and foreign deferred tax assets, with the exceptions of California, Malta, Mexico, Brazil and Colombia. This conclusion was based on historical and projected operating performance, as well as our expectation that our operations will generate sufficient taxable income in future periods to realize the tax benefits associated with the deferred tax assets well within the statutory carryover periods. Due to low state apportionment, large net operating losses and the generation of sizeable research credits in California, we concluded that it is not more likely than not that we will be able to utilize our California deferred tax assets. Therefore, we have maintained a full valuation allowance on our California deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2020. Due to a history of losses in Malta, Mexico, Brazil and Colombia, and the lack of alternative sources of future taxable income, we have established a full valuation allowance against these entities’ deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2020.
We will continue to assess the need for a valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets by evaluating both positive and negative evidence that may exist. Any adjustment to the net deferred tax asset valuation allowance would be recorded in the statement of operations for the period that the adjustment is determined to be required.
Legal Proceedings
We are involved in a number of legal actions and investigations arising out of the normal course of our business. The outcomes of these legal actions and investigations are not within our complete control and may not be known for prolonged periods of time. In some actions, the claimants seek damages as well as other relief, including injunctions barring the sale of products that are the subject of the lawsuit, that could require significant expenditures or result in lost net sales. In accordance with authoritative guidance, we disclose information regarding each claim where the likelihood of a material loss contingency is probable or reasonably possible. An estimated loss contingency is accrued in our financial statements if it is both probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. If a loss is reasonably possible and can be reasonably estimated, the estimated loss or range of loss is disclosed in the notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. In most cases, significant judgment is required to estimate the amount and timing of a loss to be recorded. Our significant legal proceedings and investigations are discussed in Notes 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report.
The above listing is not intended to be a comprehensive list of all of our accounting policies. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by GAAP. See our Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto included in this Annual Report, which contain accounting policies and other disclosures required by GAAP.
Results of Operations
Net Sales
Our spinal hardware product line offerings include our implants and fixation products. Our surgical support product line offerings include IONM services, disposables and biologics, and our capital equipment, all of which are used to aid spine surgery.
We expect continued adoption of our innovative minimally invasive procedures and deeper penetration into existing accounts and international markets as our sales force executes on our strategy of selling the full mix of our products and services. However, the continued consolidation and increased purchasing power of our hospital customers and group purchasing organizations, continued changes in the public and private insurance markets regarding reimbursement, and ongoing policy and legislative changes in the United States have created less predictability. Although the market for procedurally-integrated spine surgery solutions should continue to grow over the long term, economic, political and regulatory influences are subjecting our industry to significant changes that may slow the growth rate of the spine surgery market. Further, the COVID-19 pandemic has led to a significant reduction in procedural volumes in 2020, and it is not possible for us to accurately predict the length or severity of the COVID-19 pandemic or the timing for a broad and sustained resumption of elective surgical procedures.
Our total net sales decreased $117.5 million in 2020 compared to 2019, representing total net sales decline of 10%. In 2019 our total net sales increased $66.4 million compared to 2018, representing total net sales growth of 6%.
Net sales from our spinal hardware product line offerings decreased $67.9 million, or 8%, in 2020 compared to 2019. Product volume in spinal hardware decreased our net sales by approximately 7% in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to a reduction in elective surgeries as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, we experienced unfavorable pricing impacts of approximately 1% in 2020 compared to 2019. Foreign currency fluctuation from 2019 to 2020 did not have a material impact on spinal hardware net sales.
Net sales from our spinal hardware product line offerings increased $62.8 million, or 8%, in 2019 compared to 2018. Product volume for our spinal hardware business increased our net sales by approximately 11%, offset by unfavorable pricing impacts of approximately 2% in 2019, as compared to 2018. Foreign currency fluctuation decreased our spinal hardware net sales by approximately 1% in 2019 compared to 2018.
Net sales from our surgical support product line offerings decreased $49.6 million, or 16%, in 2020 compared to 2019. Product and service volume in surgical support decreased our net sales by approximately 15% in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to a reduction in elective surgeries as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, we experienced unfavorable pricing impacts of approximately 1% in 2020 compared to 2019. Foreign currency fluctuation from 2019 to 2020 did not have a material impact on surgical support net sales.
Net sales from our surgical support product line offerings increased $3.6 million, or 1%, in 2019 compared to 2018. Product and service volume for our surgical support business increased our net sales by approximately 2% in 2019, offset by unfavorable pricing impacts of approximately 1% in 2019, as compared to 2018. Foreign currency fluctuation from 2018 to 2019 did not have a material impact on surgical support net sales.
Cost of Sales, Excluding Below Amortization of Intangible Assets
Cost of sales consists primarily of purchased goods, raw materials, labor and overhead associated with product manufacturing, inventory-related costs and royalty expenses, as well as the cost of providing IONM services, which includes personnel and physician oversight costs. We primarily procure and manufacture our goods in the United States, and accordingly, foreign currency fluctuations have not materially impacted our cost of sales.
Cost of sales increased $9.3 million, or 3%, in 2020 compared to 2019. However, cost of sales as a percentage of net sales in 2020 increased by 4% compared to 2019. The increase in cost of sales in 2020 is due to an increase in the reserve for excess and obsolete inventory of $35.0 million, which is primarily attributable to updates to our estimates and assumptions about future demand for certain spinal hardware products associated with market conditions affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. Offsetting this increase is a proportional reduction in cost of sales associated with lower net sales due to a reduction in elective surgeries as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cost of sales increased $1.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to 2018. Cost of sales for our business increased primarily due to growth in volume, changes in product mix, and shifts in production costs, offset by favorable manufacturing absorption from in-sourced products and improved throughput and plant efficiencies in 2019, compared to 2018.
Operating Expenses
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of compensation costs, commissions and training costs for our employees engaged in sales, marketing and customer support functions. The expense also includes commissions to sales representatives, freight expenses, surgeon training costs, depreciation expense for property and equipment such as surgical instrument sets, and administrative expenses for both employees and third-party service providers.
Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased by $64.0 million, or 10%, in 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease in 2020 is primarily due to impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic reducing compensation costs, including stock-based compensation subject to fair value adjustments for certain equity awards, as well as decreases in travel and consulting expenses, as compared to 2019. Additionally, during the year ended December 31, 2020, due to the impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic we implemented temporary actions to reduce expenses, including implementing compensation reductions for our Board of Directors and executive officers, and reducing discretionary spend across the organization.
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $35.3 million, or 6%, during the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to 2018. The increase in 2019 is primarily due to increased employee compensation and expenses associated with increased headcount, as well as expenses that increased as a function of the increase in net sales and international expansion, such as equipment, freight, and facility related expenses, as compared to 2018. Stock-based compensation expense increased in 2019 as compared to 2018 due to higher fair value adjustments to certain equity awards that are subject to revaluation on a recurring basis based on stock price performance. These costs were partially offset by decreases in non-recurring consulting fees associated with the implementation of our state tax-planning strategy, which occurred during 2018. Additionally, during 2019 there was an increase in expenses associated with our compliance efforts with the EU Medical Device Regulation, and legal expenses.
Research and Development
Research and development expense consists primarily of product research and development, clinical trial and study costs, regulatory and clinical functions, and compensation and other employee related expenses. In the last several years, we have introduced numerous new products and product enhancements that have significantly expanded our technology platforms and our comprehensive product portfolio. We have also acquired complementary and strategic assets and technology, particularly in the area of spinal hardware products. We continue to invest in research and development programs related to our core product portfolio, as well as in our capital equipment.
Research and development expense increased by $7.5 million, or 10%, in 2020 compared to 2019, and $10.7 million, or 17%, in 2019 compared to 2018. The increase in spending is primarily due to increased headcount and increased cost associated with further enhancement and functionality of our current and future product offerings, including capital equipment.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Amortization of intangible assets relates to the amortization of finite-lived intangible assets acquired. Amortization expense remained relatively constant in 2020 compared to 2019 and in 2019 compared to 2018.
Purchase of In-Process Research and Development
During the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2018, we expensed $1.0 million and $8.9 million, respectively, for a purchased in-process research and development asset which had no future alternative use.
Litigation Liability Loss
During the year ended December 31, 2018, we settled all outstanding matters with Madsen Medical, Inc. for $27.8 million. We no longer have any remaining liability related to this matter.
Business Transition Costs
We incur certain costs related to acquisition, integration and business transition activities, which include severance, relocation, consulting, leasehold exit costs, third-party merger and acquisition costs, contingent consideration fair value adjustments and other costs directly associated with such activities. Contingent consideration is accrued based on the fair value of the expected payment, and such accruals are subject to increase or decrease based on the assessment of the likelihood that the contingent milestones will be achieved resulting in payment. If an accrual for contingent consideration decreases during a particular period, it results in a reduction of costs during such period.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded $10.9 million of costs related to acquisition, integration and business transition activities, which included $2.3 million of fair value adjustments on contingent consideration liabilities associated with our 2018, 2017 and 2016 acquisitions.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded a reduction of costs of $(2.0) million related to acquisition, integration and business transition activities, which included $(6.3) million of fair value adjustments on contingent consideration liabilities associated with our 2018, 2017 and 2016 acquisitions.
During the year ended December 31, 2018, we recorded $11.5 million of costs related to acquisition, integration and business transition activities, which included $(1.5) million of fair value adjustments on contingent consideration liabilities associated with our 2018, 2017 and 2016 acquisitions.
Interest and Other Expense, Net
Total interest and other expense, net for the periods presented included gains and losses from strategic investments, gains and losses from changes in the fair value of derivatives, our pro rata allocation of net income or loss from our equity method investments, and net foreign currency exchange gains and losses.
Total interest and other expense, net increased by $43.3 million in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase in 2020 is primarily due to a net loss of $12.3 million recognized for the change in fair value derivative assets and liabilities resulting from the Senior Convertible Notes due 2023 issued in June 2020, as well as an increase in interest expense associated with the Senior Convertible Notes due 2025 issued in March 2020 and Senior Convertible Notes due 2023 issued in June 2020.
Income Tax (Benefit) Expense
The provision for income tax expense as a percentage of pre-tax loss from continuing operations reflected a tax benefit of 22% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with a tax expense of 19% on pre-tax income for the year ended December 31, 2019. Tax benefits contributing to the effective tax rate in 2020 were lower than those contributing to the effective tax rate in 2019 primarily due to higher foreign income inclusion, an increase in non-deductible officer’s compensation expense, increased contingent consideration adjustments, and increased valuation allowances, offset by increased tax reserve releases, decrease in state taxes, and increased deferred tax assets due to tax rate changes.
The provision for income tax expense as a percentage of pre-tax income from continuing operations reflected a tax expense of 19% for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared with a tax benefit of 43% on pre-tax income for the year ended December 31, 2018. Tax benefits contributing to the effective tax rate in 2019 were lower than those contributing to the effective tax rate in 2018 primarily due to reduced tax benefits from expiration of statute of limitations on uncertain tax positions, less favorable return to provision adjustments, and an increase in non-deductible officer’s compensation expense, offset by an increase in tax benefits associated with share-based payments, increase in research and development credit generation, and a decrease in valuation allowances.
We are subject to audits by federal, state, local, and foreign tax authorities. We believe that adequate provisions have been made for any adjustments that may result from tax examinations. However, the outcome of tax audits cannot be predicted with certainty. Should any issues addressed in our tax audits be resolved in a manner not consistent with our expectations, we could be required to adjust our provision for income taxes in the period such resolution occurs.
We continue to streamline our international operations, including procurement, logistics and customer service functions, in an effort to improve overall operational efficiencies. U.S. tax reform has lessened the tax benefit associated with foreign earnings due to a reduced federal corporate tax rate and the forced U.S. inclusion of certain foreign intangible related earnings. As international tax rules and regulations change, we may be subjected to higher taxes on foreign earnings.
Liquidity, Cash Flows and Capital Resources
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of liquidity are our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, cash generated from operations, proceeds from our convertible notes issuances, and access to our revolving line of credit. We expect that cash provided by operating activities may fluctuate in future periods as a result of a number of factors, including fluctuations in our operating results, which include impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic, working capital requirements and capital deployment decisions. We have historically invested our cash primarily in U.S. treasuries and government agencies, corporate debt, and money market funds. Certain of these investments are subject to general credit, liquidity and other market risks. The general condition of the financial markets and the economy may increase those risks and may affect the value and liquidity of investments and restrict our ability to access the capital markets.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors including our growth rate in net sales, the timing and extent of spending to support development efforts, the expansion of selling, general and administrative activities, the timing of introductions of new products and enhancements to existing products, successful insourcing of our manufacturing process, the continuing market acceptance of our products, the expenditures associated with possible future acquisitions or other business combination transactions, the outcome of current and future litigation, international expansions of our business, and impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect our cash flows from operations to continue to fund the ongoing core business. As borrowings become due, we may be required to access the capital markets or draw upon our line of credit for additional funding. As we assess inorganic growth strategies, we may need to supplement our internally generated cash flow with outside sources. As part of our liquidity strategy, we will continue to monitor our current level of earnings and cash flow generation as well as our ability to secure additional credit facilities, term loans, or other similar arrangements and access the capital markets in light of those earning levels and general financial market conditions.
A substantial portion of our operations are located in the United States, and the majority of our net sales and cash generation have been made in the United States. Accordingly, we do not have material net cash flow exposures to foreign currency rate fluctuations. However, as our business in markets outside of the United States continues to increase, we will be exposed to foreign currency exchange risk related to our foreign operations. Fluctuations in the rate of exchange between the United States dollar and foreign currencies, primarily in the pound sterling, the euro, the Australian dollar, the Brazilian real, the Singapore dollar, and the yen, could adversely affect our financial results, including our net sales, growth rates in net sales, gross margins, income and losses as well as assets and liabilities. We enter into forward currency contracts to partially offset the impact from fluctuations of the foreign currency rates on our third-party and short-term intercompany receivables and payables between our domestic and international operations. We currently do not hedge future forecasted transactions but will continue to assess whether that strategy is appropriate. As of December 31, 2020, the cash balance held by our foreign subsidiaries with currencies other than the United States dollar was approximately $52.3 million and it is our intention to indefinitely reinvest all of our current foreign earnings to increase working capital within our international business and to expand our existing operations outside the United States. As of December 31, 2020, our account receivable balance held by our foreign subsidiaries with currencies other than the United States dollar was approximately $48.3 million. We have operations in markets in which there is governmental financial instability which could impact funds that flow into the medical reimbursement system. In addition, loss of financial stability within these markets could lead to delays in reimbursement or inability to remit payment due to currency controls. Specifically, we have operations and/or sales in Puerto Rico, Brazil and Argentina. We do not have any material financial exposure to one customer or one country that would significantly hinder our liquidity.
We are currently, and in the future could be, involved in legal actions and investigations arising out of the normal course of our business. Due to the inherent uncertainties associated with pending legal actions and investigations, we cannot predict the outcome, and, with respect to certain pending litigation or claims where no liability has been accrued, to make a meaningful estimate of the reasonably possible loss or range of loss that could result from an unfavorable outcome, other than those matters disclosed in this Annual Report. We have no material accruals for pending litigation or claims for which accrual amounts are not disclosed in our Consolidated Financial Statements. It is reasonably possible, however, that an unfavorable outcome that exceeds our accrual estimate for a particular legal proceeding or investigation could have a material adverse effect on our liquidity and access to capital resources. Additionally, it is possible that in connection with a legal proceeding or investigation we are required to pay fees and expenses of the other party or set aside funds in an escrow or purchase a performance bond, regardless of our assessment of the probability of a loss. These requirements to pay fees and expenses or escrow funding in connection with a legal proceeding or investigation could have an adverse impact on our liquidity or affect our access to additional capital resources. We have disclosed all material accruals for pending litigation or investigations in Note 12 of the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report.
On September 12, 2016, we completed an acquisition of an imaging software and technology platform known as Lessray. In connection with the acquisition, we recorded a purchase accounting fair value estimate of $34.1 million for contingent consideration liabilities related to the achievement of certain regulatory and commercial milestones. In January 2018, we paid $9.0 million of the outstanding contingent consideration liabilities for the achievement of a commercial milestone. In July 2018, we paid $10.0 million of the outstanding contingent consideration liabilities for the achievement of a regulatory approval milestone. We anticipate the remaining sales-based milestones will become payable at varying times by 2024.
On September 7, 2017, we completed an acquisition of a medical device company that developed interbody implants for spinal fusion using patented porous PEEK technology. In connection with the acquisition, we recorded a purchase accounting fair value estimate of $31.4 million for contingent consideration liabilities related to the achievement of certain manufacturing and commercial milestones. In May 2020, we paid $7.5 million toward the successful achievement of a milestone. We anticipate the remaining milestones will become payable at varying times between 2021 and 2024, but are subject to change based on the achievement of those manufacturing and commercial milestones.
On February 24, 2021, we completed the acquisition of Simplify Medical Pty Limited, or Simplify Medical, a developer of cervical artificial disc technology for cervical total disc replacement procedures. Pursuant to the terms of the definitive agreement, we agreed to make an upfront payment of $150.0 million at closing, subject to customary purchase price adjustments, plus additional future payments contingent upon milestones related to regulatory approval and net sales from products incorporating the Simplify Medical cervical artificial disc technology. In connection with the closing, we funded the $150.0 million upfront payment using available cash and investments on hand. Upon achievement of the regulatory milestone, Simplify Medical will be entitled to a one-time payment of up to $45.9 million which could become due and payable at any time between 2021 and 2024. Additional milestone payments, which are contingent upon net sales from products incorporating the Simplify Medical cervical artificial disc technology, will become payable to Simplify Medical in calendar years 2023, 2024 and 2025.
Cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments were $1.0 billion and $213.0 million at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. While the unprecedented public health and governmental efforts to contain the spread of COVID-19 have created significant disruptions to the healthcare system and the global economy, as of the filing date of this report, we believe our existing cash, cash equivalents, short-term investments, projected future cash flows from operations and access to external financing sources are sufficient to satisfy our current and reasonably anticipated requirements for funds to conduct our operations in the ordinary course of our business and pay our obligation as they become due for the next twelve months. Given the impact the COVID-19 pandemic has had on demand for elective surgical procedures, we took temporary actions to reduce operating expenses and preserve liquidity such as reducing compensation for our directors and executive officers in 2020, limiting discretionary spend, and adjusting manufacturing capacity based upon demand. Additionally, we have varying needs for cash in connection with our Senior Convertible Notes and also as a result of certain acquisition-related obligations and milestone achievements. As of December 31, 2020, we had outstanding $650.0 million aggregate principal amount of unsecured senior convertible notes with a stated interest rate of 2.25% and a maturity date of March 15, 2021, which we refer to as the 2021 Notes. We anticipate that the 2021 Notes will be settled by satisfying the principal amount outstanding with cash and any note conversion value over the principal amount in shares of our common stock. Future litigation or requirements to escrow funds could also materially impact our liquidity and our ability to invest in and run our business on an ongoing basis. Although we have no cash borrowings under our existing revolving senior credit facility as of the date of this report, we expect to use our cash resources or cash borrowings under our senior credit facility to support our business within the context of prevailing market and economic conditions, which, given the COVID-19 crisis, could rapidly and materially deteriorate or otherwise change. During this time, we may seek other sources of liquidity through capital market or bank loan transactions to support our business needs. In addition, we may seek to further adjust or amend the terms of and/or expand the capacity of our existing senior credit facility, or enter into additional credit facilities, term loans, or other similar arrangements. However, with the uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 crisis, our ability to engage in such transactions may be constrained by volatile financial market conditions, reduced investor and/or lender interest or capacity, as well as our liquidity, leverage, and general creditworthiness and we can provide no assurance as to successfully completing such transactions. Furthermore, our ability to borrow under our existing revolving senior credit facility is subject to remaining in compliance with underlying financial covenants which may be difficult to satisfy if the COVID-19 pandemic continues to adversely impact the healthcare system and our business. Further discussion of the potential impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic is provided under Part I, Item 1A - Risk Factors.
The increase in liquidity during the year ended December 31, 2020 of $817.0 million was mainly driven by cash inflows of $873.8 million related to the net issuance of our Senior Convertible Notes due 2023 and 2025 and $185.9 million in cash provided from operations, partially offset by $105.7 million in cash used for purchases of property and equipment, $80.7 million in cash used for treasury stock purchases, and $53.9 million net in cash used for the call spreads on the sales and purchases of our warrants and bond hedges issued in connection with the Senior Convertible Notes due 2023 and 2025. At December 31, 2020, we had cash totaling $1.5 million in restricted accounts which is not available to us to meet any ongoing capital requirements if and when needed.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities was $185.9 million in 2020, compared to $235.3 million in 2019. The $49.4 million decrease in cash provided by operating activities was primarily due to decreased operational cash flows in 2020 related to lower net sales and cash receipts resulting from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as an increase in payments for compensation related accruals and timing of spending.
Cash provided by operating activities was $235.3 million in 2019, compared to $219.2 million in 2018. The $16.1 million increase in cash provided by operating activities was primarily due to the comparable period’s payment of $27.8 million for the settlement of the Madsen litigation matter. This was partially offset by increased inventory purchases and general timing of cash receipts and disbursements in 2019.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities was $281.9 million in 2020, compared to $134.5 million used in 2019. The $147.4 million increase in cash used in investing activities was primarily due to $173.5 million in cash used for the net purchases of marketable debt securities, offset by a decrease of $17.2 million in cash used for purchases of property and equipment, and a decrease of $8.9 million in cash used for acquisitions, strategic investments and intangible assets in 2020 compared to 2019.
Cash used in investing activities was $134.5 million in 2019, compared to $161.3 million used in 2018. The $26.8 million decrease in cash used in investing activities was primarily due to a decrease of $51.3 million in cash used for business combinations, strategic investments and intangible assets, offset by a $21.0 million increase in cash used for purchases of property and equipment in 2019 compared to 2018.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities was $736.7 million in 2020, compared to $6.6 million cash used in 2019. The $743.3 million increase in cash provided by financing activities was primarily due to the net issuances of our Senior Convertible Notes due 2023 and 2025 of $873.8 million, offset by $53.9 million of net cash used for the call spreads on the sales and purchases of our warrants and bond hedges issued in connection with the Senior Convertible Notes due 2023 and 2025, and an increase in treasury stock purchases of $66.2 million in 2020 compared to 2019.
Cash used in financing activities was $6.6 million in 2019, compared to $14.6 million cash used in 2018. The $8.0 million decrease in cash used in financing activities was primarily due to decreased contingent consideration payments of $18.6 million, offset by increased treasury stock purchases of $11.6 million in 2019 compared to 2018.
Treasury stock purchases totaled $80.7 million during 2020, relating to our share repurchase program, the vesting of equity awards and stock option exercises. In March 2020, in connection with the issuance of the Senior Convertible Notes due 2025, we repurchased approximately 1,085,000 shares of our common stock for $75.0 million. We use net share settlement on stock issuances, which results in cash tax payments, as well as a decrease in the cash receipts from the issuance of common stock upon the exercising of stock options. Net share settlement is generally used in lieu of cash payments by employees for minimum tax withholding or exercise costs for equity awards. The net share settlement is accounted for as a treasury share repurchase transaction, with the cost of any deemed repurchased shares included in treasury stock and reported as a reduction in total equity at the time of settlement. Additionally, net share settlement for tax withholding requires us to fund a significant amount of cash for certain tax payment obligations from time-to-time with respect to the employee tax obligations for vested equity awards. We anticipate using cash generated from operating activities to fund such payments.
Senior Convertible Notes
2.25% Senior Convertible Notes due 2021
In March 2016, we issued $650.0 million principal amount of unsecured senior convertible notes with a stated interest rate of 2.25% and a maturity date of March 15, 2021, which we refer to as the 2021 Notes. The net proceeds from the offering, after deducting initial purchasers' discounts and costs directly related to the offering, were approximately $634.1 million. Interest on the 2021 Notes began accruing upon issuance and is payable semi-annually. Prior to September 14, 2020, the 2021 Notes provided for settlement in cash, stock, or a combination thereof, solely at our discretion. As of September 14, 2020, combination settlement was deemed to have been elected by us and the 2021 Notes will be settled by satisfying the principal amount outstanding with cash and any note conversion value over the principal amount in shares of our common stock. The initial conversion rate of the 2021 Notes is 16.7158 shares per $1,000 principal amount, which is equivalent to a conversion price of approximately $59.82 per share, subject to adjustments. Prior to September 15, 2020, holders could have converted their 2021 Notes only under the following conditions: (a) during any calendar quarter beginning June 30, 2016, if the reported sale price of our common stock for at least 20 days out of 30 consecutive trading days ending on the last trading day of the immediately preceding calendar quarter was greater than 130% of the conversion price on each applicable trading day; (b) during the five business day period in which the trading price of the 2021 Notes fell below 98% of the product of (i) the last reported sale price of our common stock and (ii) the conversion rate on that date; and (c) upon the occurrence of specified corporate events, as defined in the 2021 Notes. From September 15, 2020 and until the close of business on the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding March 15, 2021, holders may convert their 2021 Notes at any time (regardless of the foregoing circumstances). The 2021 Notes can no longer be redeemed by us. We previously had the ability to redeem the 2021 Notes, at our option, in whole or in part beginning on March 20, 2019 until the close of business on the business day immediately preceding September 15, 2020 if the last reported sale price of our common stock had been at least 130% of the conversion price then in effect for at least 20 trading days during any 30 consecutive trading day period ending on, and including, the trading day immediately preceding the date on which we deliver written notice of a redemption. No principal payments are due on the 2021 Notes prior to maturity. Other than restrictions relating to certain fundamental changes and consolidations, mergers or asset sales and customary anti-dilution adjustments, the 2021 Notes do not contain any financial covenants and do not restrict us from paying dividends or issuing or repurchasing any of our other securities. As of September 15, 2020, holders may convert their 2021 Notes at any time prior to the close of business on the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding the maturity date. The impact of the convertible feature will be dilutive to our earnings per share when our average stock price for the period is greater than the conversion price.
In connection with the offering of the 2021 Notes, we entered into transactions for convertible notes hedge, which we refer to as the 2021 Hedge, and warrants, which we refer to as the 2021 Warrants. The 2021 Hedge was entered into with the initial purchasers of the 2021 Notes and/or their affiliates, which we refer to as the 2021 Counterparties, entitling us to purchase up to 10,865,270 shares of our own common stock at an initial stock price of $59.82 per share, each of which is subject to adjustment. The cost of the 2021 Hedge was $111.2 million. The 2021 Hedge will expire on March 15, 2021. The 2021 Hedge is expected to reduce the potential equity dilution upon conversion of the 2021 Notes if the daily volume-weighted average price per share of our common stock exceeds the strike price of the 2021 Hedge. Our assumed exercise of the 2021 Hedge is considered anti-dilutive since the effect of the inclusion would always be anti-dilutive with respect to the calculation of diluted earnings per share.
In addition, we sold the 2021 Warrants to the 2021 Counterparties to acquire up to 10,865,270 common shares of our stock. The 2021 Warrants will expire on various dates from June 2021 through December 2021 and may be settled in cash or net shares. It is our current intent and policy to settle all conversions in shares of our common stock. We received $44.9 million in cash proceeds from the sale of the 2021 Warrants. The 2021 Warrants could have a dilutive effect on our earnings per share to the extent that the price of our common stock during a given measurement period exceeds the strike price of the 2021 Warrants, which is $80.00 per share.
1.00% Senior Convertible Notes due 2023
In June 2020, we issued $450.0 million principal amount of unsecured Senior Convertible Notes with a stated interest rate of 1.00% and a maturity date of June 1, 2023, which we refer to as the 2023 Notes. The net proceeds from the offering, after deducting initial purchasers’ discounts and costs directly related to the offering, were approximately $436.7 million. The 2023 Notes were initially required to be settled in cash as we did not have enough available shares and were unable to reserve the maximum number of shares issuable under the 2023 Notes (“sufficient reserved shares”). On September 10, 2020, we held a Special Meeting of Stockholders and received stockholder approval to amend our Restated Certificate of Incorporation to increase the number of shares of our common stock authorized for issuance from 120,000,000 shares to 150,000,000 shares. As a result of the increase in the number of shares of our common stock authorized for issuance, we currently have sufficient reserved shares and therefore may settle conversions of the 2023 Notes in cash, stock, or a combination thereof, solely at our discretion. It is our current intent and policy to settle all conversions through combination settlement, which involves satisfying the principal amount outstanding with cash and any note conversion value over the principal amount in shares of our common stock. The initial conversion rate of the 2023 Notes is 11.8778 shares per $1,000 principal amount, which is equivalent to a conversion price of approximately $84.19 per share, subject to adjustments. In addition, following certain corporate events that occur prior to the maturity date or if we issue a notice of redemption, we will increase the conversion rate for a holder who elects to convert its 2023 Notes in connection with such a corporate event or in connection with such redemption in certain circumstances. Prior to February 1, 2023, holders may convert their 2023 Notes only under the following conditions: (a) during any calendar quarter commencing after the calendar quarter ending on September 30, 2020 (and only during such calendar quarter), if the last reported sale price of our common stock for at least 20 trading days (whether or not consecutive) during a period of 30 consecutive trading days ending on, and including, the last trading day of the immediately preceding calendar quarter is greater than or equal to 130% of the conversion price on each applicable trading day; (b) during the five business day period after any five consecutive trading day period, referred to as the measurement period, in which the trading price of the 2023 Notes per $1,000 principal amount of notes for each trading day of the measurement period was less than 98% of the product of the last reported sale price of our common stock and the conversion rate on such trading day; (c) if we call any or all of the 2023 Notes for redemption, at any time prior to the close of business on the second scheduled trading day preceding the redemption date; or (d) upon the occurrence of specified corporate events, as defined in the 2023 Notes. On or after February 1, 2023, until the close of business on the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding June 1, 2023, holders may convert their 2023 Notes at any time, regardless of the foregoing conditions. We may not redeem the 2023 Notes prior to the maturity date. No principal payments are due on the 2023 Notes prior to maturity. Other than restrictions relating to certain fundamental changes and consolidations, mergers or asset sales and customary anti-dilution adjustments, the 2023 Notes do not contain any financial covenants and do not restrict us from conducting significant restructurings, paying dividends or issuing or repurchasing any of our other securities. As of December 31, 2020, we are unaware of any current events or market conditions that would allow holders to convert the 2023 Notes. The impact of the convertible feature will be dilutive to our earnings per share when our average stock price for the period is greater than the conversion price.
In connection with the sale of the 2023 Notes, we entered into transactions for convertible notes hedge, which we refer to as the 2023 Hedge, and warrants, which we refer to as the 2023 Warrants. The 2023 Hedge was entered into with certain dealers, which included affiliates of certain of the initial purchasers of the 2023 Notes and other financial institutions, which we refer to as the 2023 Counterparties, entitling us to purchase up to 5,345,010 shares of our own common stock at an initial stock price of $84.19 per share, each of which is subject to adjustment. The cost of the 2023 Hedge was $69.5 million. The 2023 Hedge will expire on the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding June 1, 2023. The 2023 Hedge is expected to reduce the potential equity dilution upon conversion of the 2023 Notes if the daily volume-weighted average price per share of our common stock exceeds the strike price of the 2023 Hedge. Our assumed exercise of the 2023 Hedge is considered anti-dilutive since the effect of the inclusion would always be anti-dilutive with respect to the calculation of diluted earnings per share.
In addition, we sold the 2023 Warrants to the 2023 Counterparties to acquire up to 5,345,010 common shares of our stock. The 2023 Warrants initially limited the amount of shares we were required to reserve for issuance under the 2023 Warrants to an aggregate of 3,093,500 shares of our common stock, subject to adjustment upon having a sufficient amount of authorized and unissued shares which are not reserved for other transactions. As a result of receiving stockholder approval to increase the number of shares of our common stock authorized for issuance on September 10, 2020, we subsequently entered into amendment agreements with each of the 2023 Counterparties to increase the number of authorized shares of our common stock required to be reserved under the 2023 Warrants to the aggregate amount of 6,948,512 shares. The 2023 Warrants will expire on various dates from September 2023 through November 2023 and may be settled in net shares or cash, subject to certain conditions. It is our current intent and policy to settle all conversions in shares of our common stock. We received $46.8 million in cash proceeds from the sale of the 2023 Warrants. The 2023 Warrants could have a dilutive effect on our earnings per share to the extent that the price of our common stock during a given measurement period exceeds the strike price of the 2023 Warrants, which is $104.84 per share.
0.375% Senior Convertible Notes due 2025
In March 2020, we issued $450.0 million principal amount of unsecured senior convertible notes with a stated interest rate of 0.375% and a maturity date of March 15, 2025, which we refer to as the 2025 Notes. The net proceeds from the offering, after deducting initial purchasers’ discounts and costs directly related to the offering, were approximately $437.0 million. Interest on the 2025 Notes began accruing upon issuance and is payable semi-annually. The 2025 Notes may be settled in cash, stock, or a combination thereof, solely at our discretion. It is our current intent and policy to settle all conversions through combination settlement, which involves satisfying the principal amount outstanding with cash and any note conversion value over the principal amount in shares of our common stock. The initial conversion rate of the 2025 Notes is 10.7198 shares per $1,000 principal amount, which is equivalent to a conversion price of approximately $93.29 per share, subject to adjustments. In addition, following certain corporate events that occur prior to the maturity date or if we issue a notice of redemption, we will increase the conversion rate for a holder who elects to convert its 2025 Notes in connection with such a corporate event or in connection with such redemption in certain circumstances. Prior to September 15, 2024, holders may convert their 2025 Notes only under the following conditions: (a) during any calendar quarter commencing after the calendar quarter ending on June 30, 2020 (and only during such calendar quarter), if the last reported sale price of our common stock for at least 20 trading days (whether or not consecutive) during a period of 30 consecutive trading days ending on, and including, the last trading day of the immediately preceding calendar quarter is greater than or equal to 130% of the conversion price on each applicable trading day; (b) during the five business day period after any five consecutive trading day period, referred to as the measurement period, in which the trading price of the 2025 Notes per $1,000 principal amount of notes for each trading day of the measurement period was less than 98% of the product of the last reported sale price of our common stock and the conversion rate on such trading day; (c) if we call any or all of the 2025 Notes for redemption, at any time prior to the close of business on the second scheduled trading day preceding the redemption date; or (d) upon the occurrence of specified corporate events, as defined in the 2025 Notes. On or after September 15, 2024, until the close of business on the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding March 15, 2025, holders may convert their 2025 Notes at any time, regardless of the foregoing conditions. We may not redeem the 2025 Notes prior to March 20, 2023. We may redeem the 2025 Notes, at our option, in whole or in part, on or after March 20, 2023 until the close of business on the business day immediately preceding September 15, 2024, if the last reported sale price of our common stock has been at least 130% of the conversion price then in effect for at least 20 trading days during any 30 consecutive trading day period ending on, and including, the trading day immediately preceding the date on which we deliver written notice of a redemption. The redemption price will be equal to 100% of the principal amount of such 2025 Notes to be redeemed plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the redemption date. No principal payments are due on the 2025 Notes prior to maturity. Other than restrictions relating to certain fundamental changes and consolidations, mergers or asset sales and customary anti-dilution adjustments, the 2025 Notes do not contain any financial covenants and do not restrict us from conducting significant restructurings, paying dividends or issuing or repurchasing any of our other securities. As of December 31, 2020, we are unaware of any current events or market conditions that would allow holders to convert the 2025 Notes. The impact of the convertible feature will be dilutive to our earnings per share when our average stock price for the period is greater than the conversion price.
In connection with the sale of the 2025 Notes, we entered into transactions for convertible notes hedge, which we refer to as the 2025 Hedge, and warrants, which we refer to as the 2025 Warrants. The 2025 Hedge was entered into with certain dealers, which included affiliates of certain of the initial purchasers of the 2025 Notes and other financial institutions, which we refer to as the 2025 Counterparties, entitling us to purchase up to 4,823,910 shares of our own common stock at an initial stock price of $93.29 per share, each of which is subject to adjustment. The cost of the 2025 Hedge was $78.3 million. The 2025 Hedge will expire on the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding March 15, 2025. The 2025 Hedge is expected to reduce the potential equity dilution upon conversion of the 2025 Notes if the daily volume-weighted average price per share of our common stock exceeds the strike price of the 2025 Hedge. Our assumed exercise of the 2025 Hedge is considered anti-dilutive since the effect of the inclusion would always be anti-dilutive with respect to the calculation of diluted earnings per share.
In addition, we sold the 2025 Warrants to the 2025 Counterparties to acquire up to 4,823,910 common shares of our stock. The 2025 Warrants will expire on various dates from June 2025 through October 2025 and may be settled in net shares or cash, subject to certain conditions. It is our current intent and policy to settle all conversions in shares of our common stock. We received $47.1 million in cash proceeds from the sale of the 2025 Warrants. The 2025 Warrants could have a dilutive effect on our earnings per share to the extent that the price of our common stock during a given measurement period exceeds the strike price of the 2025 Warrants, which is $127.84 per share.
Revolving Senior Credit Facility
In February 2020, we entered into a Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, or the 2020 Credit Agreement, for a revolving senior credit facility, referred to as the 2020 Facility, which replaced the previous Amended and Restated Credit Agreement we had entered into in April 2017. The 2020 Credit Agreement was further amended in May 2020 to, among other things, provide additional flexibility in determining the financial covenant leverage ratios for the second and third fiscal quarters of 2020 and to adjust certain margin and benchmark rates used to determine interest under the 2020 Facility. The 2020 Credit Agreement provides for secured revolving loans, multicurrency loan options and letters of credit in an aggregate amount of up to $550.0 million. The 2020 Credit Agreement also contains an expansion feature, which allows us to increase the aggregate principal amount of the 2020 Facility provided we remain in compliance with the underlying financial covenants on a pro forma basis, including but not limited to, compliance with the consolidated interest coverage ratio and certain consolidated leverage ratios. The 2020 Facility matures in February 2025 (subject to an earlier springing maturity date), and includes a sublimit of $50.0 million for standby letters of credit, a sublimit of $250.0 million for multicurrency borrowings, and a sublimit of $5.0 million for swingline loans. All of our assets including the assets of our material domestic subsidiaries continue to be pledged as collateral under the 2020 Facility (subject to customary exceptions) pursuant to the terms set forth in the Second Amended and Restated Security and Pledge Agreement executed in favor of the administrative agent. Each of our material domestic subsidiaries guarantee the 2020 Facility. In connection with the 2020 Facility, we incurred issuance costs which will be amortized over the term of the 2020 Facility. We did not carry any outstanding revolving loans under the 2020 Facility as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Borrowings under the 2020 Facility bear interest, at our option, at a rate equal to an applicable margin plus: (a) the applicable Eurocurrency Rate (as defined in the 2020 Credit Agreement), or (b) a base rate determined by reference to the highest of (1) the federal funds effective rate plus 0.50%, (2) the Bank of America prime rate, and (3) the Eurocurrency Rate for an interest period of one month plus 1.00%. The margin for the 2020 Facility ranges, based on our consolidated total net leverage ratio, from 0.50% to 1.25% in the case of base rate loans and from 1.50% to 2.25% in the case of Eurocurrency Rate loans. The 2020 Facility includes an unused line fee ranging, based on our consolidated total net leverage ratio, from 0.35% to 0.50% per annum on the revolving commitment.
The 2020 Credit Agreement contains affirmative, negative, permitted acquisition and financial covenants, and events of default customary for financings of this type. The financial covenants require us to maintain a consolidated interest coverage ratio and certain consolidated leverage ratios, which are measured on a quarterly basis. The 2020 Facility grants the lenders preferred first priority liens and security interests in capital stock, intercompany debt and all of our present and future property and assets including each guarantor. As of December 31, 2020, we are in compliance with the 2020 Credit Agreement covenants.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Contractual obligations and commitments represent future cash commitments and liabilities under agreements with third parties, including our Senior Convertible Notes, operating leases and other contractual obligations.
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2020:
(1)
Senior Convertible Notes includes the expected coupon interest payments on the outstanding debt. See Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report for further discussion of the terms of the Senior Convertible Notes.
Total contractual obligations and commitments listed in the table above excludes potential contingent consideration payments pursuant to certain merger, purchase, and product development agreements, other than achieved milestones. See Note 4 and 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report for further discussion on the contingent consideration obligations and product development agreements, respectively.
The expected timing of payments of the obligations discussed above is estimated based on current information. Timing of payment and actual amounts paid may be different depending on the time of receipt of services or changes to agreed-upon amounts for some obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet activities.