ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes which are included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements included in this discussion as a result of certain factors, including, but not limited to, those discussed in “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a medical device company dedicated to changing the lives of patients suffering from fluid overload through science, collaboration, and innovative technology. The company is focused on developing, manufacturing, and commercializing medical devices used in ultrafiltration therapy, including the Aquadex System. The Aquadex SmartFlow system is indicated for temporary (up to eight hours) or extended (longer than 8 hours in patients who require hospitalization) use in adult and pediatric patients weighing 20kg or more whose fluid overload is unresponsive to medical management, including diuretics.
Prior to July 2016, we were focused on developing the C-Pulse System for treatment of Class III and ambulatory Class IV heart failure. In August 2016, we acquired the Aquadex Business from a subsidiary of Baxter, a global leader in the hospital products and dialysis markets. In September 2016, we announced a strategic refocus of our strategy that included halting all clinical evaluations of the C-Pulse System related technology to fully focus our resources on our recently acquired Aquadex Business.
On May 23, 2017, we announced that we were changing our name from Sunshine Heart, Inc. to CHF Solutions, Inc. to more appropriately reflect the direction of our business.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we were subject to challenging social and economic conditions created as a result of the outbreak of the novel strain of coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2. The resulting impact of the COVID-19 pandemic created disruptions in our operations resulting from rapid and evolving changes
implemented to keep our customers, their patients, and our employees safe. These changes included restrictions on hospital access imposed on our field employees by customers dealing in the front lines of COVID-19 and managing the spread of the virus, changes to employees work practices by requiring employees to work remotely and increased protocols to ensure the safety of those employees that remained on site. The ongoing impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on our operational and financial performance will depend on certain future developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak, the ongoing impact on our customers and hospital access restrictions imposed on our field employees, and effect on our vendors, all of which remain uncertain and cannot be predicted.
We may experience curtailed customer demand or constrained supply that could materially adversely impact our business, results of operations and overall financial performance in future periods. Specifically, we may experience negative impacts from changes in how we conduct business due to the COVID-19 pandemic, including but not limited to restrictions on travel and in-person meetings, production delays, warehouses and staffing disruptions and shortages, decreases or delays in customer demand and spending, difficulties or changes to our sales process and customer support.
Several hospitals in the U.S. have included the Aquadex System into their treatment protocol for fluid management of COVID-19, especially when dialysis equipment and staff are limited. In March 2020, we increased production of the Aquadex System to meet anticipated demand due to its use in treatment protocols for COVID-19. We estimate that approximately 14% of our U.S. revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, was driven by hospitals treating patients with COVID-19. However, we have also seen changes to our sales practices due to restrictions on hospital access and believe that revenue in other areas was negatively impacted by these restrictions. In addition, the disruption created by COVID-19 has created significant uncertainty about our ability to access the capital markets in future periods. As of the filing date of this Form 10-K, the extent to which COVID-19 may continue to impact our financial condition or results of operations or guidance is uncertain and cannot be reasonably estimated but could be material and last for an extended period of time. The effect of the COVID-19 pandemic may not be fully reflected in our results of operations and overall financial performance until future periods. See Part 1, Item 1 - A “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Recent Developments
Pediatrics
In February 2020, we received 510(k) clearance of the Aquadex System to include pediatric patients who weigh 20kg or more. The Aquadex System is being prescribed by physicians to treat various conditions in pediatric patients, including heart failure, cardiac surgery, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) therapy, solid organ transplantation, and kidney replacement therapy for neonatal patients.
Reverse Stock Split
On October 16, 2020, we effected a 1-for-30 reverse split of our outstanding common stock (the “2020 Reverse Stock Split”). The 2020 Reverse Stock Split did not change the par value of our common stock or the number of common or preferred shares authorized by the Certificate of Incorporation. All share and per-share amounts have been retroactively adjusted to reflect the reverse stock split for all periods presented.
Public Offerings
On March 19, 2021, we closed on an underwritten public offering of 3,795,816 shares of common stock, which includes the full exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option, for gross proceeds of approximately $20.9 million. Net proceeds totaled approximately $19.0 million after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and other costs associated with the offering and after giving effect to the underwriters’ full exercise of their overallotment option.
On August 21, 2020, we closed on an underwritten public offering of 1,064,678 shares of common stock and warrants to purchase 1,064,678 shares of common stock, which includes the full exercise of the underwriter’s over-allotment option, for gross proceeds of approximately $14.4 million. Net proceeds totaled approximately $13.0 million after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and other costs associated with the offering and after giving effect to the underwriters’ full exercise of their overallotment option.
On May 5, 2020, we closed on a registered direct offering of 119,930 shares of common stock for gross proceeds of approximately $1.7 million, prior to deduction of commissions and offering expenses related to the
transaction. In a concurrent private placement, we agreed to issue to the investors in the registered direct offering warrants to purchase up to 59,966 shares our common stock. The warrants were exercisable immediately and will expire five and a half years from the date of issuance.
On April 1, 2020, we closed on a registered direct offering of 171,008 shares of common stock for gross proceeds of approximately $2.2 million, prior to deduction of commissions and offering expenses related to the transaction. In a concurrent private placement, we agreed to issue to the investors in the registered direct offering warrants to purchase up to 85,506 shares of our common stock. The warrants were exercisable immediately and will expire five and a half years from the date of issuance.
On March 23, 2020, we closed on a registered direct offering of 138,715 shares of common stock for gross proceeds of approximately $1.2 million, before deducting commissions and offering expenses related to the transaction. In a concurrent private placement, we agreed to issue to the investors in the registered direct offering warrants to purchase up to 138,715 shares of our common stock. The warrants were exercisable six months from the date of issuance and will expire five and a half years from the date of issuance.
Nasdaq Notices
On December 17, 2019, we received the Notice from Nasdaq advising that for 30 consecutive trading days preceding the date of the Notice, the bid price of our common stock had closed below the $1.00 per share minimum required under the Minimum Bid Price Requirement. Under Nasdaq Listing Rule 5810(c)(3)(A), if during the 180-calendar day Compliance Period, the closing bid price of our common stock was at or above $1.00 for a minimum of 10 consecutive business days, we would regain compliance with the Minimum Bid Price Requirement and our common stock would continue to be eligible for listing on the Nasdaq, absent noncompliance with any other requirement for continued listing. The Notice further stated that if compliance with the Minimum Bid Price Requirement cannot be demonstrated by the end of the 180-day period, we may be eligible for a second 180-day period to regain compliance. To be eligible for the second 180 day compliance period, (i) we had to meet the market value of publicly held shares requirement for continued listing and all other applicable standards for initial listing on the Nasdaq set forth in Marketplace Rule 5505 (except the Minimum Bid Price Requirement), (ii) we had to provide Nasdaq with written notice of our intention to cure the deficiency, through a reverse stock split, if necessary, and (iii) Nasdaq had to determine that the Company will be able to cure the deficiency. If we did not regain compliance with the Minimum Bid Price. Requirement by the end of the Compliance Period (or the Compliance Period as may be extended) the Company’s common stock would be subject to delisting. At such time, we could appeal Nasdaq’s delisting determination.
On April 17, 2020, Nasdaq notified us that the 180-day period to regain compliance with the Minimum Bid Price Requirement had been extended due to the global market impact caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. More specifically, Nasdaq stated that the compliance periods for any company previously notified about non-compliance are suspended effective April 16, 2020, until June 30, 2020. On July 1, 2020, companies received the balance of any pending compliance period exception to regain compliance with the Minimum Bid Price Requirement. As a result of this extension, we had until August 28, 2020 to regain compliance with the Minimum Bid Price Requirement.
On September 1, 2020, we announced the receipt of written notification from Nasdaq that it had granted the Company’s request for a 180-day extension to regain compliance the Minimum Bid Price Requirement, effectively providing us until February 24, 2021 to meet the requirement. After implementing the 2020 Reverse Stock Split described above, we received confirmation from Nasdaq on November 2, 2020, that we had regained compliance with the minimum bid price rule and the listing matter was closed.
Appointment of Nestor Jaramillo, Jr.
On January 19, 2021, we announced that Nestor Jaramillo, Jr., our President and Chief Operating Officer, was appointed President and Chief Executive Officer effective immediately. John Erb, the predecessor Chief Executive Officer will remain a part-time employee for a period of six months to assist with the transition and thereafter will continue to serve as the Company’s Chairman of the Board.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
We have adopted various accounting policies to prepare the consolidated financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (U.S. GAAP). Our most significant accounting policies are disclosed in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The preparation of the consolidated financial statements, in conformity with U.S. GAAP, requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Our estimates and assumptions, including those related to stock-based compensation, valuation of equity instruments, inventory and accounts receivable reserves, potential impairment of long-lived assets and income tax reserves are updated as appropriate, which in most cases is quarterly. We base our estimates on historical experience, valuations, or various assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (ASC), Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. Accordingly, we recognize revenue when our customers obtain control of their products or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for those goods and services. See Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Accounts Receivable
Our accounts receivable have terms that require payment in 30 days. We did not establish an allowance for doubtful accounts at December 31, 2020 as we have not experienced any write offs or a deterioration in the aging of our receivables to date and do not expect to experience in the future.
Inventories
Inventories represent primarily finished goods, raw materials and subassemblies and are recorded as the lower of cost or net realizable value using the first-in, first out method.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize all share-based payments to employees and directors, including grants of stock options, and common stock awards in the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss as an operating expense based on their fair values as established at the grant date. Equity instruments issued to non-employees consist of warrants to purchase shares of our common stock. These warrants are either fully vested and exercisable at the date of grant or vest over a certain period during which services are provided.
We compute the estimated fair values of stock options and warrants using the Black-Scholes option pricing model and market-based warrants using a Monte Carlo valuation model. Market price at the date of grant is used to calculate the fair value of restricted stock units and common stock awards.
We expense the fair market value of fully vested awards at the time of grant, and of unvested awards over the period in which the related services are received. Stock-based compensation expense is based on awards ultimately expected to vest and is reduced for estimated forfeitures except for market-based warrants which are expensed based on the grant date fair value regardless of whether the award vests. Forfeitures are estimated at the time of grant and revised, if necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates.
Loss per share
Basic loss per share is computed based on the net loss for each period divided by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding. The net loss allocable to common stockholders for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, reflects a $1.8 million increase for the net deemed dividend to preferred stockholders provided in connection with the close of the public offering of Series H Convertible Preferred Stock on January 28, 2020. This net deemed dividend includes $0.2 million that resulted from the subsequent reduction in the exercise of price of the warrants as a result of the March 2020 offering. The net loss allocable to common
stockholders for the year ended December 31, 2019, reflects a $4.5 million increase for the net deemed dividend to preferred stockholders provided in connection with the close of the public offering of Series G Convertible Preferred Stock on March 12, 2019 (see Note 5 - Stockholder’s Equity to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K), representing the intrinsic value of the shares at the time of issuance.
Diluted earnings per share is computed based on the net loss allocable to common stockholders for each period divided by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding, increased by the number of additional shares that would have been outstanding had the potentially dilutive common shares been issued, and reduced by the number of shares the Company could have repurchased from the proceeds from issuance of the potentially dilutive shares. Potentially dilutive shares of common stock include shares underlying outstanding convertible preferred stock, warrants, stock options and other stock-based awards granted under stock-based compensation plans.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset or asset group may not be recoverable. If the impairment tests indicate that the carrying value of the asset, or asset group is greater than the expected undiscounted cash flows to be generated by such asset or asset group, further analysis is performed to determine the fair value of the asset or asset group. To the extent the fair value of the asset or asset group is less than its carrying value, an impairment loss is recognized equal to the amount the fair value of the asset or asset group is exceeded by its carrying amount. Assets to be disposed of are carried at the lower of their carrying value or fair value less costs to sell. Considerable management judgment is necessary to estimate the fair value of assets or asset groups, and accordingly, actual results could vary significantly from such estimates.
The Company continues to report operating losses and negative cash flows from operations, both of which it considers to be indicators of potential impairment. Therefore, the Company evaluates its long-lived assets for potential impairment at each reporting period. The Company has concluded that its cash flows from the various long-lived assets are highly interrelated and, as a result, the Company consists of a single asset group. As the Company expects to continue incurring losses in the foreseeable future, the undiscounted cash flow step was bypassed and the Company proceeded to fair value the asset group. The Company has determined the fair value of the asset group using expected cash flows associated with its loaner units by considering sales prices for similar assets and by estimating future discounted cash flows expected from the units. For recently acquired assets within the asset group, primarily equipment, the Company determined the fair value based on the replacement cost. Because the Company consists of one asset group, consideration is also given to the relationship between the Company’s market capitalization and its carrying value to further support the Company’s determination of fair value. There have been no impairment losses recognized for the years ended December 31, 2020 or 2019.
Going Concern
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared and presented on a basis assuming we continue as a going concern. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we incurred losses from operations and net cash outflows from operating activities as disclosed in the consolidated statements of operations and cash flows, respectively. At December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $233.3 million and we expect to incur losses for the foreseeable future. To date, we have been funded by debt and equity financings, and although we believe that we will be able to successfully fund our operations, there can be no assurance that we will be able to do so or that we will ever operate profitably.
We became a revenue generating company after acquiring the Aquadex Business in August 2016. We expect to incur additional losses in the near-term as we grow the Aquadex Business, including investments in expanding our sales and marketing capabilities, purchasing inventory, manufacturing components, and complying with the requirements related to being a U.S. public company. To become and remain profitable, we must succeed in expanding the adoption and market acceptance of the Aquadex System. This will require us to succeed in training personnel at hospitals and effectively and efficiently manufacturing, marketing and distributing the Aquadex System and related components. There can be no assurance that we will succeed in these activities, and we may never generate revenues sufficient to achieve profitability.
During 2019, 2020 and through March 19, 2021, we closed on underwritten public and other equity offerings for aggregate net proceeds of approximately $57.7 million after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions or placement agents’ fees and offering expenses, as applicable, and other costs associated with the offerings. In addition, during 2020, we received $4.1 million in proceeds from the exercise of investor warrants. See Note 5 -Stockholder’s Equity, and Note 14 -Subsequent Events to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The Company will require additional funding to grow its business, which may not be available on terms favorable to the Company, or at all. The Company may receive those funds from the proceeds from future warrant exercises, issuances of equity securities, or other financing transactions.
We believe that our existing capital resources will be sufficient to support our operating plan through December 31, 2022. However, we may seek to raise additional capital to support our growth or other strategic initiatives through debt, equity or a combination thereof.
Internal Controls and Procedures
Our independent registered public accounting firm is not yet required to formally attest to the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting and will not be required to do so for as long as our public float remains below $75 million as of the last business day of our most recently completed second fiscal quarter. However, management is subject to Section 404(a) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 and is required to report annually on effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
Information regarding new accounting pronouncements, when applicable, is included in Note 1 to the condensed consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. There are no new accounting pronouncements not yet adopted that we believe will have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements of the Company.
FINANCIAL OVERVIEW
We are a medical device company focused on commercializing the Aquadex System for ultrafiltration treatment of patients with fluid overload who have failed diuretic therapy. Activities since inception have consisted principally of raising capital, performing research and development and conducting preclinical and clinical studies. During 2016, we acquired the Aquadex Business and announced that we were halting all clinical evaluations of our prior technology, the C-Pulse System. Since then, our activities have consisted mainly of expanding our sales and marketing capabilities and transferring manufacturing capabilities of the Aquadex System from Baxter to our facilities in Eden Prairie, Minnesota. At December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $233.3 million and we expect to incur losses for the foreseeable future. To date, we have been funded by public and private equity financings, and debt. Although we believe that we will be able to successfully fund our operations in the future, there can be no assurance that we will be able to do so or that we will ever operate profitably.
Results of Operations
Net Sales
(dollars in thousands)
Revenue is generated mainly from the sale of disposable blood filters and catheters used in conjunction with the Aquadex System. We sell primarily in the United States to hospitals and clinics through our direct salesforce. We sell outside of the United States to independent specialty distributors who in turn sell to hospitals and clinics in their geographic regions. The increase in sales is driven by execution of our commercialization strategy which includes continued expansion of our commercial footprint by the hiring of new sales representatives, clinical education specialists, and marketing personnel.
Costs and Expenses
Our costs and expenses were as follows:
Cost of Goods Sold
In the first quarter of 2019, we began selling our internally manufactured inventory, after successfully transitioning all manufacturing activities from Baxter during 2018. As volumes continue to increase in future periods, we expect our gross margins will continue to improve as a result of higher efficiencies of scale.
Selling, General and Administrative
The increase in selling, general and administrative expense reflect primarily on-going investment in our commercial organization as we continue to expand our outreach in the field with incremental clinical specialists and marketing support. Our general and administrative costs have remained consistent with the prior year.
We expect investments in our commercial organization to increase modestly in 2021 as we annualize the impact of hiring made in 2020. We expect that in 2021 general and administrative expenses will remain consistent with 2020 levels.
Research and Development
The decrease in research and development expenses relate to investments we made to improve the functionality of our Aquadex system, and to support our 510(k) submission for pediatric label modification, which were completed during 2019. We expect that future research and development expenditures will increase modestly as we invest in a pediatric registry and other pediatric product development activities.
Gain on Dissolution of Foreign Subsidiary
In November 2020, we dissolved our Australian subsidiary as no further business purpose existed and recognized a gain of $1.2 million related to cumulative foreign currency translation adjustments, previously recorded as part of other comprehensive income on our consolidated balance sheet.
Income Tax Expense
We have not recognized any income tax benefit in our statement of operations related to our U.S. operating losses, as all tax benefits are fully reserved. We generate minimal amounts of income tax expense in connection with activities incurred by our Irish subsidiary.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
We have funded our operations primarily through cash on hand and a series of equity and debt issuances.
On March 12, 2019, we closed on an underwritten public offering for gross proceeds of $12.4 million. Net proceeds totaled approximately $11.0 million after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and other costs associated with the offering, which included the full exercise of the underwriter’s over-allotment option to purchase additional shares and warrants. In connection with this offering, we issued a total of 15,173 shares of common stock, approximately 1.9 million shares of Series G convertible preferred stock and warrants to purchase 157,726 shares of common stock. See Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
On October 25, 2019, we closed on a registered direct offering of common stock, for gross proceeds of approximately $660,000, prior to deducting commissions and expenses related to the transaction. In a concurrent private placement, we agreed to issue to the investors in the registered direct offering unregistered warrants to purchase up to 19,196 shares of our common stock. See Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
On November 6, 2019, we closed on a registered direct offering of common stock, for gross proceeds of approximately $1.36 million, prior to deducting commissions and expenses related to the transaction. In a concurrent private placement, we agreed to issue to the investors in the registered direct offering unregistered warrants to purchase up to 40,638 shares of our common stock. See Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
On January 28, 2020, we closed on an underwritten public offering of 201,546 shares of common stock, 383,909 shares of Series H Preferred Stock and warrants to purchase 585,460 shares of common stock, which included the full exercise of the underwriter’s over-allotment option, for gross proceeds of approximately $9.7 million. Net proceeds totaled approximately $8.6 million after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and other costs associated with the offering. See Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
On March 23, 2020, we closed on a registered direct offering of 138,715 shares of common stock for gross proceeds of approximately $1.2 million, prior to deduction of commissions and offering expenses related to the transaction. In a concurrent private placement, we agreed to issue to the investors in the registered direct offering warrants to purchase up to 138,715 shares of the Company’s common stock. See Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
On April 1, 2020, we closed on a registered direct offering of 171,008 shares of common stock for gross proceeds of approximately $2.2 million, prior to deduction of commissions and offering expenses payable related to the transaction. In a concurrent private placement, we agreed to issue to the investors in the registered direct offering warrants to purchase up to 85,506 shares of the Company’s common stock. The warrants are exercisable immediately and expire five and a half years from the date of issuance. See Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
On May 5, 2020, we closed on a registered direct offering of 119,930 shares of common stock for gross proceeds of approximately $1.7 million, prior to deduction of commissions and offering related to the transaction. In a concurrent private placement, we agreed to issue to the investors in the registered direct offering warrants to purchase up to 59,966 shares of the Company’s common stock. The warrants are exercisable immediately and will expire five and a half years from the date of issuance. See Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
On August 21, 2020, we closed on an underwritten public offering of 1,064,678 shares of common stock and warrants to purchase 1,064,678 shares of common stock, which included the full exercise of the underwriter’s over-allotment option, for gross proceeds of approximately $14.4 million. Net proceeds totaled approximately $13.0 million after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and other costs associated with the offering. See Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
On March 19, 2021, we closed on an underwritten public offering of 3,795,816 shares of common stock, which includes the full exercise of the underwriter’s over-allotment option, for gross proceeds of approximately $20.9 million. Net proceeds totaled approximately $19.0 million after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and other costs associated with the offering and after giving effect to the underwriters’ full exercise of their overallotment option. See Note 14 to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, cash and cash equivalents were $14.4 million and $1.3 million, respectively. Our business strategy and ability to fund our operations in the future depends in part on our ability to grow the Aquadex Business by establishing a sales force, selling our products to hospitals and other healthcare facilities and controlling costs. While we expect to continue to receive proceeds from the exercise of warrants,
we will likely need to seek additional financing in the future, which, to date, has been through offerings of our equity. The disruption created by COVID-19 in our operations, our sales outlook, and the capital markets where we would seek such financing, have created uncertainty about our ability to access the capital markets in future periods.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $16.6 million and $16.4 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The net cash used in each of these periods primarily reflects the net loss for those periods, offset in part by stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization, the gain on the dissolution of a foreign subsidiary, and the effects of changes in operating assets and liabilities.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $0.3 million and $0.5 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The majority of cash used in investing activities was for the purchase of manufacturing, laboratory and office equipment.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $30.0 million and $12.7 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020, which represent material expected or contractually committed future obligations:
We lease a 23,000 square foot facility located in Eden Prairie, Minnesota. The lease period commenced December 1, 2011 and extends through March 31, 2022. This facility serves as our corporate headquarters and houses substantially all of our functional areas. Monthly rent and common area maintenance charges, including estimated property tax for our headquarters total approximately $27,000. The lease contains provisions for annual inflationary adjustments. Rent expense is being recorded on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease. The Company also entered into two finance leases in 2020 for computer hardware and audio-visual equipment with monthly payments of approximately $2,400 due through August 2023.
Capital Resource Requirements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any material commitments for capital expenditures.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet transactions, arrangements, obligations (including contingent obligations), or other relationships with unconsolidated entities or other persons that have, or may have, a material effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources