Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Safe Harbor Declaration
The following discussion and analysis of the consolidated financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this report. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly under the heading “Risk Factors.”
Overview
Nova LifeStyle, Inc. is a distributor of contemporary styled residential and commercial furniture incorporated into a dynamic marketing and sales platform offering retail as well as online selection and global purchase fulfillment. We monitor popular trends and products to create design elements that are then integrated into our product lines that can be used as both stand-alone or whole-room and home furnishing solutions. Through our global network of retailers, e-commerce platforms, stagers and hospitality providers, Nova LifeStyle also sells (through an exclusive third-party manufacturing partner) a managed variety of high quality bedding foundation components.
Nova LifeStyle’s brand family currently includes Diamond Sofa (www.diamondsofa.com).
Our customers principally consist of distributors and retailers with specific geographic territories that deploy middle to high end private label home furnishings which have very little competitive overlap with our specific furnishing products or product lines. Nova LifeStyle is constantly seeking to integrate new sources of distribution and manufacturing that are properly aligned with our growth strategy. This allows us to continually focus on building both our overall distribution and manufacturing relationships through a deployment of popular, as well as trend-based, furnishing solutions worldwide.
We are a U.S. holding company with no material assets in the U.S. other than the ownership interests of our wholly owned subsidiaries through which we market, design and sell residential furniture worldwide: Nova Furniture Macao Commercial Offshore Limited (“Nova Macao”), Bright Swallow International Group Limited (“Bright Swallow”), and Diamond Bar Outdoors, Inc. (“Diamond Bar”) Nova Macao was organized under the laws of Macao on May 20, 2006. Nova Macao was a wholly owned subsidiary of Nova Lifestyle. Diamond Bar is a California corporation organized on June 15, 2000, which we acquired pursuant to a stock purchase agreement on August 31, 2011. On April 24, 2013, we acquired all of the outstanding stock of Bright Swallow which we sold in January 2020. On December 7, 2017, we incorporated i Design Blockchain Technology, Inc. (“i Design”) under the laws of the State of California. The purpose of i Design is to build our own blockchain technology team. i Design is in the planning stage and has had minimum operations to date. On December 12, 2019, we became the sole shareholder of Nova Living (M) SDN. BHD. (“Nova Malaysia”), a company incorporated on July 26, 2019 under the laws of Malaysia.
On January 7, 2020, we transferred our entire interest in Bright Swallow to Y-Tone (Worldwide) Limited an unrelated third party, for cash consideration of $2.50 million, pursuant to a formal agreement entered into on January 7, 2020. We received the payment on May 11, 2020.
On October 14, 2020, the Macao Trade and Investment Promotion Institute approved that Nova Macao’s offshore license became invalid under the order of Repeal of Legal Regime of the Offshore Services by Macao Special Administrative Region. Nova Macao then entered the de-registration procedure and the current business will be taken over by Nova HK.
On November 5, 2020, Nova LifeStyle, Inc. acquired Nova Living (HK) Group Limited (“Nova HK”) which was incorporated in Hong Kong on November 6, 2019. Nova HK will take over Nova Macao’s business. This company is in a planning stage and has had minimum operations in 2020.
Our experience developing and marketing products for international markets has enabled us to develop the scale, logistics, marketing, manufacturing efficiencies and design expertise that serve as the foundation for us to expand aggressively into the highly attractive U.S., Canadian, Mexico, Honduras, Dominican Republic, Asian and Middle Eastern markets.
Due to the recent imposition of significant trade tariffs on importation from China to the United States and the adverse effect such policies have on our operations, we are actively pursuing alternative product lines with positive growth potential. One such area pertains to the health-oriented furniture segment which continues to experience popularity, particularly in Asia. Since the second quarter of 2019, we have developed a line of high-end physiotherapeutic jade mats with China-based manufacturing partners for use in therapy clinics, hospitality, and real estate projects in Asia. We launched our first flagship showroom/retail store in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia in late 2019, which, after a COVID-19 related closing, was reopened in May 2020. On August 28, 2020, after few months reopening, Malaysia government extended Movement Control Order to prohibit the businesses to open to public until March 5, 2021 to contain the spread of COVID-19. We expect that our flagship showroom/retail store will serve as one of our primary distribution channels in Malaysia. Marketing of jade mats will focus on their premium therapeutic qualities and target health conscious general consumers and professionals. We have limited experience with operations in Southeast Asia and considerable management attention and resources may be required to manage these new markets and product lines. We may be subject to additional risks including credit risk, currency exchange rate fluctuations, foreign exchange controls, import and export requirements, potentially adverse tax consequences and higher costs associated with doing business internationally.
Beginning in late 2019, there were reports of the COVID-19 (coronavirus) outbreak in Wuhan, China, and the epidemic quickly spread to many provinces, autonomous regions, and cities in China as well as many parts of the world, including the U.S. and Malaysia. In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 a pandemic. In response to the evolving dynamics related to the COVID-19 outbreak, the Company has been following the guidelines of local authorities as it prioritizes the health and safety of its employees, contractors, suppliers and retail partners. The Company’s two showrooms and warehouse in Malaysia was closed from March, 2020 to May, 2020. The Los Angeles facility has been closed since March 16, 2020 and reopened in full operation on June 1, 2020. On May 12, 2020, the Company’s Kuala Lumpur office and warehouse reopened for business. However, on August 28, 2020, Malaysia government extended the shutdown order to all business until March 5, 2021. The third-party contract manufacturers that the Company utilizes in China were closed from the beginning of the Lunar New Year Holiday at the end of January 2020 through the beginning of March 2020. Certain of the Company’s new products are being sourced from manufacturers in India starting in 2020. The factories in India suspended their operations as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic during March through early May 2020. Currently, the factories in India have resumed their operations. Economic activities in Malaysia were reopened on March 5, 2021 through the end of the six-month shutdown order imposed by Malaysia government on August 28, 2020. Shipping of products from Asia has experienced significant delays since the onset of the pandemic and the costs of shipping from Asia have increased since the onset; and we may experience shipping disruptions in the future. Finally, the Company expects that the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on the United States and world economies will continue to have a material adverse impact on the demand for its products. Because of the significant uncertainties surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic, the extent of the business interruption and the related financial impact cannot be reasonably estimated at this time.
The COVID-19 outbreak precludes in person sales meetings or visits being made out of all of the Company’s offices or attendance at furniture trade shows, but the Company continues to receive orders and solicit business via telephone and email. The Company has experienced reduced demand for its products and purchase order cancellations as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, however, though in 2020 we have been experiencing a 39.59% increase in orders placed with us online compared with 2019.
We do not have access to a revolving credit facility. On May 4, 2020, the Company received loan proceeds in the amount of approximately $139,802 under the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”). The PPP, established as part of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”), provides for loans to qualifying businesses for amounts up to 2.5 times of the average monthly payroll expenses of the qualifying business. On May 5, 2020, Diamond Bar Outdoors Inc. (“Diamond Bar”) was granted a loan from Cathay Bank in the aggregate amount of $176,294, pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program. In June 19, 2020, Diamond Bar was granted a U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) loan in the aggregate amount of $150,000, pursuant to the Economic Injury Disaster Loan. We currently believe that our financial resources will be adequate to finance our operations through the outbreak. However, in the event that we do need to raise capital in the future, the outbreak-related instability in the securities markets could adversely affect our ability to raise additional capital.
Many of our employees are currently working remotely, and our systems appear adequate to address the current demands on our employees. We do not expect that the remote working arrangements will materially and adversely impact our internal control over financial reporting and disclosure controls and procedures. While there can be no assurance, at the present time we expect the outbreak-related circumstances to result in material impairments of our inventory of Jade Mattress in Malaysia that significantly affect management’s judgements in assessing the fair value of our assets.
Discontinued Operations
Towards the end of 2019, our Board of Directors determined to discontinue its marketing efforts in Canada and committed to a plan to dispose of Bright Swallow. On January 7, 2020, we transferred our entire interest in Bright Swallow to Y-Tone (Worldwide) Limited an unrelated third party, for cash consideration of $2.50 million, pursuant to a formal agreement entered into on January 7, 2020. We received the payment in full on May 11, 2020. Operations of Bright Swallow were reported as discontinued operations in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for all periods presented.
Principal Factors Affecting Our Financial Performance
At the beginning of 2019, we commenced a transition of our business. We began moving away from low margin products. This move was intended to improve our gross profit margin, receivable collections and net profitability, and to increase our return on long-term equity. We decided to terminate sales and marketing efforts to customers that represented a high purchase volume but low profit margin, and we adjusted our product line, which included the launch of our Summer 2019 Collection in the Las Vegas Market, with a view to attracting a higher-end ultimate customer. We believe these new strategies, and the recent launch of our Summer 2019 Collection, will provide us with significant long term growth opportunities. The transition has and is expected to continue to adversely impact our revenue and our net profit in the short-term as we roll out new products and market those products to our existing client base and to new potential customers better suited for the higher end products, and as we assess our new products’ market acceptance. Significant factors that we believe could affect our operating results are the (i) prices of our products to our international retailer and wholesaler customers and their markups to end consumers; (ii) general economic conditions in the U.S., Chinese, Canadian, European and other international markets; and (iii) trade tariffs imposed by the United States on certain products manufactured in China; and (iv) the consequences of the COVID-19 outbreak throughout the world. We believe most of our customers are willing to pay for our high quality and stylish products, timely delivery, and strong production capacity at price levels which we expect will allow us to maintain a relatively high gross profit margin for our products. We do not manufacture our products, but instead we utilize third-party manufacturers. In response to the tariffs imposed by the United States on certain products manufactured in China, we are attempting to shift a portion of our product manufacturing from third-party manufacturers located in China to third-party manufacturers located in other parts of Asia, such as Vietnam, India and/or Malaysia, countries unaffected by the tariffs. Implementation of a relocation of manufacturing (which by necessity includes an assessment of the factory’s ability to deliver the quantity of the product, in accordance with the Company’s specifications, and in accordance with the Company’s quality control requirements) is time-consuming, but a portion of our manufacturing has been transitioned to Malaysia and India starting in 2020 and we expect that more of our manufacturing will be transitioned to one or more of these venues once the COVID-19 outbreak dissipates. Some of our manufacturing will continue to be performed in China because the intellectual know-how necessary to manufacture certain products is not generally available in other Asian countries. Consumer preference trends favoring high quality and stylish products and lifestyle-based furniture suites should also allow us at least to maintain our gross profit margins. The markets in North America (excluding the United States) and particularly in Europe remain challenging because such markets are experiencing a slow-down and may be entering a recession due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Critical Accounting Policies
While our significant accounting policies are described more fully in Note 2 to our accompanying consolidated financial statements, we believe the following accounting policies are the most critical to aid you in fully understanding and evaluating this Management’s Discussion and Analysis.
There have been no material changes to our critical accounting policies and estimates as compared to the critical accounting policies and estimates described in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”) for Nova LifeStyle and its subsidiaries, Diamond Bar, Nova Macao, i Design, Nova Furniture, Nova Samoa, Nova Malaysia, Nova HK and its former subsidiary, Bright Swallow.
Use of Estimates
In preparing consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP, we make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the dates of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Significant estimates and assumptions made by us, include but are not limited to, revenue recognition, the allowance for bad debt, valuation of inventories, the valuation of stock-based compensation, income taxes and unrecognized tax benefits, valuation allowance for deferred tax assets, assumptions used in assessing impairment of long-lived assets and goodwill. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Accounts Receivable
Our accounts receivable arises from product sales. We do not adjust receivables for the effects of a significant financing component at contract inception if we expect to collect the receivables in one year or less from the time of sale. We do not expect to collect receivables greater than one year from the time of sale. Our policy is to maintain an allowance for potential credit losses on accounts receivable. We review the composition of accounts receivable and analyze historical bad debts, customer concentrations, customer credit worthiness, current economic trends and changes in customer payment patterns to evaluate the adequacy of these reserves. We maintained an allowance for bad debt of $5,201 and $3,942 as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, bad debts provision (reversal) from continuing operations were $1,259 and ($220,853), respectively. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, bad debt expenses from discontinued operations were $0. As of December 31, 2020, we had gross receivable of $520,140 of which no amount was over 90 days past due. The allowance for doubtful accounts is our best estimate of the amount of probable credit losses in our existing trade accounts receivable. We determine the allowance based on historical bad debt experience, customer concentrations, customer credit worthiness, current economic trends and changes in customer payment patterns.
Advances to Suppliers
Advances to suppliers are reported net of allowance when we determine that amounts outstanding are not likely to be collected in cash or utilized against purchase of inventories. Based on our historical records and in normal circumstances, we generally receive goods within 5 to 9 months from the date the advance payment is made. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the freight transportation of the products from our international suppliers have been delayed or suspended during the outbreak. As such, no reserve on supplier prepayments has been made or recorded by us. Any provisions for allowance for advance to suppliers, if deemed necessary, will be included in general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statements of comprehensive income (loss).
Income Taxes
Income taxes are accounted for using an asset and liability method. Under this method, deferred income taxes are recognized for the tax consequences in future years of differences between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their financial reporting amounts at each period end based on enacted tax laws and statutory tax rates, applicable to the periods in which the differences are expected to affect taxable income. Valuation allowances are established, when necessary, to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
We follow ASC Topic 740, which prescribes a more-likely-than-not threshold for financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. ASC Topic 740 also provides guidance on recognition of income tax assets and liabilities, classification of current and deferred income tax assets and liabilities, accounting for interest and penalties associated with tax positions, accounting for income taxes in interim periods, and income tax disclosures.
Under the provisions of ASC Topic 740, when tax returns are filed, it is highly certain that some positions taken would be sustained upon examination by the taxing authorities, while others are subject to uncertainty about the merits of the position taken or the amount of the position that would be ultimately sustained. The benefit of a tax position is recognized in the financial statements in the period during which, based on all available evidence, management believes it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon examination, including the resolution of appeals or litigation processes, if any. Tax positions taken are not offset or aggregated with other positions. Tax positions that meet the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold are measured as the largest amount of tax benefit that is more than 50 percent likely of being realized upon settlement with the applicable taxing authority. The portion of the benefits associated with tax positions taken that exceeds the amount measured as described above is reflected as a liability for unrecognized tax benefits in the accompanying balance sheets along with any associated interest and penalties that would be payable to the taxing authorities upon examination.
Nova Lifestyle, Inc. and Diamond Bar are subject to U.S. federal and state income taxes. Nova Furniture BVI and Bright Swallow were incorporated in the BVI, Nova Samoa was incorporated in Samoa and Nova Macao was incorporated in Macau. There is no income tax for companies domiciled in the BVI, Samoa and Macau. Accordingly, the Company’s consolidated financial statements do not present any income tax provisions related to the BVI, Samoa and Macau tax jurisdictions where Nova Furniture BVI and Bright Swallow, Nova Samoa and Nova Macao are domiciled. Nova Malaysia is incorporated in Malaysia and is subject to Malaysia income taxes. Nova HK is incorporated in Hong Kong and is subject to Hong Kong income taxes.
The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (the “Act”) created new taxes on certain foreign-sourced earnings such as global intangible low-taxed income (“GILTI”) under IRC Section 951A, which is effective for the Company for tax years beginning after January 1, 2018. The Company has calculated its best estimate of the impact of the GILTI in its income tax provision in accordance with its understanding of the Act and guidance available as of the date of this filing.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenues when our customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which it expects to receive in exchange for those goods. We recognize revenues following the five step model prescribed under ASU No. 2014-09: (i) identify contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenues when (or as) we satisfy the performance obligation.
Revenue from product sales is recognized when the customer obtains control of our product, which typically occurs upon delivery to the customer. We expense incremental costs of obtaining a contract as and when incurred if the expected amortization period of the asset that it would have recognized is one year or less or the amount is immaterial.
Revenue from product sales is recorded net of reserves established for applicable discounts and allowances that are offered within contracts with our customers.
Product revenue reserves, which are classified as a reduction in product revenues, are generally characterized in the following categories: discounts, returns and rebates. These reserves are based on estimates of the amounts earned or to be claimed on the related sales and are classified as reductions of accounts receivable as the amount is payable to our customer.
Our sales policy allows for the return of product within the warranty period if the product is defective and the defects are our fault. As alternatives for the product return option, the customers have the option of asking us for a discount for products with quality issues, or of receiving replacement parts from us at no cost. The amount of reserves for return of products, the discount provided to the customers, and cost for the replacement parts were immaterial for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
We generally expense sales commissions when incurred because the amortization period would have been one year or less. These costs are recorded within selling expenses on our consolidated statements of comprehensive income (loss).
Foreign Currency Translation and Transactions
The accompanying consolidated financial statements are presented in United States Dollar (“$” or “USD”), which is also the functional currency of Nova LifeStyle, Nova Furniture, Nova Samoa, Nova Macao, Bright Swallow, Diamond Bar, Nova HK and i Design.
The Company's subsidiary with operations in Malaysia uses its local currency, Malaysian Ringgit (“RM”), as its functional currency. An entity’s functional currency is the currency of the primary economic environment in which it operates, which is normally the currency of the environment in which the entity primarily generates and expends cash. Management’s judgment is essential to determine the functional currency by assessing various indicators, such as cash flows, sales price and market, expenses, financing and inter-company transactions and arrangements.
Foreign currency transactions denominated in currencies other than the functional currency are translated into the functional currency using the exchange rates prevailing at the dates of the transactions. Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies at the balance sheet date are re-measured at the applicable rates of exchange in effect at that date. Gains and losses resulting from foreign currency re-measurement are included in the statements of comprehensive loss.
The financial statements are presented in U.S. dollars. Assets and liabilities are translated into U.S. dollars at the current exchange rate in effect at the balance sheet date, and revenues and expenses are translated at the average of the exchange rates in effect during the reporting period. Stockholders’ equity accounts are translated using the historical exchange rates at the date the entry to stockholders’ equity was recorded, except for the change in retained earnings during the period, which is translated using the historical exchange rates used to translate each period’s income statement. Differences resulting from translating functional currencies to the reporting currency are recorded in accumulated other comprehensive income in the balance sheets.
Translation of amounts from RM into U.S. dollars has been made at the following exchange rates:
Segment Reporting
ASC Topic 280, “Segment Reporting,” requires use of the “management approach” model for segment reporting. The management approach model is based on the way a company’s chief operating decision maker organizes segments within the company for making operating decisions, assessing performance and allocating resources. Reportable segments are based on products and services, geography, legal structure, management structure, or any other manner in which management disaggregates a company.
We determined that our operations constitute a single reportable segment in accordance with ASC 280. We operate exclusively in one business and industry segment: the design and sale of furniture.
We concluded that we had one reportable segment under ASC 280 because Diamond Bar is a furniture distributor based in California focusing on customers in the US, Bright Swallow is a furniture distributor focusing on customers primarily in Canada, Nova Macao is a furniture distributor based in Macao focusing on international customers, and Nova Malaysia is a furniture retailer and distributor focusing on customers primarily in Malaysia. Each of our subsidiaries is operated under the same senior management of our company, and we view the operations of Diamond Bar, Bright Swallow, Nova Macao, Nova HK and Nova Malaysia as a whole for making business decisions. Our long-lived assets are mainly property, plant and equipment located in the United States and Malaysia for administrative purposes.
Net sales to customers by geographic area are determined by reference to the physical product shipment delivery locations requested by our customers. For example, if the products are delivered to a customer in the U.S., the sales are recorded as generated in the U.S.; if the customer directs us to ship its products to China, the sales are recorded as sold in China.
New Accounting Pronouncements
Recent Adopted Accounting Standards
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-13, Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820): Disclosure Framework-Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement, which modifies the disclosure requirements for Level 1, Level 2 and Level 3 instruments in the fair value hierarchy. The guidance is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019, and interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted for any eliminated or modified disclosures. The Company applied the new standard beginning January 1, 2020. The adoption of this standard did not have an impact on the Company’s consolidated financial position, results of operations and cash flows.
Recently issued accounting pronouncements not yet adopted
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326), which requires entities to measure all expected credit losses for financial assets held at the reporting date based on historical experience, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts. This replaces the existing incurred loss model and is applicable to the measurement of credit losses on financial assets measured at amortized cost. Adoption of the ASUs is on a modified retrospective basis. As a smaller reporting company, the standard will be effective for the Company for interim and annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2022. We are currently evaluating the impact that the standard will have on our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
In January 2017, the FASB issued ASU No. 2017-04, simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment. The guidance removes Step 2 of the goodwill impairment test, which requires a hypothetical purchase price allocation. A goodwill impairment will now be the amount by which a reporting unit’s carrying value exceeds its fair value, not to exceed the carrying amount of goodwill. The guidance should be adopted on a prospective basis. As a smaller reporting company, the standard will be effective for the Company for interim and annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2022, with early adoption permitted. We are currently evaluating the impact of adopting this standard on our consolidated financial statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes, which simplifies the accounting for income taxes, eliminates certain exceptions within ASC 740, Income Taxes, and clarifies certain aspects of the current guidance to promote consistent application among reporting entities. The guidance is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, and interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted. Upon adoption, we must apply certain aspects of this standard retrospectively for all periods presented while other aspects are applied on a modified retrospective basis through a cumulative-effect adjustment to retained earnings as of the beginning of the fiscal year of adoption. We are evaluating the impact this update will have on our financial statements.
In March 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-04, Reference Rate Reform (Topic 848) (“ASU 2020-04”). ASU 2020-04 contains practical expedients for reference rate reform related activities that impact debt, leases, derivatives and other contracts. The guidance in ASU 2020-04 is optional and may be elected over time as reference rate reform activities occur. We continue to evaluate the impact of the guidance and may apply the elections as applicable as changes in the market occur.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470- 20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies the accounting for certain financial instruments with characteristics of liabilities and equity. This ASU (1) simplifies the accounting for convertible debt instruments and convertible preferred stock by removing the existing guidance in ASC 470-20, Debt: Debt with Conversion and Other Options, that requires entities to account for beneficial conversion features and cash conversion features in equity, separately from the host convertible debt or preferred stock; (2) revises the scope exception from derivative accounting in ASC 815-40 for freestanding financial instruments and embedded features that are both indexed to the issuer’s own stock and classified in stockholders’ equity, by removing certain criteria required for equity classification; and (3) revises the guidance in ASC 260, Earnings Per Share, to require entities to calculate diluted earnings per share (EPS) for convertible instruments by using the if-converted method. In addition, entities must presume share settlement for purposes of calculating diluted EPS when an instrument may be settled in cash or shares.
For SEC filers, excluding smaller reporting companies, ASU 2020-06 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021 including interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020. For all other entities, ASU 2020-06 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Entities should adopt the guidance as of the beginning of the fiscal year of adoption and cannot adopt the guidance in an interim reporting period. The Company is currently evaluating the impact that ASU 2020-06 may have on its consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table sets forth the results of our operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. Certain columns may not add due to rounding.
Net Sales
Net sales from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $11.35 million, a decrease of 48% from $21.98 million in 2019. This decrease in net sales resulted primarily from a 23.08% decrease in sales volume, simultaneously with a 32.88% decrease in average selling price. Our three largest selling product categories in the year ended December 31, 2020 were sofas, beds and coffee table, which accounted for approximately 52%, 14% and 8% of sales from our continuing operations, respectively. In the year ended December 31, 2019, the three largest selling categories were sofas, cabinets and beds, which accounted for approximately 50%, 13% and 10% of sales from our continuing operations, respectively.
Our revenue has been adversely impacted by three factors: (a) the Covid-19 pandemic and its impact on worldwide demand and the timing and effectiveness of any vaccines, (b) our decision to move away from low margin products and to eliminate customers generating low margin sales and customers that have slow payment histories, and (c) the increased trade tariffs imposed by the United States on products manufactured in China. The trade tariffs imposed by the United States would have effectively reduced or eliminated our gross margin on our low cost, low margin products, which in part drove our decision to move away from those products. The resulting shift from those low margin products caused certain of our distributors that historically had represented a significant portion of our revenue to move their business to other providers. The $10.63 million decrease in net sales from continuing operations in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year of 2019, was mainly due to decreased sales to China. Sales to China, decreased 100% to $0 in the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $11.79 million in 2019, primarily due to no sales orders from our customers in China. Sales to North America were $10.85 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of 6.63% from $10.17 million in 2019. We changed our sales strategy to seek sales of products of higher margins and shorter collection time on the customers’ accounts receivable. Sales to Asia (excluding China) increased to $0.47 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $0 in 2019, primarily due to sales orders received from new customers for jade mats in Malaysia. Sales to other countries increased to $34,244 in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $17,720 in 2019. The increased sales in other countries were primarily due to more sales orders from our customers.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales from continuing operations consists primarily of costs of finished goods purchased from third-party manufacturers. Total cost of sales from continuing operations increased by 51% to $31.24 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $20.69 million in 2019. Cost of sales as a percentage of sales increased to 275% in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 94% in 2019. The increase of cost of sales in dollar term, and cost of sales as a percentage of sales, is a result of two related factors: (a) our write down of $24 million of our slow-moving inventory, primarily the jade mats in Malaysia, to the lower of cost and net realizable value in the year of 2020, compared to an inventory write-down of $3.61 million in 2019; (b) a change in the mix of our products sold as a result of our suspension of operations in Malaysia due to Covid-19. Due to Malaysia government’s shut down orders caused by prolonged covid-19 pandemic, our Malaysian operations have been curtailed.
Gross (Loss) Profit
Gross loss from continuing operations was $19.89 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to gross profit of $1.29 million in 2019. Our gross loss margin was 175% in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a positive gross profit margin of 6% in 2019. The decrease in gross profit margin is a result of our write down of $24 million of our slow-moving inventory, primarily the jade mats in Malaysia, in the year of 2020, compared to an inventory write-down of $3.61 million in 2019.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses from continuing operations consisted of selling, general and administrative expenses. Operating expenses were $6.41 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $7.09 million in 2019. Selling expenses increased by 10%, or $162,563, to $1.75 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, from $1.59 million in 2019, primarily due to increased marketing and advertising expenses, partially offset by the drop of show and travelling expenses. On the other hand, general and administrative expenses decreased by 15%, or $0.84 million, to $4.66 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, from $5.50 million in 2019, primarily due to a decrease in traveling expenses of $0.51 million, a decrease of $0.51 million in legal and professional fees and partially offset by the increment of $0.11 million of insurance.
Other Expenses, Net
Other expenses, net, from continuing operations was $96,183 in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with other expenses, net, of $89,281 in 2019, representing an increase in other expenses of $6,902. The increase in other expenses was due primarily to the increase of foreign exchange loss to $297,965 for the year ended December 31, 2020 from foreign exchange gain of $79 in 2019. The loss in 2020 was mainly a result of the depreciation of Malaysian Ringgit against U.S. dollars on the Company's assets in Malaysia. Also, there was an increase in financial expenses of $17,034 to $170,184 for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $153,150 in 2019. The increment was partially offset by the government grant of $336,096 for the year ended December 31, 2020, in the form of forgivable loans which we have used for eligible purposes.
Income Tax Benefit (Expenses)
Income tax benefit from continuing operations was $649,165 in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with $251,042 of income tax expense in 2019. The income tax benefit was primarily related to deferred tax on net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020. The income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 was mainly due to full valuation allowance against deferred tax assets, partially offset by a reversal of tax liability reserves due to a statute of limitations expiration in 2019.
Loss from Continuing Operations
As a result of the foregoing, our loss from continuing operations was $25.75 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with $6.14 million of loss for the year of 2019.
Loss from Discontinued Operations
On January 7, 2020, we transferred our entire interest in Bright Swallow to Y-Tone (Worldwide) Limited, an unrelated third party, for cash consideration of $2.50 million, pursuant to a formal agreement entered into on January 7, 2020. We received the payment on May 11, 2020. Operations of Bright Swallow were reported as discontinued operations in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for all periods presented. We had loss from discontinued operations of $0.33 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, and loss from discontinued operations of $2.46 million in 2019.
Net Loss
As a result of the foregoing, our net loss was $26.08 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with $8.60 million of net loss for the year of 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal demands for liquidity are related to our efforts to increase sales and purchase inventory, and for expenditures related to sales distribution and general corporate purposes. We intend to meet our liquidity requirements, including capital expenditures related to purchase of inventories and the expansion of our business, primarily through cash flow provided by operations, collections of accounts receivable, and credit facilities from banks. In May 2020, we received loans under the Paycheck Protection Program established by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act. In June 2020, we obtained a loan pursuant to the Economic Injury Disaster Loan Program.
We rely primarily on internally generated cash flow and available working capital to support growth. We may seek additional financing in the form of bank loans or other credit facilities or funds raised through future offerings of our equity or debt, if and when we determine such offerings are required. As of December 31, 2020, we do not have any credit facilities. We believe that our current cash and cash equivalents and anticipated cash receipts from sales of products will be sufficient to meet our anticipated working capital requirements and capital expenditures for the next 12 months.
We had net working capital of $41,269,620 at December 31, 2020, a decrease of $25,764,551 from net working capital of $67,034,171 at December 31, 2019. The ratio of current assets to current liabilities was 21.38-to-1 at December 31, 2020.
The following is a summary of cash provided by or used in each of the indicated types of activities during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Net cash used in operating activities was $2.07 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of cash inflow of $16.96 million from $14.89 million of cash provided by operating activities in 2019. The decrease of cash inflow was attributable primarily to a decreased cash inflow of $66.55 million from accounts receivable to $0.13 million cash outflow in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $66.42 million cash inflow in 2019, such decrease being primarily due to our reduced sales in the year ended December 31, 2020 and significant accounts receivable collected from our customers in the year ended December 31, 2019. In past years, we had allowed our key customers to take longer than the granted credit periods to settle their purchases, in order to boost sales. Starting from the second half of 2018, we had been monitoring them closely for payment but our accounts receivable still reached a record high of $66.59 million as of December 31, 2018, and this negatively impacted our cash flow from operating activities. In 2019, the industry environment worsened as a result of the imposition by the U.S. of tariffs on products manufactured in China. We determined not to accept new sales orders from those key customers until they settled all overdue balances. As a result of customer payments and the significant reduction in sales, we were able to reduce our accounts receivable balance by approximately $66.42 million in the first quarter of 2019. We will continue our efforts to tighten customers’ credit terms and expect that most of our customers will pay according to the contract terms going forward.
The decrease in operating cash inflow was partially offset by the increase in cash inflow for advance to suppliers of $45.56 million to $27.36 million cash inflow in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $18.20 million cash outflow in 2019, such increase in cash inflows being mainly due to placing less amount of deposits to our suppliers in China due to receipt of fewer sales orders from customers; and the increase in cash inflow for accounts payable of $4.06 million to $0.33 million cash inflow in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $3.73 million cash outflow in 2019, such decrease in cash outflows being mainly due to fewer purchases made in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Due to the recent imposition of significant trade tariffs on importation from China to the United States, we are actively developing alternative markets and product lines. We have been developing relationships with potential customers in Asia who intend to purchase high-end health furniture products for use in therapy clinics, hospitality and real estate projects. We have also been networking with sales agents to develop these markets. In the second quarter of 2019, we sourced physiotherapeutic jade mats from manufacturers in China. Purchase of these inventories totaled were $27.61 million and $27.72 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $0.67 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily relating to cash of Bright Swallow disposed of $1.46 million in January 2020 while we received $2.50 million cash consideration for this sale transaction. We also incurred cash outflow of $365,043 from purchases of property and equipment in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $25,902 in 2019.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $0.47 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of cash outflow of $7.33 million from cash outflow of $6.86 million in 2019. In the year ended December 31, 2020, we received $0.47 million from other loans (see Note 11 to the financial statements). In the year ended December 31, 2019, we repaid $23.76 million in bank loans and borrowed $17.51 million in bank loans, while repurchasing common stock for $616,193.
As of December 31, 2020, we had gross accounts receivable of $520,140, of which $346,955 was not yet past due and $173,185 was less than 90 days past due. We had an allowance for bad debt of $5,201. As of March 22, 2021, $490,184 of accounts receivable outstanding as of December 31, 2020 had been collected.
All accounts receivable outstanding at December 31, 2019 had been collected during 2020.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had advances to suppliers of $381,894 and $27,745,184, respectively. These supplier prepayments are made for goods before we actually receive them.
For a new product, the normal lead time from new product R&D, prototype, and mass production to delivery of goods from our suppliers to us is approximately six to nine months after we make advance payments to our suppliers. For other products, the typical time is five months after our advance payment. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, freight transportation of products from our international suppliers has been delayed or suspended during the outbreak. As such, no reserve on supplier prepayments had been made or recorded by us. We will consider the need for a reserve when and if a supplier fails to fulfill our orders within the time frame as stipulated in the purchase contracts. As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, no reserve on supplier prepayments had been made or recorded by us.
As of March 22, 2021, 72% of our advances to suppliers outstanding at December 31, 2020 had been delivered to us in the form of purchases of furniture.
Lines of Credit
On September 19, 2017, Diamond Bar extended the line of credit up to a maximum of $8,000,000 to mature on June 1, 2019. The annual interest rate was 5.50% as of December 31, 2019. The line of credit was secured by all of the assets of Diamond Bar and is guaranteed by Nova LifeStyle. We paid off our lines of credit upon expiration on June 30, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, Diamond Bar had $0 outstanding on the line of credit. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company recorded interest expense of $0 and $35,444, respectively.
As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, we do not have any credit facilities.
Shelf Registration
On July 13, 2017, the Company filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 under which the Company may, from time to time, sell securities in one or more offerings up to a total dollar amount of $60,000,000. The shelf registration statement was declared effective as of October 12, 2017 and has expired on October 12, 2020. On October 8, 2020, the Company filed a new shelf registration statement on Form S-3 under which the Company may, from time to time, sell securities in one or more offerings up to a total dollar amount of $60,000,000. The new shelf registration statement was declared effective on October 15, 2020.
Other Long-Term Liabilities
As of December 31, 2020, we recorded long-term taxes payable of $1.63 million, consisting of an income tax payable of $1.63 million, primarily arising from a one-time transition tax recognized in the fourth quarter of 2017 on our post-1986 foreign unremitted earnings, and a $0.01 million unrecognized tax benefit, as ASC 740 specifies that tax positions for which the timing of the ultimate resolution is uncertain should be recognized as long-term liabilities.
We elected to pay the one-time transition tax over the eight years commencing April 2018.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
There are no off-balance sheet arrangements between us and any other entity that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to shareholders.
We have not entered into any other financial guarantees or other commitments to guarantee the payment obligations of any third parties. We have not entered into any derivative contracts that are indexed to our shares and classified as stockholders’ equity or that are not reflected in our consolidated financial statements. Furthermore, we do not have any retained or contingent interest in assets transferred to an unconsolidated entity that serves as credit, liquidity or market risk support to such entity. We do not have any variable interest in any unconsolidated entity that provides financing, liquidity, market risk or credit support to us or engages in leasing, hedging or research and development services with us.