ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read this discussion together with the Financial Statements, related Notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. The following discussion contains assumptions, estimates and other forward-looking statements that involve a number of risks and uncertainties, including those discussed under “Risk Factors,” and elsewhere in this Form 10-K. These risks could cause our actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a biotechnology company focused on developing personalized immune therapies for cancer. We have developed a platform technology, DCVax®, which uses activated dendritic cells to mobilize a patient’s own immune system to attack their cancer.
Our lead product, DCVax®-L, is designed to treat solid tumor cancers in which the tumor can be surgically removed. We have completed a 331-patient international Phase III trial of DCVax-L for Glioblastoma multiforme brain cancer (GBM). As previously reported, the data collection and confirmation process was conducted by the independent contract research organization (CRO) who managed the trial and by other independent service firms. On October 5, 2020, the Company announced that Data Lock for the Phase III trial had been reached, and that a series of steps and processes would follow. These processes included data validation, analyses of the data by independent statisticians, preparations by the statisticians of summaries of the Trial results for review by the Company, the Principal Investigator, the Steering Committee of the Trial, the Scientific Advisory Board, and a panel of independent brain cancer experts, in preparation for publication in a scientific journal and public announcement. This series of processes is under way. It is anticipated that public announcement will follow these processes.
As also previously reported, coronavirus-related difficulties have impacted most aspects of the process, especially with the waves of COVID cases in many areas. The independent service firms have had limited capacity, and restrictions on operations. Key experts at certain specialized service providers have been unavailable for periods of time due to illness in their family. Other experts have gone on extended leave due to restrictions on operations. Clinical trial site personnel have been unavailable due to being reassigned for COVID, and the limited site personnel have had to work under restrictions. Committee processes and regulatory processes have been similarly focused on COVID matters and delayed on other matters. Firms such as the ones storing the Phase III trial tissue samples that are needed for certain analyses, and the firms conducting the analyses, continue to have only limited operations. Even logistical matters such as the shipping of materials have been, and continue to be, subjected to substantial restrictions and delays.
On August 28, 2020, the Company acquired Flaskworks, LLC (“Flaskworks”), a company that has developed a system to close and automate the manufacturing of cell therapy products such as DCVax®. The Company acquired 100% of the ownership, and Flaskworks became a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company. Flaskworks was previously owned by its technical founders and Corning Inc. The technical team from Flaskworks joined the Company as part of the Acquisition. It is anticipated that the Flaskworks system will enable substantial scale-up of production volumes of DCVax products and substantial reduction of production costs. The Company’s buildout of the Sawston, UK facility has been designed to proceed in phases, as modules, both for efficiency in the timing of capital costs and to allow flexibility in operations and usage. The Company anticipates that implementation of the Flaskworks system will enable certain phases of the buildout to be simplified and streamlined. For further details on the financial aspects of the acquisition, please see Item 8 Note 5 below.
Our second product, DCVax®-Direct, is designed to treat inoperable solid tumors. A 40-patient Phase I trial has been completed, and included treatment of a diverse range of more than a dozen types of cancers. The Company is working on preparations for Phase II trials of DCVax-Direct, as resources permit.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect our reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses.
On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to derivative liabilities, accrued expenses and stock-based compensation. We based our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results could differ from those estimates, particularly given the significant social and economic disruptions and uncertainties associated with the ongoing coronavirus pandemic (“COVID-19”) and the COVID-19 control responses.
Fair Value Measurements
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received for sale of an asset or paid for transfer of a liability, in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. U.S. GAAP establishes a three-tier fair value hierarchy that prioritizes the inputs used in measuring fair value. The hierarchy gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (Level 1 measurements) and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs (Level 3 measurements). These tiers include:
● Level 1 - defined as observable inputs such as quoted prices for identical instruments in active markets;
● Level 2 - quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities in active markets or inputs that are observable
● Level 3 - inputs that are unobservable (for example, cash flow modeling inputs based on assumptions)
We account for the issuance of common stock purchase warrants issued in connection with the equity offerings in accordance with the provisions of ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). We classify as equity any contracts that (i) require physical settlement or net-share settlement or (ii) gives the Company a choice of net-cash settlement or settlement in its own shares (physical settlement or net-share settlement). We account for certain common stock warrants outstanding as a liability at fair value and adjust the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our consolidated statements of operations. The fair value of the warrants issued by us has been estimated using Monte Carlo simulation and or a Black Scholes model. The warrant liabilities are valued using Level 3 valuation inputs.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company has derivative financial instruments that are not hedges and do not qualify for hedge accounting. Changes in the fair value of these instruments are recorded in other income (expense), net in the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
The Company assesses its long-lived assets for impairment whenever facts and circumstances indicate that the carrying amounts may not be fully recoverable. To analyze recoverability, the Company projects undiscounted net future cash flows over the remaining lives of such assets. If these projected cash flows are less than the carrying amounts, an impairment loss would be recognized, resulting in a write-down of the assets with a corresponding charge to earnings. The impairment loss is measured based upon the difference between the carrying amounts and the fair values of the assets. Assets to be disposed of are reported at the lower of the carrying amounts or fair value less cost to sell. Management determines fair value using the discounted cash flow method or other accepted valuation techniques.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the undiscounted net future cash flows of the U.K. property were greater than the carrying value. Therefore, no impairment loss was considered necessary.
Leases
We adopted ASC 842 on January 1, 2019, using the optional transition method to apply the new guidance as of January 1, 2019, rather than as of the earliest period presented, and elected the package of practical expedients. Leases with an initial term of 12 months or less are not recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. We recognize these lease expenses on a straight-line basis over the lease term. Based on the analysis, on January 1, 2019, we recorded right of use (“ROU”) assets and lease liabilities of approximately $4.3 million, which represented operating lease entered prior to January 1, 2019. ROU assets represent our right to use an underlying asset for the lease term and lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Operating lease ROU assets and liabilities are recognized at commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. Additionally, we recorded an adjustment to opening accumulated deficit of $4.8 million related to the derecognition of deferred profit related to the U.K facility sales leaseback transaction.
Stock Based Compensation
Share-based compensation cost is recorded for all option grants and awards of non-vested stock based on the grant date fair value of the award using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, and is recognized over the service period required for the award.
We estimate the fair value of stock option grants using the Black-Scholes option pricing model and the assumptions used in calculating the fair value of stock-based awards represent management’s best estimates and involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment.
Expected Term - The expected term of options represents the period that the Company’s stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding based on the simplified method, which is the half-life from vesting to the end of its contractual term.
Expected Volatility - The Company computes stock price volatility over expected terms based on its historical common stock trading prices.
Risk-Free Interest Rate - The Company bases the risk-free interest rate on the implied yield available on U. S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with an equivalent remaining term.
Expected Dividend - The Company has never declared or paid any cash dividends on its common shares and does not plan to pay cash dividends in the foreseeable future, and, therefore, uses an expected dividend yield of zero in its valuation models.
We recognize forfeitures when they occur.
Recent Accounting Standards
Income Taxes
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12, “Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes (“ASU 2019-12”), which is intended to simplify various aspects related to accounting for income taxes. ASU 2019-12 removes certain exceptions to the general principles in Topic 740 and also clarifies and amends existing guidance to improve consistent application. This guidance is effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2020, with early adoption permitted. The Company is currently evaluating the impact of this standard on its consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
Debt
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity, which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception and it also simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. This ASU is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2021, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020. This update permits the use of either the modified retrospective or fully retrospective method of transition. The Company is currently evaluating the impact this ASU will have on its consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
Revision of Previously Issued Financial Statements
We have revised certain previously reported non-material financial information for the year ended December 31, 2019 in this Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, including but not limited to information within the Results of Operations section.
See Note 14, Revision to Prior Period Financial Statements, for additional information related to the revision, including descriptions of the misstatements and the non-material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Results of Operations
Operating costs:
Operating costs and expenses consist primarily of research and development expenses, including clinical trial expenses, which increase when we are actively participating in clinical trials and especially when we are in a large ongoing international phase III trial or we are completing such a large international trial, and undertaking substantial one-time expenses such as for final site visits, query resolutions, statistical work for the Statistical Analysis Plan, preparations for data analyses and other activities related to completion and assessment of the trial and its results. The operating costs also include administrative expenses associated with trials, and increase as such operating activities grow.
In addition to clinical trial related costs, our operating costs may include ongoing work relating to our DCVax products, including R&D, product characterization, and related matters. Going forward, we are also incurring large amounts of costs to carry out and complete statistical analyses, process validation work, final data collection and validation, and other work associated with moving towards preparing for locking, unblinding and analyzing the trial results.
Following our acquisition of Flaskworks, our operating costs now include the costs for its ongoing operations and its intellectual property filings.
Our operating costs also include the costs of preparations for the launch of new or expanded clinical trial programs, such as our planned Phase II clinical trials. The preparation costs include payments to regulatory consultants, lawyers, statisticians, sites and others, evaluation of potential investigators, the clinical trial sites and the CROs managing the trials and other service providers, and expenses related to institutional approvals, clinical trial agreements (business contracts with sites), training of medical and other site personnel, trial supplies and other. Additional substantial costs relate to the maintenance and substantial expansion of manufacturing capacity, in both the US and Europe.
Our operating costs also include significant legal and accounting costs in operating the Company.
Research and development:
Discovery and preclinical research and development expenses include costs for substantial external scientific personnel, technical and regulatory advisers, and others, costs of laboratory supplies used in our internal research and development projects, travel, regulatory compliance, and expenditures for preclinical and clinical trial operation and management when we are actively engaged in clinical trials.
Because we are pre-revenue company, we do not allocate research and development costs on a project basis. We adopted this policy, in part, due to the unreasonable cost burden associated with accounting at such a level of detail and our limited number of financial and personnel resources.
General and administrative:
General and administrative expenses include personnel related salary and benefit expenses, cost of facilities, insurance, travel, legal services, property and equipment and amortization of stock options and warrants.
For the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
We recognized a net loss of $529.8 million and $20.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The net loss of $529.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 included a cash loss of $32 million and a non-cash loss of $497.8 million. The increase in net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the increased stock price, which resulted in significant non-cash loss from the change on the derivative liability.
Net cash used in operations was $32.1 million and $31.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Research and development expense
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, research and development expense was $33.6 million and $14.1 million, respectively. Research and development expenses included activities and involvement of external consultants as the Phase 3 trial moved through final data collection and query resolution, independent data validation, and other preparations for Data Lock and analyses. The increase of $19.5 million was mainly due to the recognition of approximately $19.8 million stock-based compensation under research and development during the year ended December 31, 2020.
The following table summarizes expenses incurred (i.e., amounts invoiced, including those which have only been partly paid) to entities as related parties during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (amount in thousands):
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expenses were $51.0 million and $12.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase was mainly related to a one-time cost of $30.8 million stock-based compensation that covered several years of such compensation and that was recognized in general and administrative.
Legal Expenses
Legal costs were $3.3 million and $3.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in legal costs reflects a reduction in the need for legal services.
Change in fair value of derivatives
We recognized a non-cash loss of $435.4 million and a non-cash gain of $11.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The non-cash loss was primarily due to the increase of our stock price as of December 31, 2020 ($1.53 per share) compared to December 31, 2019 ($0.21 per share). In the year ended December 31, 2019, the non-cash gain was primarily due to the decrease in stock price as of December 31, 2019 compared with December 31, 2018.
Loss from Extinguishment of Debt
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we converted debt of approximately $12.7 million principal and $1.2 million accrued interest into approximately 58.4 million shares of common stock and 6.2 million warrants. We also extinguished $6.6 million embedded derivative liabilities, wrote off $0.9 million unamortized debt discount and made some debt amendment upon the conversion. We recorded an approximate $1.6 million debt extinguishment loss from the conversion.
Our PPP Loan forgiveness application was approved on December 7, 2020. We recorded approximate $0.4 million debt extinguishment gain from the forgiveness of PPP Loan.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded loss from extinguishment of debt of $1.9 million. The debt extinguishment loss resulted from debt conversion, when the fair value of common stock exceeded the book value of the debt as of the conversion date. We also amended certain notes in 2019, which was treated as an extinguishment for accounting purposes.
Interest expense
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recorded interest expense of $8.5 million and $3.0 million, respectively.
Foreign currency transaction gain
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized foreign currency transaction gain of $2.3 million and $0.3 million, respectively. The gain was due to the weakening of the U.S. dollar relative to the British pound sterling.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have experienced recurring losses from operations since inception. We have not yet established an ongoing source of revenues and must cover our operating expenses through debt and equity financings to allow us to continue as a going concern. Our ability to continue as a going concern depends on the ability to obtain adequate capital to fund operating losses until we generate adequate cash flows from operations to fund our operating costs and obligations. If we are unable to obtain adequate capital, we could be forced to cease operations.
We depend upon our ability, and will continue to attempt, to secure equity and/or debt financing. We cannot be certain that additional funding will be available on acceptable terms, or at all. Our management determined that there was substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the consolidated financial statements were issued, and management’s concerns about our ability to continue as a going concern within the year following this report persist.
Contingent Contractual Payment
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 (amount in thousands):
(1) The obligations related to short-term convertible notes were approximately $2.4 million as of December 31, 2020, which included remaining contractual unpaid interest of $0.2 million.
(2) The obligations related to short-term notes were approximately $2.8 million as of December 31, 2020, which included unpaid interest of $0.3 million.
(3) The obligations related to long-term notes were approximately $9.6 million as of December 31, 2020, which included unpaid interest for the next 5 years of approximately $0.6 million.
(4) The operating lease obligations during the next 2 years included approximately $468,000 and $9,000 for our offices in Maryland and Germany, respectively, and approximately $513,000 for our office in Maryland for the next 3-4 years. Approximately £1 million ($1.5 million) in lease obligations during the next 2 years and approximately £1.5 million ($2.2 million) for the next 3 to 5 years related to the Vision Centre in the U.K. that we leased back in December 2018. We also included approximately $10.3 million of anticipated payments to Advent BioServices, which represents the next 2 years’ obligation. The remaining contract term as of December 31, 2020 was approximately 2 years under the Manufacturing Services Agreement with Advent.
(5) We have possible contingent obligations to pay certain fees to contract manufacturers if we shut down or suspend programs.
For a shut down or suspension of the DCVax-L program at Advent, the Company must give 12 months’ advance notice. During the notice period services would still be provided. Minimum required payments for this notice period total approximately £3.8 million ($5 million).
As of December 31, 2020, no shut-down or suspension fees were triggered.
Operating Activities
We used $32.1 million and $31.9 million in cash for operating activities during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in cash used in operating activities was primarily attributable to an increase in clinical trial related expenditures.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we spent approximately $6.6 million to purchase additional equipment in the UK and construction in progress.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we spent approximately $1.5 million related to the Flaskworks acquisition.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we spent approximately $360,000 to purchase additional equipment in the UK.
Financing Activities
We received approximately $26.8 million and $6.9 million in cash proceeds from issuance of convertible preferred stock, common stock and warrants, in both public and private offerings during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
We received approximately $13.9 million and $2.2 million cash proceeds from the exercise of warrants during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
We received approximately $13.7 million and $7.0 million in cash proceeds from the issuance of multiple notes payable during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
We received approximately $0.3 million in cash proceeds from issuances of debt with a related party during the year ended December 31, 2020.
We made aggregate debt payments of $2.0 million and $6.1 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.