Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following is management's discussion and analysis of certain significant factors that have affected our consolidated financial condition and results of operations during the periods included herein. This discussion should be read in conjunction with our historical Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II - Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this 2020 Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under Part I - Item 1A. “Risk Factors” or in other parts of this 2020 Form 10-K. For discussion related to the results of operations and changes in financial condition for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, refer to Part II - Item 7. “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018” in our 2019 Form 10-K, which was filed with the SEC on March 3, 2020, and which is incorporated herein by reference.
Overview
Northwest Pipe Company is a leading manufacturer for water related infrastructure products. In addition to being the largest manufacturer of engineered steel water pipeline systems in North America, we produce high-quality precast and reinforced concrete products, Permalok® steel casing pipe, bar-wrapped concrete cylinder pipe, as well as linings, coatings, joints, and one of the largest offerings of fittings and specialized components. Our ten manufacturing facilities are strategically positioned to meet growing water and wastewater infrastructure needs. We provide solution-based products for a wide range of markets including water transmission and infrastructure, water and wastewater plant piping, structural stormwater and sewer systems, trenchless technology, and pipeline rehabilitation. Our prominent position is based on a widely-recognized reputation for quality, service, and manufacturing to meet performance expectations in all categories including highly-corrosive environments. We have manufacturing facilities located in Portland, Oregon; Adelanto, California; Saginaw, Texas; Tracy, California; Parkersburg, West Virginia; Salt Lake City, Utah; Orem, Utah; St. George, Utah; St. Louis, Missouri; and San Luis Río Colorado, Mexico.
On January 31, 2020, we completed the acquisition of 100% of Geneva Pipe and Precast Company (fka Geneva Pipe Company, Inc.) for a purchase price of $49.4 million. Geneva is a concrete pipe and precast concrete products manufacturer based in Utah. This acquisition expanded our water infrastructure product capabilities by adding additional reinforced concrete pipe capacity and a full line of precast concrete products including storm drains and manholes, catch basins, vaults, and curb inlets as well as innovative lined products that extend the life of concrete pipe and manholes for sewer applications. Operations have continued with Geneva's previous management and workforce at its three manufacturing facilities.
Our water infrastructure products are sold generally to installation contractors, who include our products in their bids to federal, state, and municipal agencies, privately-owned water companies, or developers for specific projects. We believe our sales are substantially driven by spending on urban growth and new water infrastructure with a recent trend towards spending on water infrastructure replacement, repair, and upgrade. Within the total range of products, our steel pipe tends to fit larger-diameter, higher-pressure pipeline applications, while our precast concrete products mainly serve stormwater and sanitary sewer systems.
Our Current Economic Environment
We operate our business with a long-term time horizon. Projects are often planned for many years in advance, and are sometimes part of 50-year build-out plans. Long-term demand for water infrastructure projects in the United States appears strong. However, in the near term, we expect that strained governmental and water agency budgets and financing along with increased manufacturing capacity from competition could impact the business. Fluctuating steel costs will also be a factor, as the ability to adjust our selling prices as steel costs fluctuate depends on market conditions. Purchased steel represents a substantial portion of our cost of sales, and changes in our selling prices often correlate directly to changes in steel costs.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Our Business
While the COVID-19 pandemic has not had a material adverse effect on our reported results for the year ended December 31, 2020, we are unable to predict the ultimate impact that the COVID-19 pandemic may have on our business, future results of operations, financial position, or cash flows. For additional details, refer to the information set forth under the caption “Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Our Business” in Part I - Item 1. “Business” and discussions in Part I - Item 1A. “Risk Factors” of this 2020 Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, certain financial information regarding costs and expenses expressed in dollars (in thousands) and as a percentage of total Net sales.
We have one operating segment, Water Infrastructure, which produces high-quality engineered steel water pipe, precast and reinforced concrete products, Permalok® steel casing pipe, bar-wrapped concrete cylinder pipe, as well as linings, coatings, joints, fittings, and specialized components. These products are primarily used in water infrastructure including water transmission, water and wastewater plant piping, structural stormwater and sewer systems, trenchless technology, and pipeline rehabilitation. See Note 3 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II - Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this 2020 Form 10-K for information on our acquisition of Geneva in January 2020.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net sales. Net sales increased 2.4% to $285.9 million in 2020 compared to $279.3 million in 2019 as the $44.2 million contribution from our acquired Geneva operations was nearly entirely offset by the decrease in net sales at our legacy steel pipe facilities. The decrease at our legacy steel pipe facilities was due to a 28% decrease in tons produced resulting from changes in project timing, partially offset by a 20% increase in selling price per ton due to a change in product mix. Additionally, the pandemic-related shut-down of our SLRC facility negatively impacted our sales in the second quarter of 2020. Bidding activity, backlog, and production levels may vary significantly from period to period affecting sales volumes.
Gross profit. Gross profit increased 7.1% to $50.5 million (17.7% of net sales) in 2020 compared to $47.2 million (16.9% of net sales) in 2019. The increase in gross profit was due to the addition of the acquired Geneva operations and improved product pricing at our legacy steel pipe facilities, partially offset by lower production volume at our legacy steel pipe facilities and amortization and other acquisition-related accounting adjustments resulting from the purchase accounting of Geneva. Additionally, as a result of the fire at our Saginaw facility in April 2019, $1.4 million of business interruption insurance recovery (net of incremental production costs) was recorded in 2020, compared to $1.6 million of incremental production costs (net of business interruption insurance recovery) in 2019.
Selling, general, and administrative expense. Selling, general, and administrative expense increased 34.9% to $25.0 million (8.8% of net sales) in 2020 compared to $18.5 million (6.6% of net sales) in 2019. The increase in selling, general, and administrative expense was primarily due to the addition of Geneva, including $2.7 million in higher compensation-related expense, $2.0 million in higher acquisition-related transaction costs, and $0.9 million in higher intangible amortization expense. In addition, we incurred $0.8 million in higher administrative expense.
Other income. In 2020 and 2019, we recognized gains on insurance proceeds of $1.0 million and $1.6 million, respectively, for property damage resulting from the fire at our Saginaw facility. In August 2019, we received $2.3 million of proceeds related to a favorable legal settlement involving certain pipe produced at our former Houston, Texas and Bossier City, Louisiana facilities.
Income taxes. Income tax expense was $6.6 million in 2020 (an effective income tax rate of 25.7%) compared to $4.7 million in 2019 (an effective income tax rate of 14.5%). The effective income tax rate for 2020 was primarily impacted by costs associated with the acquisition of Geneva that are expected to be non-deductible for tax purposes. The effective income tax rate for 2019 was primarily impacted by the estimated changes in our valuation allowance. The effective income tax rate can change significantly depending on the relationship of permanent income tax deductions and tax credits to estimated pre-tax income or loss and the changes in valuation allowances. Accordingly, the comparison of effective income tax rates between periods is not meaningful in all situations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources and Uses of Cash
Our principal sources of liquidity generally include operating cash flows and the Amended Credit Agreement. From time to time our long-term capital needs may be met through the issuance of long-term debt or additional equity. Our principal uses of liquidity generally include capital expenditures, working capital, and debt service. Information regarding our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 are presented in our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows contained in Part II - Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this 2020 Form 10-K, and are further discussed below.
As we cannot predict the duration or scope of the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our customers and suppliers, the potential negative financial impact to our results cannot be reasonably estimated, but could be material. We are actively managing the business to maintain cash flow and believe we have liquidity to meet our anticipated funding requirements and other near-term obligations.
As of December 31, 2020, our working capital (current assets minus current liabilities) was $146.1 million compared to $153.5 million as of December 31, 2019. Cash and cash equivalents totaled $37.9 million and $31.0 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Fluctuations in our working capital accounts result from timing differences between production, shipment, invoicing, and collection, as well as changes in levels of production and costs of materials. We typically have a relatively large investment in working capital, as we generally pay for materials, labor, and other production costs in the initial stages of a project, while payments from our customers are generally received after finished product is delivered. A portion of our revenues are recognized over time as the manufacturing process progresses; therefore, cash receipts typically occur subsequent to when revenue is recognized and the elapsed time between when revenue is recorded and when cash is received can be significant. As such, our payment cycle is a significantly shorter interval than our collection cycle, although the effect of this difference in the cycles may vary by project, and from period to period.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $13.8 million of outstanding long-term debt, no outstanding revolving loan borrowings, $1.7 million of finance lease liabilities, and $30.1 million of operating lease liabilities. For future maturities of these obligations, see Notes 8 and 9 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II - Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this 2020 Form 10-K.
Due to the uncertainty with respect to the timing of future cash flows associated with our approximately $4.4 million in unrecognized tax benefits as of December 31, 2020, we are unable to make reasonably reliable estimates of the period of cash settlement with the respective taxing authorities. For further information, see Note 16 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II - Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this 2020 Form 10-K.
Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $56.1 million in 2020 compared to $42.9 million in 2019. Net income, adjusted for non-cash items, generated $40.3 million of operating cash flow in 2020 compared to $45.7 million in 2019. The net change in working capital resulted in an increase to net cash provided by operations of $15.7 million in 2020 compared to a decrease of $2.8 million in 2019.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $61.4 million in 2020 compared to $6.4 million in 2019. Net cash used in investing activities in 2020 includes the acquisition of Geneva of $48.7 million, net of cash acquired. Capital expenditures were $14.0 million in 2020 compared to $8.6 million in 2019. The 2019 capital expenditures associated with the rebuilding of assets lost in the April 2019 fire at our Saginaw, Texas facility were recovered through insurance proceeds of $1.4 million in 2020 and $2.1 million in 2019. We currently expect capital expenditures in 2021 to be approximately $12 million to $15 million primarily for standard capital replacement.
Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Financing Activities
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities was $12.3 million in 2020 compared to $(12.1) million in 2019. Net borrowings on long-term debt were $13.8 million in 2020. There were no net borrowings (repayments) on the line of credit in 2020 compared to $(11.5) million in 2019.
We anticipate that our existing cash and cash equivalents, cash flows expected to be generated by operations, and amounts available under the Amended Credit Agreement will be adequate to fund our working capital, debt service, and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next twelve months. To the extent necessary, we may also satisfy capital requirements through additional bank borrowings, senior notes, term notes, subordinated debt, and finance and operating leases, if such resources are available on satisfactory terms. We have from time to time evaluated and continue to evaluate opportunities for acquisitions and expansion. Any such transactions, if consummated, may necessitate additional bank borrowings or other sources of funding. As previously discussed, we acquired Geneva in January 2020, which was funded by available cash and borrowings under the Amended Credit Agreement.
On November 3, 2020, our registration statement on Form S-3 (Registration No. 333-249637) covering the potential future sale of up to $150 million of our equity and/or debt securities or combinations thereof, was declared effective by the SEC. This registration statement, which replaced the registration statement on Form S-3 that expired on September 15, 2020, provides another potential source of capital, in addition to other alternatives already in place. We cannot be certain that funding will be available on favorable terms or available at all. To the extent that we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, our shareholders may experience significant dilution. As of the date of this 2020 Form 10-K, we have not yet sold any securities under this registration statement, nor do we have an obligation to do so. Please refer to the factors discussed in Part I - Item 1A. “Risk Factors” of this 2020 Form 10-K.
Line of Credit (Revolving Loan) and Long-Term Debt
The Amended Credit Agreement expires on October 25, 2024 and provides for a term loan, as well as letters of credit and revolving loans in the aggregate amount of up to $74 million, subject to a borrowing base (“Revolver Commitment”). As of December 31, 2020, under the Amended Credit Agreement, we had $13.8 million of outstanding long-term debt as a term loan, $1.6 million of outstanding letters of credit, and no revolving loan borrowings. As of December 31, 2020, we had additional revolving loan borrowing capacity of $53 million. Based on our business plan and forecasts of operations, we expect to have sufficient credit availability to support our operations for at least the next twelve months.
Pursuant to the Amended Credit Agreement, on March 31, 2020, we entered into a term loan for $15.9 million with Wells Fargo that matures on October 25, 2024 and bears interest at the daily three month LIBOR plus 2.0% to 2.5%. The Amended Credit Agreement also provides a mechanism for determining an alternative benchmark rate to the LIBOR, which may include SOFR. The term loan requires monthly principal payments of $0.3 million plus accrued interest. We are obligated to prepay the term loan to the extent that the outstanding principal balance at any time exceeds 60% of the fair market value of specified real property securing the loan. We are also obligated to prepay the term loan in an amount equal to 20% of Excess Cash Flow (as defined in the Amended Credit Agreement). The prepayment from Excess Cash Flow generated in 2020 that is required in 2021 is $4.6 million. Subject to certain limitations, we may also voluntarily prepay the balance upon ten business days’ written notice.
Revolving loan borrowings under the Amended Credit Agreement bear interest at rates related to the daily three month LIBOR plus 1.5% to 2.0%. The Amended Credit Agreement requires the payment of an unused line fee of between 0.25% and 0.375%, based on the amount by which the Revolver Commitment exceeds the average daily balance of outstanding borrowings (as defined in the Amended Credit Agreement) during any month. Such fee is payable monthly in arrears.
The letters of credit outstanding as of December 31, 2020 relate to workers’ compensation insurance. Based on the nature of these arrangements and our historical experience, we do not expect to make any material payments under these arrangements.
The Amended Credit Agreement contains customary representations and warranties, as well as customary affirmative and negative covenants, events of default, and indemnification provisions in favor of the lender. The negative covenants include restrictions regarding the incurrence of liens and indebtedness and certain acquisitions and dispositions of assets and other matters, all subject to certain exceptions. The Amended Credit Agreement also requires us to regularly provide financial information to Wells Fargo. Under the terms of the Amended Credit Agreement, mandatory prepayments may be required to the extent the revolving loans exceed the borrowing base or the Maximum Revolver Amount (as defined in the Amended Credit Agreement), or in the event we or our named affiliates receive cash proceeds from the sale or disposition of assets (including proceeds of insurance or arising from casualty losses), subject to certain limitations and exceptions, including sales of assets in the ordinary course of business.
The Amended Credit Agreement imposes financial covenants requiring us to maintain a Senior Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Amended Credit Agreement) not greater than 3.00 and a Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio (as defined in the Amended Credit Agreement) of at least 1.10 to 1.00. We were in compliance with all financial covenants as of December 31, 2020. Based on our business plan and forecasts of operations, we believe we will remain in compliance with our financial covenants for the next twelve months.
Our obligations under the Amended Credit Agreement are secured by a security interest in certain real property owned by us and our subsidiaries and substantially all of our and our subsidiaries’ other assets.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a description of recent accounting pronouncements affecting our company, including the dates of adoption and estimated effects on financial position, results of operations, and cash flows, see Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II - Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this 2020 Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Management Estimates
The preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses, and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate all of our estimates including those related to revenue recognition, business combinations, goodwill, inventories, property and equipment, including depreciation and valuation, share-based compensation, income taxes, allowance for doubtful accounts, and litigation and other contingencies. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe the following critical accounting policies and related judgments and estimates affect the preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue for water infrastructure steel pipe products is recognized over time as the manufacturing process progresses because of our right to payment for work performed to date plus a reasonable profit on cancellations for unique products that have no alternative use to us. Revenue is measured by the costs incurred to date relative to the estimated total direct costs to fulfill each contract (cost-to-cost method). Contract costs include all material, labor, and other direct costs incurred in satisfying performance obligations. The cost of steel material is recognized as a contract cost when the steel is introduced into the manufacturing process. Estimated total costs of each contract are reviewed on a monthly basis by project management and operations personnel for all active projects. All cost revisions that result in a material change in gross profit are reviewed by senior management personnel. Significant judgment is required in estimating total costs and measuring the progress of project completion, as well as whether a loss is expected to be incurred on the contract. We use certain assumptions and develop estimates based on a number of factors, including the degree of required product customization, our historical experience, the project plans, and an assessment of the risks and uncertainties inherent in the contract related to implementation delays or performance issues that may or may not be within our control. Changes in job performance, job conditions, and estimated profitability, including those arising from contract change orders, contract penalty provisions, foreign currency exchange rate movements, changes in raw materials costs, and final contract settlements may result in revisions to estimates of revenue, costs, and income, and are recognized in the period in which the revisions are determined. Provisions for losses on uncompleted contracts are estimated by comparing total estimated contract revenue to the total estimated contract costs and a loss is recognized during the period in which it becomes probable and can be reasonably estimated.
Revenue for water infrastructure concrete pipe and precast concrete products is recognized at the time control is transferred to customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for the products. All variable consideration that may affect the total transaction price, including contractual discounts, returns, and credits, is included in net sales. Estimates for variable consideration are based on historical experience, anticipated performance, and management's judgment. Our contracts do not contain significant financing.
We do not recognize revenue on a contract until the contract has approval and commitment from both parties, the contract rights and payment terms can be identified, the contract has commercial substance, and its collectability is probable.
Business Combinations
Business combinations are accounted for under the acquisition method which requires identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed in the business acquired be recognized and measured at fair value on the acquisition date, which is the date that the acquirer obtains control of the acquired business. The amount by which the fair value of consideration transferred as the purchase price exceeds the net fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recorded as goodwill. The amount by which the net fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed exceeds the fair value of consideration transferred as the purchase price is recorded as a bargain purchase gain. Acquisition-related costs are expensed as incurred.
Accounting for business combinations requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions in the determination of the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in order to allocate purchase price consideration properly. These assumptions and estimates include a market participant’s use of the asset and the appropriate discount rates for a market participant. Our estimates are based on historical experience, information obtained from the management of the acquired companies and, when appropriate, include assistance from independent third-party appraisal firms. Our significant assumptions and estimates can include, but are not limited to, the cash flows that an asset is expected to generate in the future, the appropriate weighted-average cost of capital, and the cost savings expected to be derived from acquiring an asset. These estimates are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. In addition, unanticipated events and circumstances may occur which may affect the accuracy or validity of such estimates. As a result, during the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed with the corresponding offset to goodwill or bargain purchase gain.
Goodwill
Goodwill is reviewed for impairment annually as of December 31 or whenever events occur or circumstances change that indicates goodwill may be impaired. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level. A reporting unit is an operating segment or one level below an operating segment (also known as a component).
In testing goodwill for impairment, we have the option to perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances indicate that it is more-likely-than-not (more than 50%) that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. When performing a qualitative assessment, we evaluate factors such as industry and market conditions, cost factors, overall financial performance, and other relevant entity specific events and changes. In the evaluation, we look at the long-term prospects for the reporting unit and recognize that current performance may not be the best indicator of future prospects or value, which requires management judgment.
If the qualitative assessment indicates that it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, or if we choose not to perform the qualitative assessment, then a quantitative assessment is performed to determine the reporting unit’s fair value. The fair value calculation uses a combination of income and market approaches. The income approach is based upon projected future after-tax cash flows discounted to present value using factors that consider the timing and risk associated with the future after-tax cash flows. The market approach is based upon historical and/or forward-looking measures using multiples of revenue or earnings before interest, tax, depreciation, and amortization. We utilize a weighted average of the income and market approaches. If the reporting unit’s carrying value exceeds its fair value, then an impairment loss is recognized for the amount of the excess of the carrying amount over the reporting unit’s fair value, not to exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost and net realizable value. Determining net realizable value of inventories involves judgments and assumptions, including projecting selling prices and cost of sales. To estimate net realizable value, we review recent sales and gross profit history, existing customer orders, current contract prices, industry supply and demand, forecasted steel prices, replacement costs, seasonal factors, general economic trends, and other information, as applicable. If future market conditions are less favorable than those projected by us, inventory write-downs may be required. The cost of raw material inventories of steel is either on a specific identification basis or on an average cost basis. The cost of all other raw material inventories, as well as work-in-process and supplies, is on an average cost basis. The cost of finished goods uses the first-in, first-out method of accounting.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment are recorded at cost, and are depreciated using either the units of production method or the straight-line method depending on the classification of the asset. Depreciation expense calculated under the units of production method may be less than, equal to, or greater than depreciation expense calculated under the straight-line method. We evaluate historical and projected units of production at each plant to reassess the units of production expected on an annual basis.
We assess impairment of property and equipment whenever changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying values of the asset or asset group(s) may not be recoverable. The recoverable value of a long-lived asset group is determined by estimating future undiscounted cash flows using assumptions about our expected future operating performance. Estimates of future cash flows used in the recoverability test incorporate our own assumptions about the use of the asset group and shall consider all available evidence. Our estimates of undiscounted cash flows may differ from actual cash flow due to, among other things, technological changes, economic conditions, or changes to our business operations. If we determine the carrying value of the property and equipment will not be recoverable, we calculate and record an impairment loss.
Share-based Compensation
We recognize the compensation cost of employee and director services received in exchange for awards of equity instruments based on the grant date estimated fair value of the awards. We estimate the fair value of restricted stock units and performance share awards using the value of our stock on the date of grant. Share-based compensation cost is recognized over the period during which the employee or director is required to provide service in exchange for the award and, as forfeitures occur, the associated compensation cost recognized to date is reversed. For awards with performance-based payout conditions, we recognize compensation cost based on the probability of achieving the performance conditions, with changes in expectations recognized as an adjustment to earnings in the period of change. Any recognized compensation cost is reversed if the conditions are ultimately not met.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are recorded using an asset and liability approach that requires the recognition of deferred income tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our Consolidated Financial Statements or income tax returns. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred income tax assets to the amount expected to be realized. The determination of our provision for income taxes requires significant judgment, the use of estimates, and the interpretation and application of complex tax laws. Our provision for income taxes primarily reflects a combination of income earned and taxed in the various United States federal, state, local, and to a lesser extent, foreign jurisdictions. Jurisdictional tax law changes, increases or decreases in permanent differences between book and tax items, accruals or adjustments of accruals for unrecognized income tax benefits or valuation allowances, and our change in the mix of earnings from these taxing jurisdictions all affect the overall effective income tax rate.
We record income tax reserves for federal, state, local, and international exposures relating to periods subject to audit. The development of reserves for these exposures requires judgments about tax issues, potential outcomes and timing, and is a subjective estimate. We assess our income tax positions and record income tax benefits for all years subject to examination based upon management’s evaluation of the facts, circumstances, and information available at the reporting dates. For those income tax positions where it is more-likely-than-not that an income tax benefit will be sustained, we have recorded the largest amount of income tax benefit with a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon settlement with a tax authority that has full knowledge of all relevant information. For those income tax positions where it is not more-likely-than-not that an income tax benefit will be sustained, no income tax benefit has been recognized in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
We maintain allowances for estimated losses resulting from the inability of our customers to make required payments or from contract disputes. The amounts of such allowances are based on historical experience and management’s judgment. The extension and revision of credit is determined by obtaining credit rating reports or financial information on the customer. An allowance is recorded based on a variety of factors, including our historical collection experience and our historical product quality claims. At least monthly, we review past due balances to identify the reasons for non-payment. We will write down or write off a receivable account once the account is deemed uncollectible for reasons such as customer quality claims, a contract dispute, deterioration in the customer’s financial position, a bankruptcy filing, or other events. We believe the reported allowances as of December 31, 2020 are adequate. If the customer’s financial conditions were to deteriorate resulting in their inability to make payments, or if contract disputes were to escalate, additional allowances may need to be recorded which would result in additional expenses being recorded for the period in which such determination was made.