ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This discussion and analysis contains statements that constitute “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), and Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. All statements that are not statements of historical fact are forward-looking statements. The words “expect,” “will,” “estimate,” “anticipate,” “predict,” “believe” and similar expressions and variations thereof are intended to identify forward-looking statements. These statements appear in a number of places in this discussion and analysis and include statements regarding the intent, belief or current expectations of the Company, its directors or its officers with respect to, among other things, trends affecting the Company’s financial condition or results of operations, the Company’s strategy and strategic initiatives and the outcome of contingencies such as litigation and investigations. Readers are cautioned that any forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve risks and uncertainties. More information regarding these risks and uncertainties and other important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those in the forward-looking statements is set forth under the heading “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K (the “Annual Report”). The Company does not ordinarily make projections of its future operating results and undertakes no obligation (and expressly disclaims any obligation) to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by law. Readers should carefully review this document and the other documents filed by the Company with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”). This section should be read together with the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation and related notes set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report.
The following discussion and analysis omits discussion of fiscal 2019. Please see “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020 for a discussion on fiscal 2019.
INTRODUCTION
News Corporation (together with its subsidiaries, “News Corporation,” “News Corp,” the “Company,” “we,” or “us”) is a global diversified media and information services company comprised of businesses across a range of media, including: digital real estate services, subscription video services in Australia, news and information services and book publishing.
The consolidated financial statements are referred to herein as the “Consolidated Financial Statements.” The consolidated statements of operations are referred to herein as the “Statements of Operations.” The consolidated balance sheets are referred to herein as the “Balance Sheets.” The consolidated statements of cash flows are referred to herein as the “Statements of Cash Flows.” The Consolidated Financial Statements have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America (“GAAP”).
Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is intended to help provide an understanding of the Company’s financial condition, changes in financial condition and results of operations. This discussion is organized as follows:
•Overview of the Company’s Businesses-This section provides a general description of the Company’s businesses, as well as developments that occurred during the two fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and through the date of this filing that the Company believes are important in understanding its results of operations and financial condition or to disclose known trends.
•Results of Operations-This section provides an analysis of the Company’s results of operations for the two fiscal years ended June 30, 2021. This analysis is presented on both a consolidated basis and a segment basis. Supplemental revenue information is also included for reporting units within certain segments and is presented on a gross basis, before eliminations in consolidation. In addition, a brief description is provided of significant transactions and events that impact the comparability of the results being analyzed. The Company maintains a 52-53 week fiscal year ending on the Sunday closest to June 30 in each year. Fiscal 2021 and 2020 each included 52 weeks.
•Liquidity and Capital Resources-This section provides an analysis of the Company’s cash flows for the two fiscal years ended June 30, 2021, as well as a discussion of the Company’s financial arrangements and outstanding commitments, both firm and contingent, that existed as of June 30, 2021.
•Critical Accounting Policies-This section discusses accounting policies considered important to the Company’s financial condition and results of operations, and which require significant judgment and estimates on the part of management in application. In addition, Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements summarizes the Company’s significant accounting policies, including the critical accounting policies discussed in this section.
OVERVIEW OF THE COMPANY’S BUSINESSES
The Company manages and reports its businesses in the following six segments:
•Digital Real Estate Services-The Digital Real Estate Services segment consists of the Company’s 61.4% interest in REA Group and 80% interest in Move. The remaining 20% interest in Move is held by REA Group. REA Group is a market-leading digital media business specializing in property and is listed on the Australian Securities Exchange (“ASX”) (ASX: REA). REA Group advertises property and property-related services on its websites and mobile apps, including Australia’s leading residential, commercial and share property websites, realestate.com.au, realcommercial.com.au and Flatmates.com.au, and property portals in India and East Asia. In addition, REA Group provides property-related data to the financial sector and financial services through an end-to-end digital property search and financing experience and a mortgage broking offering.
Move is a leading provider of digital real estate services in the U.S. and primarily operates realtor.com®, a premier real estate information, advertising and services platform. Move offers real estate advertising solutions to agents and brokers, including its ConnectionsSM Plus and AdvantageSM Pro products as well as its referral-based services. Move also offers online tools and services to do-it-yourself landlords and tenants, as well as professional software and services products.
•Subscription Video Services-The Company’s Subscription Video Services segment provides sports, entertainment and news services to pay-TV and streaming subscribers and other commercial licensees, primarily via cable, satellite and internet distribution, and consists of (i) the Company’s 65% interest in the Foxtel Group (with the remaining 35% interest held by Telstra, an ASX-listed telecommunications company) and (ii) Australian News Channel (“ANC”). The Foxtel Group is the largest Australian-based subscription television provider, with nearly 200 channels covering sports, general entertainment, movies, documentaries, music, children’s programming and news. Foxtel and the Kayo Sports streaming service offer the leading sports programming content in Australia, with broadcast rights to live sporting events including: National Rugby League, Australian Football League, Cricket Australia and various motorsports programming. The Foxtel Group also operates BINGE, its on-demand entertainment streaming service, and Foxtel Now, a streaming service that provides access across Foxtel's live and on-demand content.
ANC operates the SKY NEWS network, Australia’s 24-hour multi-channel, multi-platform news service. ANC channels are distributed throughout Australia and New Zealand and available on Foxtel and Sky Network Television NZ. ANC also owns and operates the international Australia Channel IPTV service and offers content across a variety of digital media platforms, including web, mobile and third party providers.
•Dow Jones-The Dow Jones segment consists of Dow Jones, a global provider of news and business information, which distributes its content and data through a variety of media channels including newspapers, newswires, websites, applications, or apps, for mobile devices, tablets and e-book readers, newsletters, magazines, proprietary databases, live journalism, video and podcasts. The Dow Jones segment’s products, which target individual consumers and enterprise customers, include The Wall Street Journal, Factiva, Dow Jones Risk & Compliance, Dow Jones Newswires, Barron’s, MarketWatch and Investor’s Business Daily.
•Book Publishing-The Book Publishing segment consists of HarperCollins, the second largest consumer book publisher in the world, with operations in 17 countries and particular strengths in general fiction, nonfiction, children’s and religious publishing. HarperCollins owns more than 120 branded publishing imprints, including Harper, William Morrow, HarperCollins Children’s Books, Avon, Harlequin and Christian publishers Zondervan and Thomas Nelson, and publishes works by well-known authors such as Harper Lee, George Orwell, Agatha Christie and Zora Neale Hurston, as well as global author brands including J.R.R. Tolkien, C.S. Lewis, Daniel Silva, Karin Slaughter and Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. It is also home to many beloved children’s books and authors and a significant Christian publishing business.
•News Media-The News Media segment consists primarily of News Corp Australia, News UK and the New York Post and includes, among other publications, The Australian, The Daily Telegraph, Herald Sun, The Courier Mail and The Advertiser in Australia and The Times, The Sunday Times, The Sun and The Sun on Sunday in the U.K. This segment also includes Wireless Group, operator of talkSPORT, the leading sports radio network in the U.K., and Storyful, a social media content agency. The segment included News America Marketing until the completion of the sale of the business on May 5, 2020.
•Other-The Other segment consists primarily of general corporate overhead expenses, costs related to the U.K. Newspaper Matters (as defined in Note 16-Commitments and Contingencies to the Consolidated Financial Statements) and transformation costs associated with the Company’s ongoing cost reduction initiatives.
Digital Real Estate Services
The Digital Real Estate Services segment generates revenue through property and property-related advertising and services, including: the sale of real estate listing and lead generation products and referral-based services to agents, brokers and developers; real estate-related and property rental-related services; display advertising on residential real estate and commercial property sites; and residential property data services to the financial sector. The Digital Real Estate Services segment also generates revenue through licenses of certain professional software products on a subscription basis and fees and commissions from referrals generated through its end-to-end digital property search and financing offering and mortgage broking services. Significant expenses associated with these sites, services and software solutions include development costs, advertising and promotional expenses, hosting and support services, salaries, broker commissions, employee benefits and other routine overhead expenses.
Consumers overwhelmingly turn to the internet and mobile devices for real estate information and services. The Digital Real Estate Services segment’s success depends on its continued innovation to provide products and services that are useful for consumers and real estate, mortgage and financial services professionals and attractive to its advertisers. The Digital Real Estate Services segment operates in a highly competitive digital environment with other operators of real estate and property websites and mobile apps.
Subscription Video Services
The Company’s Subscription Video Services segment consists of (i) its 65% interest in the Foxtel Group and (ii) ANC. The Foxtel Group is the largest Australian-based subscription television provider through its Foxtel pay-TV and Kayo Sports, BINGE and Foxtel Now streaming services. The Foxtel Group generates revenue primarily through subscription revenue as well as advertising revenue.
The Foxtel Group competes for audiences primarily with a variety of other video content providers, such as traditional Free-To-Air (“FTA”) TV operators in Australia, including the three major commercial FTA networks and two major government-funded FTA broadcasters, and content providers that deliver video programming over the internet. These providers include, Internet Protocol television, or IPTV, subscription video-on-demand and broadcast video-on-demand providers; streaming services offered through digital media providers; as well as programmers and distributors that provide content directly to consumers over the internet.
ANC operates the SKY NEWS network, Australia’s 24-hour multi-channel, multi-platform news service, and also owns and operates the Australia Channel IPTV service for international markets. Revenue is primarily derived from monthly affiliate fees received from pay-TV providers based on the number of subscribers and advertising.
The most significant operating expenses of the Subscription Video Services segment are the acquisition and production expenses related to programming, the expenses related to operating the technical facilities of the broadcast operations, expenses related to cable, satellite, internet and broadband transmission costs and studio and engineering expense. The expenses associated with licensing certain sports programming rights are recognized during the applicable season or event, which can cause results at the Subscription Video Services segment to fluctuate based on the timing and mix of the Foxtel Group’s local and international sports programming. Sports programming rights costs associated with a dedicated channel are amortized over 12 months. Other expenses include subscriber acquisition costs such as sales costs and marketing and promotional expenses related to improving the market visibility and awareness of the channels and their programming. Additional expenses include salaries, employee benefits, rent and other routine overhead expenses.
Dow Jones
The Dow Jones segment’s products target individual consumers and enterprise customers. Revenue from the Dow Jones segment’s consumer business is derived primarily from circulation, which includes subscription and single-copy sales of its digital and print consumer products, the sale of digital and print advertising, licensing fees for its print and digital consumer content and participation fees for its live journalism events. Circulation revenues are dependent on the content of the Dow Jones segment’s consumer products, prices of its and/or competitors’ products, as well as promotional activities and news cycles. Advertising revenue is dependent on a number of factors, including demand for the Dow Jones segment’s consumer products, general economic and business conditions, demographics of the customer base, advertising rates and effectiveness and brand strength and reputation. Advertising revenues are also subject to seasonality, with revenues typically highest in the Company's second fiscal quarter due to the end-of-year holiday season. In addition, the traditional consumer print business faces challenges from alternative media formats and shifting consumer preferences, which have adversely affected, and are expected to continue to adversely affect, both print circulation and advertising revenues. Advertising, in particular, has been impacted by long-term structural movements in advertising spending from print to digital. The increasing range of advertising choices and formats has
resulted in audience fragmentation and increased competition. Technologies and policies have also been and will continue to be developed and implemented that may make it more difficult to target and measure the effectiveness of digital advertising or allow users to block advertising on websites and mobile devices, which may impact digital advertising rates or revenues. As a multi-platform news provider, the Dow Jones segment recognizes the importance of maximizing revenues from a variety of media formats and platforms, both in terms of paid-for content and in new advertising models, and continues to invest in its digital and other products, which represent an increasingly larger share of revenues at its consumer business. Mobile devices, their related apps and other technologies, provide continued opportunities for the Dow Jones segment to make its content available to a new audience of readers, introduce new or different pricing schemes and develop its products to continue to attract advertisers and/or affect the relationship between content providers and consumers. The Dow Jones segment continues to develop and implement strategies to exploit its content across a variety of media channels and platforms, including leveraging its content through licensing arrangements with third-party distribution platforms and growing its live journalism events business, which has been affected in recent periods by uncertainty, cancellations and postponements caused by the novel coronavirus (”COVID-19”) pandemic and new revenue models for virtual events.
Operating expenses for the consumer business include costs related to paper, production, distribution, third party printing, editorial and commissions. Selling, general and administrative expenses include promotional expenses, salaries, employee benefits, rent and other routine overheads. The costs associated with printing and distributing newspapers, including paper prices and delivery costs, are key operating expenses whose fluctuations can have a material effect on the results of the Dow Jones segment’s consumer business. The consumer business is affected by the cyclical increases and decreases in the price of paper and other factors that may affect paper prices, including tariffs or other restrictions on non-U.S. paper suppliers. In addition, the Dow Jones segment relies on third parties for much of the printing and distribution of its print products. Long-term structural movements from print to digital and the more immediate, as well as longer term, economic impacts of COVID-19 present challenges to the financial and operational stability of these third parties which could, in turn, increase the cost of printing and distributing the Company's newspapers.
The Dow Jones segment’s consumer products compete for consumers, audience and advertising with other local and national newspapers, web and app-based media, magazines, investment tools, social media sources and podcasts, as well as other media such as television, radio stations and outdoor displays. As a result of rapidly changing and evolving technologies, distribution platforms and business models, and corresponding changes in consumer behavior, the consumer business continues to face increasing competition for both circulation and advertising revenue, including from a variety of alternative news and information sources. These include both paid and free websites, digital apps, news aggregators, blogs, podcasts, search engines, social media networks, programmatic advertising buying channels, as well as other emerging media and distribution platforms, including off-platform distribution of its products.
The Dow Jones segment’s professional information business, which targets enterprise customers, derives revenue primarily from subscriptions to its professional information products. The professional information business serves enterprise customers with products that combine news and information with technology and tools that inform decisions and aid awareness, research and understanding. The success of the professional information business depends on its ability to provide products, services, applications and functionalities that meet the needs of its enterprise customers, who operate in information-intensive and oftentimes highly regulated industries such as finance and insurance. The professional information business must also anticipate and respond to industry trends and regulatory and technological changes.
Significant expenses for the professional information business include development costs, sales and marketing expenses, hosting and support services, royalties, salaries, consulting and professional fees, sales commissions, employee benefits and other routine overhead expenses.
The Dow Jones segment’s professional information products compete with various information service providers, compliance data providers and global financial newswires, including Reuters News, LexisNexis and Refinitiv, as well as many other providers of news, information and compliance data.
Book Publishing
The Book Publishing segment derives revenues from the sale of general fiction, nonfiction, children’s and religious books in the U.S. and internationally. The revenues and operating results of the Book Publishing segment are significantly affected by the timing of releases and the number of its books in the marketplace. The book publishing marketplace is subject to increased periods of demand during the end-of-year holiday season in its main operating geographies. This marketplace is highly competitive and continues to change due to technological developments, including additional digital platforms, such as e-books and downloadable audiobooks, and distribution channels and other factors. Each book is a separate and distinct product and its financial success depends upon many factors, including public acceptance.
Major new title releases represent a significant portion of the Book Publishing segment’s sales throughout the fiscal year. Print-based consumer books are generally sold on a fully returnable basis, resulting in the return of unsold books. In the domestic and international markets, the Book Publishing segment is subject to global trends and local economic conditions. Operating expenses for the Book Publishing segment include costs related to paper, printing, authors’ royalties, editorial, promotional, art and design expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses include salaries, employee benefits, rent and other routine overhead.
News Media
Revenue at the News Media segment is derived primarily from the sale of advertising, circulation and subscriptions, as well as licensing. Adverse changes in general market conditions for advertising, including as a result of COVID-19, continue to affect revenues. Advertising revenues at the News Media segment are also subject to seasonality, with revenues typically being highest in the Company’s second fiscal quarter due to the end-of-year holiday season in its main operating geographies. Circulation and subscription revenues can be greatly affected by changes in the prices of the Company’s and/or competitors’ products, as well as by promotional activities and news cycles.
Operating expenses include costs related to paper, production, distribution, third party printing, editorial, commissions, technology and radio sports rights. Selling, general and administrative expenses include promotional expenses, salaries, employee benefits, rent and other routine overhead.
The cost of paper is a key operating expense whose fluctuations can have a material effect on the results of the segment. The News Media segment continues to be exposed to risks associated with paper used for printing. Paper is a basic commodity and its price is sensitive to the balance of supply and demand. The News Media segment’s expenses are affected by the cyclical increases and decreases in the price of paper and other factors that may affect paper prices, including tariffs. The News Media segment’s products compete for readership, audience and advertising with local and national competitors and also compete with other media alternatives in their respective markets. Competition for circulation and subscriptions is based on the content of the products provided, pricing and, from time to time, various promotions. The success of these products also depends upon advertisers’ judgments as to the most effective use of their advertising budgets. Competition for advertising is based upon the reach of the products, advertising rates and advertiser results. Such judgments are based on factors such as cost, availability of alternative media, distribution and quality of consumer demographics.
The News Media segment's traditional print business faces challenges from alternative media formats and shifting consumer preferences. The News Media segment is also exposed to the impact of long-term structural movements in advertising spending, in particular, the move from print to digital. These alternative media formats could impact the segment’s overall performance, positively or negatively. In addition, technologies and policies have been and will continue to be developed and implemented that may make it more difficult to target and measure the effectiveness of digital advertising or allow users to block advertising on websites and mobile devices, which may impact digital advertising rates or revenues.
As multi-platform news providers, the businesses within the News Media segment recognize the importance of maximizing revenues from a variety of media formats and platforms, both in terms of paid-for content and in new advertising models, and continue to invest in their digital products. Mobile devices, their related apps and other technologies, provide continued opportunities for the businesses within the News Media segment to make their content available to a new audience of readers, introduce new or different pricing schemes and develop their products to continue to attract advertisers and/or affect the relationship between content providers and consumers. The businesses within the News Media segment continue to develop and implement strategies to exploit their content across a variety of media channels and platforms.
Other
The Other segment primarily consists of general corporate overhead expenses, costs related to the U.K. Newspaper Matters and transformation costs associated with the Company’s ongoing cost reduction initiatives.
Other Business Developments
Fiscal 2021
REA Group sale of Malaysia and Thailand businesses
In August 2021, REA Group acquired an 18% interest (16.6% on a diluted basis) in PropertyGuru Pte. Ltd. (“PropertyGuru”), a leading digital property technology company operating marketplaces in Southeast Asia, in exchange for all shares of REA
Group’s entities in Malaysia and Thailand. The transaction was completed after REA Group entered into an agreement to sell its 27% interest in its existing venture with 99.co. The transaction will create a leading digital real estate services company in Southeast Asia and create new opportunities for collaboration and access to a deeper pool of expertise, technology and investment in the region. REA Group received one seat on the board of directors of PropertyGuru as part of the transaction.
Agreement to acquire OPIS
In July 2021, the Company entered into an agreement to acquire the Oil Price Information Service business and related assets (“OPIS”) from S&P Global Inc. (“S&P”) and IHS Markit Ltd. (“IHS”) for $1.15 billion in cash, subject to customary purchase price adjustments. OPIS is a global industry standard for benchmark and reference pricing and news and analytics for the oil, natural gas liquids and biofuels industries. The business also provides pricing and news and analytics for the coal, mining and metals end markets and insights and analytics in renewables and carbon pricing. The acquisition will enable Dow Jones to become a leading provider of energy and renewables information and further its goal of building the leading global business news and information platform for professionals. OPIS will be operated by Dow Jones, and its results will be included in the Dow Jones segment. The acquisition is subject to customary closing conditions, including regulatory approvals and the consummation of the S&P and IHS merger, and is expected to close in the second quarter of fiscal 2022.
Acquisition of Mortgage Choice
In June 2021, REA Group acquired Mortgage Choice Limited (“Mortgage Choice”) for approximately A$244 million in cash (approximately $183 million based on exchange rates as of the closing date), funded by an increase in REA Group’s debt facilities. Control was transferred and the acquisition became effective and binding on Mortgage Choice shareholders on June 18, 2021 upon court approval. Mortgage Choice is a leading Australian mortgage broking business, and the acquisition complements REA Group’s existing Smartline broker footprint and accelerates REA Group’s financial services strategy to establish a leading mortgage broking business with national scale. Mortgage Choice is a subsidiary of REA Group and its results are included in the Digital Real Estate Services segment.
Acquisition of HMH Books & Media
In May 2021, the Company acquired the Books & Media segment of Houghton Mifflin Harcourt (“HMH Books & Media”) for $349 million in cash. HMH Books & Media publishes renowned and awarded children’s, young adult, fiction, non-fiction, culinary and reference titles. The acquisition adds an extensive and successful backlist, a strong frontlist in the lifestyle and children’s segments and a productions business that provides opportunities to expand HarperCollins’s intellectual property across different formats. HMH Books & Media is a subsidiary of HarperCollins and its results are included in the Book Publishing segment.
Acquisition of Investor’s Business Daily
In May 2021, the Company acquired Investor’s Business Daily (“IBD”) for $275 million in cash. IBD is a digital-first financial news and research business with unique investing content, analytical products and educational resources, including the Investors.com website. The acquisition expands Dow Jones’s offerings with the addition of proprietary data and tools to help professional and retail investors identify top-performing stocks. IBD is operated by Dow Jones, and its results are included within the Dow Jones segment.
Senior Notes Offering
In April 2021, the Company issued $1 billion of senior notes due 2029 (the “2021 Senior Notes”). The 2021 Senior Notes bear interest at a fixed rate of 3.875% per annum, payable in cash semi-annually on May 15 and November 15 of each year, commencing November 15, 2021. The notes will mature on May 15, 2029. The Company is using the net proceeds from the offering for general corporate purposes, which may include acquisitions and working capital.
Google partnership
In February 2021, the Company entered into a multi-year partnership with Google to provide content from its news sites around the world. The three-year agreement also includes the development of a subscription platform, the sharing of advertising revenue via Google’s advertising technology services, the cultivation of audio journalism and meaningful investments in video journalism by YouTube.
Elara
In December 2020, the Company acquired a controlling interest in Elara Technologies Pte. Ltd. (“Elara”) through a subscription for newly-issued preference shares and the buyout of certain minority shareholders. The total aggregate purchase price associated
with the acquisition at the completion date is $138 million which primarily consists of $69 million of cash, the fair value of noncontrolling interests of $37 million and the fair value of the Company’s previously held equity interest in Elara of $22 million. As a result of the transactions, REA Group’s shareholding in Elara increased from 13.5% to 59.7%, while News Corporation’s shareholding increased from 22.1% to 39.0%. During the three months ended March 31, 2021, REA Group acquired an additional 0.8% interest in Elara. REA Group and News Corporation now hold all Elara board seats, and the Company began consolidating Elara in December 2020. The acquisition of Elara allows REA Group to be at the forefront of long-term growth opportunities within India and the digitization of the real estate sector. Elara is a subsidiary of REA Group, and its results are included within the Digital Real Estate Services segment. As a result of the transactions, the Company’s ownership in REA Group was diluted by 0.2% to 61.4%. Subsequent to June 30, 2021, REA Group provided additional funding to Elara in exchange for further equity which increased REA Group’s ownership interest to 65.5% and diluted News Corporation’s interest to 34.3%.
Avail
In December 2020, the Company acquired Rentalutions, Inc. (“Avail”) for initial cash consideration of approximately $36 million, net of $4 million of cash acquired, and up to $8 million in future cash consideration based upon the achievement of certain performance objectives over the next three years. Avail is a platform that improves the renting experience for do-it-yourself landlords and tenants with online tools, educational content and world-class support. The acquisition helps realtor.com® further expand into the rental space, extend its support for landlords, augment current rental listing content, grow its audience and build brand affinity and long-term relationships with renters. Avail is a subsidiary of Move, and its results are included within the Digital Real Estate Services segment.
Regional and community newspapers in Australia
During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, the Company decommissioned the print operations for its regional and community newspapers in Australia. These initiatives resulted in a revenue decrease at News Corp Australia of approximately $111 million and had an immaterial impact on Segment EBITDA during fiscal 2021.
Fiscal 2020
Sale of News America Marketing
On May 5, 2020, the Company sold its News America Marketing business, a reporting unit within its News Media segment (the “Disposition”). The aggregate purchase price for the Disposition consists of (a) up to approximately $235 million, comprised of (i) $50 million in cash at closing, subject to working capital and other adjustments, less cash reinvested to acquire a 5% equity interest in the business at closing, and (ii) additional deferred cash payments payable on or before the fifth anniversary of closing in an aggregate amount of between $125 million and approximately $185 million, depending on the timing of such payments, and (b) a warrant to purchase up to an additional 10% equity interest in the business, which the Company exercised in fiscal 2021. In the Disposition, the Company retained certain liabilities relating to News America Marketing, including those arising from its legal proceedings with Valassis Communications, Inc. and Insignia Systems, Inc. See Note 16-Commitments and Contingencies in the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements.
Sale of Unruly
In January 2020, the Company sold Unruly to Tremor International Ltd (“Tremor”) for approximately 7% of Tremor’s outstanding shares. The Company agreed not to sell the Tremor shares for a period of 18 months after closing. At closing, the Company and Tremor entered into a three year commercial arrangement which granted Tremor the exclusive right to sell outstream video advertising on all of the Company’s digital properties in exchange for a total minimum revenue guarantee for News Corp of £30 million.
See Note 4-Acquisitions, Disposals and Other Transactions in the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of the acquisitions and dispositions discussed above.
Results of Operations-Fiscal 2021 versus Fiscal 2020
The following table sets forth the Company’s operating results for fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020.
________________________
** not meaningful
Revenues-Revenues increased $350 million, or 4%, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020, primarily driven by the $328 million increase at the Digital Real Estate Services segment primarily due to higher real estate revenues, the $319 million increase at the Book Publishing segment primarily due to higher book sales across categories, the $188 million increase at the Subscription Video Services segment which was due to the positive impact of foreign currency fluctuations and the $112 million increase at the Dow Jones segment primarily driven by higher circulation and subscription revenues. The increases were partially offset by the $596 million decline at the News Media segment, primarily driven by the $649 million impact from the sale of News America Marketing in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020.
The impact of foreign currency fluctuations of the U.S. dollar against local currencies resulted in a revenue increase of $513 million, or 6%, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020. The Company calculates the impact of foreign currency fluctuations for businesses reporting in currencies other than the U.S. dollar by multiplying the results for each quarter in the current period by the difference between the average exchange rate for that quarter and the average exchange rate in effect during the corresponding quarter of the prior year and totaling the impact for all quarters in the current period.
Operating expenses-Operating expenses decreased $169 million, or 3%, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020. The decrease was largely due to lower operating expenses at the News Media segment of $476 million, primarily due to the sale of News America Marketing, cost savings initiatives and lower newsprint, production and distribution costs, partially offset by the $87 million negative impact of foreign currency fluctuations and the absence of the $22 million one-time benefit from the settlement of certain warranty-related claims in the U.K. in fiscal 2020. The decrease at the News Media segment was partially offset by increases of $167 million at the Book Publishing segment driven by increased revenue and $114 million at the Subscription Video Services segment, primarily due to the $139 million negative impact of foreign currency fluctuations. The impact of foreign currency fluctuations of the U.S. dollar against local currencies resulted in an Operating expense increase of $250 million, or 5%, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020.
Selling, general and administrative-Selling, general and administrative increased $259 million, or 9%, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020. The increase in Selling, general and administrative for the fiscal year ended June 30,
2021 was primarily due to increased expenses of $149 million at the Digital Real Estate Services segment, driven by the $40 million negative impact of foreign currency fluctuations and higher employee and marketing costs, as well as a $128 million increase at the Other segment driven primarily by higher employee costs largely related to stock price and Company performance, which were negatively impacted by COVID-19 in the prior year, one-time legal settlement costs and investment spending as the Company ramps up its global cost reduction initiatives. The increase was partially offset by lower expenses of $119 million at the News Media segment driven by the sale of News America Marketing and ongoing cost savings initiatives, partially offset by the $74 million negative impact of foreign currency fluctuations. The impact of foreign currency fluctuations of the U.S. dollar against local currencies resulted in a Selling, general and administrative increase of $177 million, or 6%, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020.
Depreciation and amortization-Depreciation and amortization expense increased $36 million, or 6%, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020. The impact of foreign currency fluctuations of the U.S. dollar against local currencies resulted in a depreciation and amortization expense increase of $46 million, or 8%, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020.
Impairment and restructuring charges-During the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, the Company recorded restructuring charges of $168 million and $140 million, respectively, of which $122 million and $84 million, respectively, related to the News Media segment. The increase in restructuring charges was primarily as a result of exit costs associated with the anticipated closure of the Company’s Bronx print plant, the termination of a third-party printing contract and the Company’s global cost reduction initiatives.
During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, the Company recognized non-cash impairment charges of $1,690 million, primarily due to a $931 million write-down of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets at its Foxtel reporting unit in the third quarter of fiscal 2020, $410 million of write-downs related to News America Marketing, including $175 million related to its reclassification to assets held for sale in the third quarter of fiscal 2020, and $292 million in impairments of property, plant and equipment, goodwill and intangible assets identified during the Company's annual impairment assessment.
See Note 5-Restructuring Programs, Note 7-Property, Plant and Equipment and Note 8-Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets in the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements.
Equity losses of affiliates-Equity losses of affiliates increased by $18 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020, primarily due to the $54 million non-cash write-down of the Foxtel Group’s investment in the Nickelodeon Australia Joint Venture. In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, Foxtel and ViacomCBS entered into a separate programming rights agreement which will result in the windup of the Nickelodeon Australia Joint Venture in the first half of fiscal 2022. See Note 6-Investments in the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements.
Interest expense, net-Interest expense, net for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 increased $28 million as compared to fiscal 2020, primarily due to the absence of the impact from the settlement of cash flow hedges related to debt maturities in the first quarter of fiscal 2020 and the issuance of the 2021 Senior Notes in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021. See Note 9-Borrowings in the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements.
Other, net-Other, net increased $134 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020. See Note 21-Additional Financial Information in the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements.
Income tax expense-The Company’s income tax expense and effective tax rate for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 were $61 million and 14%, respectively, as compared to an income tax expense and effective tax rate of $21 million and (1)%, respectively, for fiscal 2020.
For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 the Company recorded income tax expense of $61 million on pre-tax income of $450 million resulting in an effective tax rate that was lower than the U.S. statutory tax rate. The tax rate was impacted by valuation allowances being recorded against tax benefits in certain foreign jurisdictions with operating losses and by the impact of foreign operations which are subject to higher tax rates, offset by a release of valuation allowances on deferred tax assets that are more-likely-than-not to be realized and a remeasurement of deferred taxes in the U.K.
For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, the Company recorded income tax expense of $21 million on a pre-tax loss of $1,524 million resulting in an effective tax rate that was lower than the U.S. statutory tax rate. The tax rate was impacted by the non-cash impairments, which have low or no tax benefit, valuation allowances being recorded against tax benefits in certain foreign jurisdictions with operating losses and by the impact of foreign operations which are subject to higher tax rates.
Management assesses available evidence to determine whether sufficient future taxable income will be generated to permit the use of existing deferred tax assets. Based on management’s assessment of available evidence, it has been determined that it is more likely than not that certain deferred tax assets in U.S. Federal, State and foreign jurisdictions may not be realized and therefore, a valuation allowance has been established against those tax assets.
Net income (loss)-Net income was $389 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, as compared to a net loss of $1,545 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, an improvement of $1,934 million, primarily driven by the absence of non-cash impairment charges recognized in fiscal 2020, higher Total Segment EBITDA and higher Other, net, partially offset by higher tax expense.
Net (income) loss attributable to noncontrolling interests-Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests was $59 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, as compared to a net loss attributable to noncontrolling interests of $276 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, primarily due to the absence of the non-cash impairment charges recognized in fiscal 2020 at the Company’s Foxtel reporting unit.
Segment Analysis
Segment EBITDA is defined as revenues less operating expenses and selling, general and administrative expenses. Segment EBITDA does not include: depreciation and amortization, impairment and restructuring charges, equity losses of affiliates, interest (expense) income, net, other, net and income tax (expense) benefit. Segment EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies, since companies and investors may differ as to what items should be included in the calculation of Segment EBITDA.
Segment EBITDA is the primary measure used by the Company’s chief operating decision maker to evaluate the performance of, and allocate resources within, the Company’s businesses. Segment EBITDA provides management, investors and equity analysts with a measure to analyze the operating performance of each of the Company’s business segments and its enterprise value against historical data and competitors’ data, although historical results may not be indicative of future results (as operating performance is highly contingent on many factors, including customer tastes and preferences).
Total Segment EBITDA is a non-GAAP measure and should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for, net income (loss), cash flow and other measures of financial performance reported in accordance with GAAP. In addition, this measure does not reflect cash available to fund requirements and excludes items, such as depreciation and amortization and impairment and restructuring charges, which are significant components in assessing the Company’s financial performance. The Company believes that the presentation of Total Segment EBITDA provides useful information regarding the Company’s operations and other factors that affect the Company’s reported results. Specifically, the Company believes that by excluding certain one-time or non-cash items such as impairment and restructuring charges and depreciation and amortization, as well as potential distortions between periods caused by factors such as financing and capital structures and changes in tax positions or regimes, the Company provides users of its consolidated financial statements with insight into both its core operations as well as the factors that affect reported results between periods but which the Company believes are not representative of its core business. As a result, users of the Company’s consolidated financial statements are better able to evaluate changes in the core operating results of the Company across different periods.
The following table reconciles Net income (loss) to Total Segment EBITDA for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020:
The following table sets forth the Company’s Revenues and Segment EBITDA by reportable segment for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020:
Digital Real Estate Services (15% and 12% of the Company’s consolidated revenues in fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively)
For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, revenues at the Digital Real Estate Services segment increased $328 million, or 31%, as compared to fiscal 2020. Revenues at Move increased $168 million, or 36%, to $641 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 from $473 million in fiscal 2020, primarily driven by higher real estate revenues due to the factors discussed below and the absence of an estimated $15 million of discounts offered to customers in response to COVID-19 during fiscal 2020. The referral model and the traditional lead generation product both benefited from higher lead and transaction volumes. The referral model also benefited from higher average home values and referral fees and generated approximately 29% of total Move revenues. The traditional lead generation product saw continued strong demand from agents, driving improvements in sell-through and yield. At REA Group, revenues increased $160 million, or 27%, to $752 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 from $592 million in fiscal 2020. The higher revenues were primarily due to the $80 million positive impact of foreign currency fluctuations, an increase in Australian residential depth revenue driven by strong national listings and the $l3 million impact from the acquisition of Elara.
For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, Segment EBITDA at the Digital Real Estate Services segment increased $169 million, or 49%, as compared to fiscal 2020. The increase in Segment EBITDA was primarily driven by the $100 million and $67 million higher contributions from Move and REA Group, respectively, resulting from the higher revenues discussed above and the $40 million positive impact of foreign currency fluctuations, partially offset by higher employee costs at both Move and REA Group, an $18 million increase in marketing costs at Move and the $17 million negative impact from the acquisition of Elara. Fiscal 2021 included approximately $12 million of transaction costs related to current year acquisitions.
Subscription Video Services (22% and 21% of the Company’s consolidated revenues in fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively)
For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, revenues at the Subscription Video Services segment increased $188 million, or 10%, as compared to fiscal 2020, primarily due to the positive impact of foreign currency fluctuations and $89 million of higher streaming revenues, primarily from Kayo and BINGE, partially offset by lower subscription revenues resulting from fewer residential broadcast subscribers. Commercial subscription revenues were largely flat, as the recovery in the commercial sector during the second half of fiscal 2021 largely offset the impact of COVID-19 restrictions that began in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020. However, ongoing lockdowns within certain states in Australia are expected to have a modest negative impact on commercial subscription revenues in the first quarter of fiscal 2022. The impact of foreign currency fluctuations of the U.S. dollar against local currencies resulted in a revenue increase of $217 million, or 12%, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020.
For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, Segment EBITDA increased $36 million, or 11%, as compared to fiscal 2020, primarily due to the $36 million positive impact of foreign currency fluctuations and lower entertainment programming, transmission and employee costs. The increase was partially offset by increased investment in streaming products and $35 million in higher sports programming rights and production costs, primarily driven by the absence of live sports in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020 due to COVID-19 restrictions which led to the subsequent recognition of $57 million of those deferred costs in fiscal 2021, partially offset by savings from renegotiated sports rights.
The following tables provide information regarding certain key performance indicators for the Foxtel Group, the primary reporting unit within the Subscription Video Services segment, as of and for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020. Management believes these metrics provide useful information to allow investors to understand trends in consumer behavior and acceptance of the various services offered by the Foxtel Group. Management utilizes these metrics to track and forecast subscription revenue trends across the business’s various linear and streaming products. See “Part I. Business” for further detail regarding these performance indicators including definitions and methods of calculation.
(a)Subscribing households throughout Australia as of June 30, 2021 and 2020.
(b)Commercial subscribers throughout Australia as of June 30, 2021 and 2020.
(c)Total and Paid Kayo subscribers as of June 30, 2021 and 2020.
(d)Total and Paid BINGE subscribers as of June 30, 2021 and 2020. BINGE was launched on May 25, 2020.
(e)Total and Paid Foxtel Now subscribers as of June 30, 2021 and 2020.
(f)Average monthly broadcast residential subscription revenue per user (excluding Optus) (Broadcast ARPU) for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020.
(g)Broadcast residential subscriber churn rate (excluding Optus) (Broadcast Subscriber Churn) for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020.
Dow Jones (18% of the Company’s consolidated revenues in both fiscal 2021 and 2020)
For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, revenues at the Dow Jones segment increased $112 million, or 7%, as compared to fiscal 2020 driven by an increase in circulation and subscription revenues, higher digital advertising revenues and the $11 million impact from the acquisition of IBD in May 2021, partially offset by declines in print advertising revenues and print circulation revenues. Digital revenues at the Dow Jones segment represented 72% of total revenues for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, as compared to 67% in fiscal 2020. The impact of foreign currency fluctuations of the U.S. dollar against local currencies resulted in a revenue increase of $13 million as compared to fiscal 2020.
Circulation and subscription revenues
Circulation and subscription revenues increased $105 million, or 9%, during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020. Circulation and other revenues increased $77 million, or 10%, primarily driven by growth in digital-only subscriptions at The Wall Street Journal and Barron’s and a $12 million increase in content licensing revenues, partially offset by print volume declines. During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, average daily digital-only subscriptions at The Wall Street Journal increased 21% to 2.7 million as compared to the corresponding period of fiscal 2020, and digital revenues represented 64% of circulation revenue for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 as compared to 58% in fiscal 2020. Revenues at the professional information business increased $28 million, or 6%, as growth of $36 million in Risk & Compliance revenues was partially offset by lower revenues from other professional information business products.
The following table summarizes average daily consumer subscriptions during the three months ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 for select publications and for all consumer subscription products.(a)
________________________
(a)Based on internal data for the periods from March 29, 2021 to June 27, 2021 and March 30, 2020 to June 28, 2020, respectively, with independent assurance over global total sales and subscriptions provided by PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP UK.
(b)Subscriptions include individual consumer subscriptions, as well as subscriptions purchased by companies, schools, businesses and associations for use by their respective employees, students, customers or members. Subscriptions exclude single-copy sales and copies purchased by hotels, airlines and other businesses for limited distribution or access to customers.
(c)For some publications, including The Wall Street Journal and Barron’s, Dow Jones sells bundled print and digital products. For bundles that provide access to both print and digital products every day of the week, only one unit is reported each day and is designated as a print subscription. For bundled products that provide access to the print product only on specified days and full digital access, one print subscription is reported for each day that a print copy is served and one digital subscription is reported for each remaining day of the week.
(d)Barron’s Group consists of Barron’s, MarketWatch, Financial News and Private Equity News.
(e)Total Consumer consists of The Wall Street Journal, Barron’s Group and, from May 5, 2021, Investor’s Business Daily.
Advertising revenues
Advertising revenues increased $14 million, or 4%, during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020, primarily driven by the $52 million increase in digital advertising revenue, which represented 58% of advertising revenue for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, as compared to 46% in fiscal 2020. The increase was partially offset by a $38 million decline in print advertising revenues resulting from general market weakness and lower print volume across The Wall Street Journal and Barron’s accelerated by COVID-19.
Segment EBITDA
For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, Segment EBITDA at the Dow Jones segment increased $96 million, or 41%, as compared to fiscal 2020. The increase was mainly due to the increase in revenues discussed above, lower newsprint, production and distribution costs driven by lower print volumes and other discretionary cost savings, partially offset by increased employee and marketing costs.
Book Publishing (21% and 18% of the Company’s consolidated revenues in fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively)
For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, revenues at the Book Publishing segment increased $319 million, or 19%, as compared to fiscal 2020. The increase was primarily driven by the strong performance across categories, including the Bridgerton series by Julia Quinn, The Guest List by Lucy Foley, The Boy, The Mole, the Fox and the Horse by Charlie Mackesy and other backlist titles in the General Books and children’s categories, the strong performance of The Order by Daniel Silva, The Happy In A Hurry Cookbook by Steve Doocey, and Didn’t See That Coming by Rachel Hollis, as well as the $32 million impact from the acquisition of a book publisher in Europe in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020 and the $23 million impact from the acquisition of HMH Books and Media in May 2021. Digital sales increased by 16% as compared to fiscal 2020 due to growth in both e-books and downloadable audiobooks. Digital sales represented approximately 22% of consumer revenues during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021. The impact of foreign currency fluctuations of the U.S. dollar against local currencies resulted in a revenue increase of $34 million, or 2%, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020.
For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, Segment EBITDA at the Book Publishing segment increased $89 million, or 42%, as compared to fiscal 2020, primarily due to the higher revenues discussed above, partially offset by higher costs related to increased sales volume and higher employee costs.
News Media (24% and 31% of the Company’s consolidated revenues in fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively)
For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, revenues at the News Media segment decreased $596 million, or 21%, as compared to fiscal 2020, primarily due to lower advertising revenues of $677 million driven by the sale of News America Marketing in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, which contributed $649 million to the decline, the $90 million impact from the closure or transition to digital of regional and community newspapers in Australia as well as continued weakness in the print advertising market exacerbated by COVID-19, partially offset by the $68 million positive impact of foreign currency fluctuations and digital advertising growth at the New York Post and News UK. Other revenues for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 decreased $23 million as compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to the $26 million impact from the sale of Unruly in January 2020. Circulation and subscription revenues increased $104 million as compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to the $79 million positive impact of foreign currency fluctuations, digital subscriber growth across key mastheads and price increases, partially offset by print volume declines, primarily at News UK. The impact of foreign currency fluctuations of the U.S. dollar against local currencies resulted in a revenue increase of $169 million, or 6%, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020.
For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, Segment EBITDA at the News Media segment decreased $1 million, or 2%, as compared to fiscal 2020, primarily due to the net $50 million negative impact from the sales of News America Marketing and Unruly in fiscal 2020 and the absence of the $22 million one-time benefit from the settlement of certain warranty-related claims in the U.K. in fiscal 2020. The decrease was partially offset by the increased contribution from News Corp Australia of $15 million, primarily due to cost savings initiatives and lower newsprint, production and distribution costs, lower losses at the New York Post of $15 million primarily due to higher revenues, the increased contribution from News UK of $9 million and the $8 million positive impact of foreign currency fluctuations.
News Corp Australia
Revenues were $997 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, a decrease of $8 million, or 1%, as compared to fiscal 2020 revenues of $1,005 million. The closure or transition to digital of regional and community newspapers in Australia resulted in a revenue decrease of $111 million. Advertising revenues decreased $79 million, primarily due to the closure or transition to digital of regional and community newspapers and continued weakness in the print advertising market exacerbated by COVID-19, partially offset by the $45 million positive impact of foreign currency fluctuations. Circulation and subscription revenues increased $66 million primarily driven by the $43 million positive impact from foreign currency fluctuations and digital
subscriber growth, which were partially offset by print volume declines resulting from the closure or transition to digital of regional and community newspapers.
News UK
Revenues were $942 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, an increase of $44 million, or 5%, as compared to fiscal 2020 revenues of $898 million. Circulation and subscription revenues increased $44 million, primarily driven by the $36 million positive impact of foreign currency fluctuations, cover price increases, mainly at The Sun, and digital subscriber growth, mainly at The Times and The Sunday Times, partially offset by single-copy volume declines exacerbated by COVID-19, primarily at The Sun. Advertising revenues decreased $3 million, primarily due to continued weakness in the print advertising market exacerbated by COVID-19, partially offset by the $16 million positive impact of foreign currency fluctuations and digital advertising growth.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Current Financial Condition
The Company’s principal source of liquidity is internally generated funds and cash and cash equivalents on hand. As of June 30, 2021, the Company’s cash and cash equivalents were $2.24 billion. The Company also has available borrowing capacity under the 2019 News Corp Credit Facility (as defined below) and certain other facilities, as described below, and expects to have access to the worldwide credit and capital markets, subject to market conditions, in order to issue additional debt if needed or desired. The Company currently expects these elements of liquidity will enable it to meet its liquidity needs for at least the next 12 months, including repayment of indebtedness. Although the Company believes that its cash on hand and future cash from operations, together with its access to the credit and capital markets, will provide adequate resources to fund its operating and financing needs for at least the next 12 months, its access to, and the availability of, financing on acceptable terms in the future will be affected by many factors, including: (i) the financial and operational performance of the Company and/or its operating subsidiaries, as applicable; (ii) the Company’s credit ratings and/or the credit rating of its operating subsidiaries, as applicable; (iii) the provisions of any relevant debt instruments, credit agreements, indentures and similar or associated documents; (iv) the liquidity of the overall credit and capital markets; and (v) the state of the economy. There can be no assurances that the Company will continue to have access to the credit and capital markets on acceptable terms.
As of June 30, 2021, the Company’s consolidated assets included $798 million in cash and cash equivalents that were held by its foreign subsidiaries. Of this amount, $128 million is cash not readily accessible by the Company as it is held by REA Group, a majority owned but separately listed public company. REA Group must declare a dividend in order for the Company to have access to its share of REA Group’s cash balance. The Company earns income outside the U.S., which is deemed to be permanently reinvested in certain foreign jurisdictions. The Company does not currently intend to repatriate these earnings. Should the Company require more capital in the U.S. than is generated by and/or available to its domestic operations, the Company could elect to transfer funds held in foreign jurisdictions. The transfer of funds from foreign jurisdictions may be cumbersome due to local regulations, foreign exchange controls and taxes. Additionally, the transfer of funds from foreign jurisdictions may result in higher effective tax rates and higher cash paid for income taxes for the Company.
The principal uses of cash that affect the Company’s liquidity position include the following: operational expenditures including employee costs, paper purchases and programming costs; capital expenditures; income tax payments; investments in associated entities; acquisitions; and the repayment of debt and related interest. In addition to the acquisitions and dispositions disclosed elsewhere, the Company has evaluated, and expects to continue to evaluate, possible future acquisitions and dispositions of certain businesses. Such transactions may be material and may involve cash, the issuance of the Company’s securities or the assumption of indebtedness.
Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
In May 2013, the Company’s Board of Directors (the “Board of Directors”) authorized the Company to repurchase up to an aggregate of $500 million of its Class A Common Stock. No stock repurchases were made during the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020. Over the life of the program through July 30, 2021, the Company cumulatively repurchased approximately 5.2 million shares of Class A Common Stock for an aggregate cost of approximately $71 million. The remaining authorized amount under the stock repurchase program as of July 30, 2021 was approximately $429 million. All decisions regarding any future stock repurchases are at the sole discretion of a duly appointed committee of the Board of Directors and management. The committee’s decisions regarding future stock repurchases will be evaluated from time to time in light of many factors, including the Company’s financial condition, earnings, capital requirements and debt facility covenants, other contractual restrictions, as well as legal requirements, regulatory constraints, industry practice, market volatility and other factors that the committee may deem relevant. The stock repurchase authorization may be modified, extended, suspended or discontinued at any time by the Board of Directors and the Board of Directors cannot provide any assurances that any additional shares will be repurchased.
The Company did not purchase any of its Class A or Class B Common Stock during the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020.
Dividends
The following table summarizes the dividends declared and paid per share on both the Company’s Class A Common Stock and Class B Common Stock:
The timing, declaration, amount and payment of future dividends to stockholders, if any, is within the discretion of the Board of Directors. The Board of Directors’ decisions regarding the payment of future dividends will depend on many factors, including the Company’s financial condition, earnings, capital requirements and debt facility covenants, other contractual restrictions, as well as legal requirements, regulatory constraints, industry practice, market volatility and other factors that the Board of Directors deems relevant.
Sources and Uses of Cash-Fiscal 2021 versus Fiscal 2020
Net cash provided by operating activities for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 was as follows (in millions):
Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $457 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020. The increase was primarily due to higher Total Segment EBITDA and lower working capital, partially offset by higher cash taxes paid of $88 million and higher restructuring payments of $42 million.
Net cash used in investing activities for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 was as follows (in millions):
Net cash used in investing activities was $1,292 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 as compared to net cash used in investing activities of $427 million for fiscal 2020.
During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, the Company used $886 million of cash for acquisitions, primarily HMH Books & Media, IBD and Mortgage Choice, and used $390 million of cash for capital expenditures, of which $139 million related to the Foxtel Group. The Company’s capital expenditures for fiscal 2022 are expected to increase approximately $100 million, subject to foreign currency fluctuations, partly driven by higher technology costs and the roll-out of the IP-enabled set-top-boxes at the Foxtel Group.
During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, the Company used $438 million of cash for capital expenditures, of which $195 million related to Foxtel.
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 was as follows (in millions):
The Company had net cash provided by financing activities of $699 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 as compared to net cash used in financing activities of $472 million for fiscal 2020.
During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, the Company issued $1.0 billion of senior notes and had new borrowings related to REA Group and the Foxtel Group of $515 million, which includes drawdowns under REA Group's 2021 bridge facility to repay outstanding debt in connection with its refinancing completed in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021. The net cash provided by financing activities was partially offset by $557 million of repayments for borrowings related to the Foxtel Group and REA Group and dividend payments of $163 million to News Corporation stockholders and REA Group minority stockholders. See Note 9-Borrowings in the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements.
During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, the Company repaid $1,226 million of borrowings related to Foxtel and REA Group, which includes repayments made as part of the debt refinancings completed in the second quarter of fiscal 2020, and made dividend payments of $158 million to News Corporation stockholders and REA Group minority stockholders. The net cash used in financing activities for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020 was partially offset by new borrowings of $926 million, which includes drawdowns under the new facilities entered into as part of the debt refinancings referenced above, and the net settlement of hedges of $57 million.
Reconciliation of Free Cash Flow Available to News Corporation
Free cash flow available to News Corporation is a non-GAAP financial measure defined as net cash provided by operating activities, less capital expenditures (“free cash flow”), less REA Group free cash flow, plus cash dividends received from REA Group. Free cash flow available to News Corporation should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for, cash flows from operations and other measures of financial performance reported in accordance with GAAP. Free cash flow available to News Corporation may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies, since companies and investors may differ as to what items should be included in the calculation of free cash flow.
The Company considers free cash flow available to News Corporation to provide useful information to management and investors about the amount of cash that is available to be used to strengthen the Company’s balance sheet and for strategic opportunities including, among others, investing in the Company’s business, strategic acquisitions, dividend payouts and repurchasing stock. The Company believes excluding REA Group’s free cash flow and including dividends received from REA Group provides users of its consolidated financial statements with a measure of the amount of cash flow that is readily available to the Company, as REA Group is a separately listed public company in Australia and must declare a dividend in order for the Company to have access to its share of REA Group’s cash balance. The Company believes free cash flow available to News Corporation provides a more conservative view of the Company’s free cash flow because this presentation includes only that amount of cash the Company actually receives from REA Group, which has generally been lower than the Company’s unadjusted free cash flow.
A limitation of free cash flow available to News Corporation is that it does not represent the total increase or decrease in the cash balance for the period. Management compensates for the limitation of free cash flow available to News Corporation by also relying on the net change in cash and cash equivalents as presented in the Statements of Cash Flows prepared in accordance with GAAP which incorporate all cash movements during the period.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net cash provided by operating activities to free cash flow available to News Corporation:
Free cash flow available to News Corporation increased $551 million in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 to $731 million from $180 million in fiscal 2020, primarily due to higher cash provided by operating activities as discussed above and lower capital expenditures.
Borrowings
As of June 30, 2021, the Company, certain subsidiaries of NXE Australia Pty Limited (the “Foxtel Group” and together with such subsidiaries, the “Foxtel Debt Group”) and REA Group and certain of its subsidiaries (REA Group and certain of its subsidiaries, the “REA Debt Group”) had total borrowings of $2.31 billion, including the current portion. Both Foxtel and REA Group are consolidated but non wholly-owned subsidiaries of News Corp, and their indebtedness is only guaranteed by members of the Foxtel Debt Group and REA Debt Group, respectively, and is non-recourse to News Corp.
News Corporation Borrowings
As of June 30, 2021, the Company had borrowings of $985 million. In April 2021, the Company issued $1 billion of senior notes due 2029 (the “2021 Senior Notes”). The 2021 Senior Notes bear interest at a fixed rate of 3.875% per annum, payable in cash semi-annually on May 15 and November 15 of each year, commencing November 15, 2021. The notes will mature on May 15, 2029.
Foxtel Group Borrowings
As of June 30, 2021, the Foxtel Debt Group had (i) borrowings of approximately $914 million, including the full drawdown of its 2019 Term Loan Facility, amounts outstanding under the 2019 Credit Facility and 2017 Working Capital Facility, its outstanding U.S. private placement senior unsecured notes and amounts outstanding under the Telstra Facility (described below), and (ii) total undrawn commitments of A$334 million available under the 2017 Working Capital Facility and 2019 Credit Facility. On April 9, 2021, the Foxtel Debt Group amended its 2019 Credit Facility and 2017 Working Capital Facility to, among other things, extend the debt maturity from November 2022 to May 2024 and reduce the applicable margin to between 2.00% to 3.25%, depending on the Foxtel Debt Group’s net leverage ratio.
In addition to third-party indebtedness, the Foxtel Debt Group has related party indebtedness, including A$900 million of outstanding shareholder loans and available facilities from the Company. The shareholder loans bear interest at a variable rate of the Australian BBSY plus an applicable margin ranging from 6.30% to 7.75% and mature in December 2027. The shareholder revolving credit facility bears interest at a variable rate of the Australian BBSY plus an applicable margin ranging from 2.00% to 3.75%, depending on the Foxtel Debt Group’s net leverage ratio, and matures in July 2024. Additionally, the Foxtel Debt Group has an A$170 million subordinated shareholder loan facility agreement with Telstra which can be used to finance cable transmission costs due to Telstra. The Telstra Facility bears interest at a variable rate of the Australian BBSY plus an applicable margin of 7.75% and matures in December 2027. The Company excludes the utilization of the Telstra Facility from the Statements of Cash Flows because it is non-cash.
REA Group Borrowings
As of June 30, 2021, REA Group had (i) borrowings of approximately $314 million, consisting of amounts outstanding under its new 2021 Bridge Facility, and (ii) A$107 million of undrawn commitments available under the 2021 Bridge Facility. In June 2021, REA Group entered into an A$520 million 2021 Bridge Facility due July 2022 (the “2021 Bridge Facility”). Drawdowns under this facility were used to repay and terminate its A$170 million 2019 Credit Facility, while cash on hand was used to repay the A$70 million 2018 Credit Facility at maturity. The undrawn 2020 Credit Facility and 2020 Overdraft Facility were also terminated. REA Group expects to refinance the 2021 Bridge Facility with a syndicate of loans in the first half of fiscal 2022.
News Corp Revolving Credit Facility
The Company has an undrawn $750 million unsecured revolving credit facility (the “2019 News Corp Credit Facility”) that can be used for general corporate purposes, which terminates on December 12, 2024.
All of the Company’s borrowings contain customary representations, covenants and events of default. The Company was in compliance with all such covenants at June 30, 2021.
See Note 9-Borrowings in the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements for further details regarding the Company’s outstanding debt, including additional information about interest rates, maturities and covenants related to such debt arrangements.
Commitments
The Company has commitments under certain firm contractual arrangements (“firm commitments”) to make future payments. These firm commitments secure the current and future rights to various assets and services to be used in the normal course of operations.
The following table summarizes the Company’s material firm commitments as of June 30, 2021:
________________________
(a)The Company has commitments under purchase obligations related to minimum subscriber guarantees for license fees, printing contracts, capital projects, marketing agreements, production services and other legally binding commitments.
(b)The Company has sports programming rights commitments with the National Rugby League, Australian Football League and Cricket Australia, as well as certain other broadcast rights which are payable through fiscal 2028.
(c)The Company has programming rights commitments with various suppliers for programming content.
(d)The Company leases office facilities, warehouse facilities, printing plants, satellite services and equipment. These leases, which are classified as operating leases, are expected to be paid at certain dates through fiscal 2048. Amounts reflected represent only the Company’s lease obligations for which it has firm commitments.
(e)The Company has contractual commitments for satellite transmission services. The Company’s satellite transponder services arrangements extend through fiscal 2032 and are accounted for as operating or finance leases, based on the underlying terms of those arrangements.
(f)See Note 9-Borrowings in the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements.
(g)Reflects the Company’s expected future interest payments on borrowings outstanding and interest rates applicable at June 30, 2021. Such rates are subject to change in future periods. See Note 9-Borrowings in the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements.
The Company has certain contracts to purchase newsprint, ink and plates that require the Company to purchase a percentage of its total requirements for production. Since the quantities purchased annually under these contracts are not fixed and are based on the Company’s total requirements, the amount of the related payments for these purchases is excluded from the table above.
The table also excludes the Company’s pension obligations, other postretirement benefits (“OPEB”) obligations and the liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits for uncertain tax positions as the Company is unable to reasonably predict the ultimate amount and timing of the commitments. The Company made contributions of $35 million and $30 million to its pension plans in fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively. Future plan contributions are dependent upon actual plan asset returns and interest rates and statutory requirements. The Company anticipates that it will make contributions of approximately $15 million in fiscal 2022, assuming that actual plan asset returns are consistent with the Company’s expected returns in fiscal 2021 and beyond, and that interest rates remain constant. The Company will continue to make voluntary contributions as necessary to improve the funded status of the plans. Payments due to participants under the Company’s pension plans are primarily paid out of underlying trusts. Payments due under the Company’s OPEB plans are not required to be funded in advance, but are paid as medical costs are incurred by covered retiree populations, and are principally dependent upon the future cost of retiree medical benefits under the Company’s OPEB plans. The Company expects its OPEB payments to approximate $8 million in fiscal 2022. See Note 17-Retirement Benefit Obligations in the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements.
Contingencies
The Company routinely is involved in various legal proceedings, claims and governmental inspections or investigations, including those discussed in Note 16-Commitments and Contingencies in the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements. The
outcome of these matters and claims is subject to significant uncertainty, and the Company often cannot predict what the eventual outcome of pending matters will be or the timing of the ultimate resolution of these matters. Fees, expenses, fines, penalties, judgments or settlement costs which might be incurred by the Company in connection with the various proceedings could adversely affect its results of operations and financial condition.
The Company establishes an accrued liability for legal claims when it determines that a loss is both probable and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. Once established, accruals are adjusted from time to time, as appropriate, in light of additional information. The amount of any loss ultimately incurred in relation to matters for which an accrual has been established may be higher or lower than the amounts accrued for such matters. Legal fees associated with litigation and similar proceedings are expensed as incurred. The Company recognizes gain contingencies when the gain becomes realized or realizable. See Note 16-Commitments and Contingencies in the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements.
The Company’s tax returns are subject to on-going review and examination by various tax authorities. Tax authorities may not agree with the treatment of items reported in the Company’s tax returns, and therefore the outcome of tax reviews and examinations can be unpredictable. The Company believes it has appropriately accrued for the expected outcome of uncertain tax matters and believes such liabilities represent a reasonable provision for taxes ultimately expected to be paid. However, these liabilities may need to be adjusted as new information becomes known and as tax examinations continue to progress, or as settlements or litigations occur.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
An accounting policy is considered to be critical if it is important to the Company’s financial condition and results of operations and if it requires significant judgment and estimates on the part of management in its application. The development and selection of these critical accounting policies have been determined by management of the Company. See Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements.
Long-lived assets
The Company’s long-lived assets include goodwill, finite-lived and indefinite-lived intangible assets and property, plant and equipment. Assets acquired in business combinations are recorded at their estimated fair value at the date of acquisition. Goodwill is recorded as the difference between the cost of acquiring a business and the estimated fair values assigned to its tangible and identifiable intangible net assets and is assigned to one or more reporting units for purposes of testing for impairment.
Determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires management’s judgment and often involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including assumptions with respect to future cash inflows and outflows, discount rates, asset lives and market multiples, among other items. Identifying reporting units and assigning goodwill to them requires judgment involving the aggregation of business units with similar economic characteristics and the identification of existing business units that benefit from the acquired goodwill. The judgments made in determining the estimated fair value assigned to each class of long-lived assets acquired, their reporting unit, as well as their useful lives can significantly impact net income. The Company allocates goodwill to disposed businesses using the relative fair value method.
Goodwill and Indefinite-lived Intangible Assets
The Company tests goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment on an annual basis in the fourth quarter and at other times if a significant event or change in circumstances indicates that it is more likely than not that the fair value of these assets has been reduced below their carrying value. The Company uses its judgment in assessing whether assets may have become impaired between annual impairment assessments. Indicators such as unexpected adverse economic factors, unanticipated technological changes or competitive activities, loss of key personnel and acts by governments and courts, may signal that an asset has become impaired.
Under ASC 350, in assessing goodwill for impairment, the Company has the option to first perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether events or circumstances exist that lead to a determination that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If the Company determines that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, the Company is not required to perform any additional tests in assessing goodwill for impairment. However, if the Company concludes otherwise or elects not to perform the qualitative assessment, then it is required to perform a quantitative analysis to determine the fair value of the business, and compare the calculated fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount, including goodwill. The Company determines the fair value of a reporting unit primarily by using both a discounted cash flow analysis and market-based valuation approach.
Determining fair value requires the exercise of significant judgments, including judgments about appropriate discount rates, long-term growth rates, relevant comparable company earnings multiples and the amount and timing of expected future cash flows. During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, as part of the Company’s long-range planning process, the Company completed its annual goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment test.
The performance of the Company’s annual impairment analysis resulted in no impairments to goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets in fiscal 2021. Significant unobservable inputs utilized in the income approach valuation method were discount rates (ranging from 8.0% to 22.0%), long-term growth rates (ranging from 0.0% to 3.0%) and royalty rates (ranging from 0.25% to 6.0%). Significant unobservable inputs utilized in the market approach valuation method were EBITDA multiples from guideline public companies operating in similar industries and control premiums (ranging from 5.0% to 10.0%). Significant increases (decreases) in royalty rates, growth rates, control premiums and multiples, assuming no change in discount rates, would result in a significantly higher (lower) fair value measurement. Significant decreases (increases) in discount rates, assuming no changes in royalty rates, growth rates, control premiums and multiples, would result in a significantly higher (lower) fair value measurement.
As of June 30, 2021, there were no reporting units with goodwill at-risk for future impairment. The Company will continue to monitor its goodwill for possible future impairment.
Property, Plant and Equipment
The Company evaluates the carrying value of property, plant and equipment for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of an asset group may not be recoverable, in accordance with ASC 360, “Property, Plant, and Equipment” (“ASC 360”). An asset group is the lowest level of assets and liabilities for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities. Events or circumstances that might warrant an impairment recoverability review include, among other things, material declines in operating performance, significant adverse market conditions and planned changes in the use of an asset group.
In determining whether the carrying value of an asset group is recoverable, the Company estimates undiscounted future cash flows over the estimated life of the primary asset of the asset group. The estimates of such future cash flows require estimating such factors as future operating performance, market conditions and the estimated holding period of each asset. If all or a portion of the carrying value of an asset group is found to be non-recoverable, the Company records an impairment charge equal to the difference between the asset group’s carrying value and its fair value. The Company generally measures fair value by considering sales prices for similar assets or by discounting estimated future cash flows using an appropriate discount rate. Typical assumptions applied when using a market-based approach include projected EBITDA and related multiples. Typical assumptions applied when using an income approach include projected free cash flows, discount rates and long-term growth rates. All of these assumptions are made by management based on the best available information at the time of the estimates and are subject to deviations from actual results.
Programming Costs
Costs incurred in acquiring programming rights are accounted for in accordance with ASC 920, “Entertainment-Broadcasters.” Programming rights and the related liabilities are recorded at the gross amount of the liabilities when the license period has begun, the cost of the program is determinable and the program is accepted and available for airing. Programming costs are amortized based on the expected pattern of consumption over the license period or expected useful life of each program. The pattern of consumption is based primarily on consumer viewership information as well as other factors. If initial airings are expected to generate higher viewership, an accelerated method of amortization is used. The Company monitors its programming amortization policy on an ongoing basis and any impact arising from changes to the policy would be recognized prospectively. The Company regularly reviews its programming assets to ensure they continue to reflect fair value. Changes in circumstances may result in a write-down of the asset to fair value. The Company has single and multi-year contracts for broadcast rights of sporting events. The costs of sports contracts are primarily charged to expense over the respective season as events are aired. For sports contracts with dedicated channels, the Company amortizes the sports programming rights costs over 12 months.
Income Taxes
The Company is subject to income taxes in the U.S. and various foreign jurisdictions in which it operates and records its tax provision for the anticipated tax consequences in its reported results of operations. Tax laws are complex and subject to different interpretations by the taxpayer and respective governmental taxing authorities. Significant judgment is required in determining the Company’s tax expense and in evaluating its tax positions including evaluating uncertainties as promulgated under ASC 740, “Income Taxes.”
The Company’s annual tax rate is based primarily on its geographic income and statutory tax rates in the various jurisdictions in which it operates. Significant management judgment is required in determining the Company’s provision for income taxes, deferred tax assets and liabilities and the valuation allowance recorded against the Company’s net deferred tax assets, if any. In assessing the likelihood of realization of deferred tax assets, management considers estimates of the amount and character of future taxable income. The Company’s actual effective tax rate and income tax expense could vary from estimated amounts due to the future impacts of various items, including changes in income tax laws, tax planning and the Company’s forecasted financial condition and results of operations in future periods. Although the Company believes its current estimates are reasonable, actual results could differ from these estimates.
The Company recognizes tax benefits from uncertain tax positions only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the Consolidated Financial Statements from such positions are then measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. Significant management judgment is required to determine whether the recognition threshold has been met and, if so, the appropriate amount of unrecognized tax benefits to be recorded in the Consolidated Financial Statements. Management re-evaluates tax positions each period in which new information about recognition or measurement becomes available. The Company’s policy is to recognize, when applicable, interest and penalties on unrecognized income tax benefits as part of Income tax (expense) benefit.
Retirement Benefit Obligations
The Company’s employees participate in various defined benefit pension and postretirement plans sponsored by the Company and its subsidiaries. See Note 17-Retirement Benefit Obligations in the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements.
The Company records amounts relating to its pension and other postretirement benefit plans based on calculations specified by GAAP. The measurement and recognition of the Company’s pension and other postretirement benefit plans require the use of significant management judgments, including discount rates, expected return on plan assets, mortality and other actuarial assumptions. Net periodic benefit costs (income) is calculated based upon a number of actuarial assumptions, including a discount rate for plan obligations, an expected rate of return on plan assets and mortality rates. Current market conditions, including changes in investment returns and interest rates, were considered in making these assumptions. In developing the expected long-term rate of return, the pension portfolio’s past average rate of returns, and future return expectations of the various asset classes were considered. The weighted average expected long-term rate of return of 3.7% for fiscal 2022 is based on a weighted average target asset allocation assumption of 20% equities, 73% fixed-income securities and 7% cash and other investments.
The Company recorded $(1) million and $7 million in net periodic benefit (income) costs in the Statements of Operations for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The Company utilizes the full yield-curve approach to estimate the service and interest cost components of net periodic benefit costs for its pension and other postretirement benefit plans.
Although the discount rate used for each plan will be established and applied individually, a weighted average discount rate of 2.1% will be used in calculating the fiscal 2022 net periodic benefit costs (income). The discount rate reflects the market rate for high-quality fixed-income investments on the Company’s annual measurement date of June 30 and is subject to change each fiscal year. The discount rate assumptions used to account for pension and other postretirement benefit plans reflect the rates at which the benefit obligations could be effectively settled. The rate was determined by matching the Company’s expected benefit payments for the plans to a hypothetical yield curve developed using a portfolio of several hundred high-quality non-callable corporate bonds. The weighted average discount rate is volatile from year to year because it is determined based upon the prevailing rates in the U.S., the U.K., Australia and other foreign countries as of the measurement date.
The key assumptions used in developing the Company’s fiscal 2021 and 2020 net periodic benefit costs (income) for its plans consist of the following:
The Company will use a weighted average long-term rate of return of 3.7% for fiscal 2022 based principally on a combination of current asset mix and an expectation of future long term investment returns. The accumulated net pre-tax losses on the Company’s pension plans as of June 30, 2021 were approximately $542 million which increased from approximately $529 million for the Company’s pension plans as of June 30, 2020. This increase of $13 million was primarily due to currency movements partially offset by unrecognized losses amortized during fiscal 2021. Lower discount rates increase present values of benefit obligations and increase the Company’s deferred losses and also increase subsequent-year benefit costs. Higher discount rates decrease the present values of benefit obligations and reduce the Company’s accumulated net loss and have a minimal impact on benefit costs. These deferred losses are being systematically recognized in future net periodic benefit costs (income) in accordance with ASC 715, “Compensation-Retirement Benefits.” Unrecognized losses for the primary plans in excess of 10% of the greater of the market-related value of plan assets or the plan’s projected benefit obligation are recognized over the average life expectancy for plan participants for the primary plans.
The Company made contributions of $35 million and $30 million to its funded pension plans in fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively. Future plan contributions are dependent upon actual plan asset returns, statutory requirements and interest rate movements. Assuming that actual plan asset returns are consistent with the Company’s expected returns in fiscal 2021 and beyond, and that interest rates remain constant, the Company anticipates that it will make contributions of approximately $15 million in fiscal 2022. The Company will continue to make voluntary contributions as necessary to improve the funded status of the plans. See Note 18-Other Postretirement Benefits in the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements.
Changes in net periodic benefit costs may occur in the future due to changes in the Company’s expected rate of return on plan assets and discount rate resulting from economic events. The following table highlights the sensitivity of the Company’s pension obligations and expense to changes in these assumptions, assuming all other assumptions remain constant:
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements.