Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis is intended to help prospective investors understand our business, financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and capital resources. You should read this discussion in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this information statement.
The statements in this discussion regarding industry outlook, expectations regarding our future performance, liquidity and capital resources and other non-historical statements are forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, the risks and uncertainties described in “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements.
The NexGel Financial Statements, discussed below, reflect the NexGel financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows. The financial information discussed below and included in this information statement, however, may not necessarily reflect what the NexGel financial condition, results of operations, or cash flows would have been had NexGel been operated as a separate, independent entity during the periods presented, or what the NexGel financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows may be in the future.
Overview
We manufacture a high-water content, electron beam cross-linked, aqueous polymer hydrogels, or gels, used for wound care, medical diagnostics, transdermal drug delivery and cosmetics. We believe that we are one of the leading manufacturers of high-performance gels in the United States. We specialize in custom gels by capitalizing on proprietary manufacturing technologies. We have historically served as a contract manufacturer, supplying our gels to third parties who incorporate them into their own products. Our contract manufacturing business provides custom hydrogels to the OEM market. We have recently launched an initiative to produce and market consumer products based on our unique technology. We believe there will be significant interest for applications in beauty and cosmetics, foot care, and over the counter remedies.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
The Spin-Off
On June 21, 2019, AquaMed became an independent company through the pro rata distribution (“Spin-Off”) by Adynxx, Inc. (“Adynxx” and the “Parent”) in connection with the closing of a reverse merger between Adynxx, Inc. and Alliqua BioMedical, Inc., of AquaMed’s common stock for common stock of Parent. Adynxx, Inc. was previously known as Alliqua BioMedical, Inc. and subsequently changed its name to Adynxx, Inc. on May 3, 2019. The terms and conditions of the Spin-Off provided that each record holder of Parent stock as of April 22, 2019, received one share of AquaMed common stock in book-entry form and resulted in the distribution of 5,005,211 shares of common stock of AquaMed. Following the distribution (“Capitalization”), all existing operations were distributed to AquaMed with the exception of a corporate lease for property in Yardley, Pennsylvania which was retained by Adynxx, Inc.
Following the distribution (“Capitalization”), all existing operations were distributed to AquaMed with the exception of a corporate lease for property in Yardley, Pennsylvania which was retained by Adynxx, Inc.
Pursuant to the Spin-Off and in exchange for the 5,005,211 shares of common stock, NexGel assumed the following net liabilities from Parent as of June 21, 2019 ($ in thousands):
Basis of Presentation
The balance sheet as of December 31, 2020 and the statements of operations, stockholders’ equity, and cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2020 consists of the balances of NexGel as prepared on a stand-alone basis. The statements of operations, stockholders’ equity, and cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2019 were prepared on a “carve-out” basis for the periods and dates prior to the Spin-Off. Prior to the separation, these financial statements were derived from the consolidated financial statements and accounting records of Adynxx, Inc.
Prior to the Spin-Off, Adynxx used a centralized approach to cash management and financing its operations, including the operations of the Company. Accordingly, none of the cash of Adynxx have been attributed to the Company in the financial statements. Transactions between Adynxx and the Company were accounted for through Parent’s Net Investment.
The expenses, including executive compensation, have been allocated by management based either on specific attribution of those expenses or, where necessary and appropriate, based on management’s best estimate of an appropriate proportional allocation.
Results of Operations
Revenues, net.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 revenues were $674 thousand and decreased by $43 thousand when compared to $717 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in our overall revenues was due to the impact of the Covid-19, however, sales have begun to return to higher levels during the initial part of 2021.
Gross profit (loss). Our gross loss was $291 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a gross profit of $137 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2019. The margin/loss recorded for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to a loss recorded for the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily due to the higher volume of contract manufacturing sales and lower manufacturing labor costs. Gross loss was approximately (43%) for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a gross loss of (19%) for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The components of cost of revenues are as follows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 ($ in thousands):
Cost of revenues increased by $111 thousand to $965 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $854 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in cost of revenues is primarily attributable to our fixed overhead and compensation and benefits costs as our facility is operating at approximately 10% capacity.
Selling, general and administrative expenses. The following table highlights selling, general and administrative expenses by type for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 ($ in thousands):
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $182 thousand to $1.97 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $1.79 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in selling, general and administrative expenses is primarily attributable to our costs for professional fees, executive compensation, share-based compensation and other administrative expenses in the current period operating as a stand-alone entity.
Compensation and benefits increased by $103 thousand to $462 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $359 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2019. The number of employees increased compared to the prior period upon the spin-off as a stand-alone company.
Share-based compensation increased by $228 thousand to $232 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $4 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in share-based compensation related to the issuance of 12,705,949 stock options and the issuance of restricted awards to our officers, employees and advisors.
Other Expenses and professional fees decreased by $138 thousand to $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Other selling, general and administrative expenses generally consist of costs associated with our selling efforts and general management, including information technology, travel, training and recruiting. We continued to incur legal, accounting and consulting fees associated with public company governance requirements, however, the decrease in professional fees compared to the prior year period was the primary result in the cost reduction.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had $32 thousand of cash, compared to $261 thousand of cash at December 31, 2019. Net cash used in operating activities was $1.80 million and $1.81 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Net cash used in investing activities during the years ended December 31, 2020 was $312 thousand. No cash was used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1,884,000 which is attributable to the issuance of common stock of $1,370,000 and proceeds of a notes payable of $414,000 and convertible notes payable of $100,000. For the year ended December 31, 2019 cash flows from financing activities were $2,045,000 which is composed of $730,000 from the issuance of common stock and $1,345,000 of advances from our former Parent.
At December 31, 2020, current assets totaled $362,000 and current liabilities totaled $1,332,000, as compared to current assets totaling $513,000 and current liabilities totaling $801,000 at December 31, 2019. As a result, we had working capital deficit of $970,000 at December 31, 2020, compared to a working capital deficit of $288,000 at December 31, 2019. The increase in the working capital deficit as of December 31, 2020 is primarily attributable to the decrease in accounts receivable offset by an increase in inventory, an increase from the current portion of PPP notes payable and additional convertible notes payable due in June 2021.
On March 11, 2021, the Company entered into a securities purchase agreement (the “Auctus Purchase Agreement”) with Auctus Fund, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“Auctus”), pursuant to which the Company issued to Auctus a senior secured convertible promissory note in the principal amount of $1,500,000 (the “Auctus Note”). The net proceeds received by the Company were $1,337,000 after deducting fees and expenses related to the transaction.
On March 4, 2021, the Company received a second PPP Loan in the amount of $127 thousand under Phase II of the Paycheck Protection Program which commenced on January 13, 2021 and allowed certain businesses that received an initial PPP Loan to seek a second draw PPP Loan.
From January 1, 2021 through March, 2021, the Company entered into Securities Purchase Agreements with certain accredited investors whereby we sold 3,562,500 shares of our common stock at a price per share equal to $0.08 for an aggregate purchase price of $285,000.
From October 13, 2020 through December 24, 2020, the Company entered into Securities Purchase Agreements with certain accredited investors whereby we sold 4,437,500 shares of our common stock at a price per share equal to $0.08 for an aggregate purchase price of $355,000.
From July 30, 2020 through August 14, 2020, the Company entered into Securities Purchase Agreements with certain accredited investors whereby we sold 6,585,000 shares of our common stock at a price per share equal to $0.06 for an aggregate purchase price of $395,100.
From February 6, 2020 through March 20, 2020, the Company entered into Securities Purchase Agreements with certain accredited investors whereby we sold 15,500,000 shares of our common stock at a price per share equal to $0.04 for an aggregate purchase price of $620,000.
Proceeds from these offering are expected to be used for working capital, new product development and testing, and general business operations.
We have never declared or paid any cash dividends on our common stock. For the foreseeable future, we anticipate that all available fund and any earnings generated in our business will be used to finance the growth of our business and will not be paid out as dividends to our shareholders. Any future determination related to our dividend policy will be made at the discretion of our Board of Directors and will depend upon, among other factors, our results of operations, financial condition, capital requirements, contractual restrictions, business prospects and other factors our Board of Directors may deem relevant.
The Company is in the process of expanding its customer base to increase revenue in order to alleviate the current going concern. Management is exploring new product channel sales in consumer products, such as cosmetics, athletic products and proprietary medical devices. The Company has increased its focus on sales and developing a sales pipeline for potential customers. This customer base expansion will enable us to provide financial stability for the foreseeable future, expand our current processes, and position us for long-term shareholder value creation.
Moving forward, the Company we will be raising additional capital and focusing on increasing revenues for the business to stabilize and become profitable. The Company will maintain and attempt to grow the existing contract manufacturing business. The Company plans to continue building and developing its catalog of consumer products for sale to branding partners. Thirdly, we will use our in house capabilities to create and test market additional branded products. These products will be target marketed and sold online through social media, television and online market places.
We expect to continue incurring losses for the near-term future and may need to raise additional capital to support ongoing operations. Our ability to continue to operate as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to raise additional capital and to ultimately achieve profitable operations. Management is evaluating various options to raise capital to funds the Company’s working capital requirements through equity offerings. There can be no assurances, however, that management will be able to obtain sufficient additional funds when needed, or that such funds, if available, will be obtained on terms satisfactory to us. These factors raise substantial doubt as to our ability to continue as a going concern. The financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded assets and liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
On January 30, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the coronavirus outbreak a "Public Health Emergency of International Concern" and on March 10, 2020, declared it to be a pandemic. Actions taken around the world to help mitigate the spread of the coronavirus include restrictions on travel, and quarantines in certain areas, and forced closures for certain types of public places and businesses. The coronavirus and actions taken to mitigate it have had and are expected to continue to have an adverse impact on the economies and financial markets of many countries, including the geographical area in which the Company operates. While it is unknown how long these conditions will last and what the complete financial effect will be to the Company, to date, the Company could experience declining revenue, labor and supply shortages, or difficulty in raising additional capital. Our concentrations with a few customers and one supplier make it reasonably possible that we are vulnerable to the risk of a near-term severe impact.
Additionally, it is reasonably possible that estimates made in the financial statements have been, or will be, materially and adversely impacted in the near term as a result of these conditions, including the recoverability of long-lived assets.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements in the nature of guarantee contracts, retained or contingent interests in assets transferred to entities (or similar arrangements serving as credit, liquidity or market risk support to entities for any such assets), or obligations (including contingent obligations) arising out of variable interests in entities providing financing, liquidity, market risk or credit risk support to us, or that engage in leasing, hedging or research and development services with us.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of our Financial Statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles is based on the selection and application of accounting policies that require us to make significant estimates and assumptions about the effects of matters that are inherently uncertain. We consider the accounting policies discussed below to be critical to the understanding of our Financial Statements. Actual results could differ from our estimates and assumptions, and any such differences could be material to our Financial Statements.
Share-based compensation - We utilize share-based compensation in the form of incentive stock options. The fair values of incentive stock option award grants are estimated as of the date of grant using a Black-Scholes option valuation model. Compensation expense is recognized in the statements of operations on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period required to obtain full vesting. The expected term of the awards granted is estimated using the simplified method which computes the expected term as the sum of the award’s vesting term plus the original contractual term divided by two.
Warrant Liability - Warrants to purchase common stock were issued in connection with equity financing raises which occurred on December 24, 2020, March 18, 2020, September 10, 2019 and November 6, 2019. The fair values of the warrants are estimated as of the date of issuance and again at each period end using a Black-Scholes option valuation model. At issuance, the fair value of the warrant is recognized as an equity issuance cost within additional paid-in-capital. Fair value adjustments to the warrant liability are recognized in other income (expense) in the statements of operations. The expected term of the awards granted are based on the 3 year contractual expiration date.
Black Scholes Inputs - The fair value of each stock option award and warrant issued was estimated on the date of grant using a Black-Scholes option-valuation model, which requires management to make certain assumptions regarding: (i) fair value of the common stock that underlies the stock option; (ii) the expected volatility in the market price of our common stock; (iii) dividend yield; (iv) risk-free interest rates; and (iv) the period of time employees are expected to hold the award prior to exercise (referred to as the expected term). Under the Black-Scholes option-valuation model, entities typically estimate the expected volatility based on historical volatilities of the entity’s own common stock. Based on the lack of historical data of volatility for the Company’s common stock, the Company based its estimate of expected volatility on a weighted average of the historical volatility of comparable public companies that manufacture similar products and are similar in size, stage of life cycle, and financial leverage. The fair value of the common stock that underlies the stock option is estimated by the Company considering the price of the most recent issuance of the Company’s common stock. The dividend yield is based upon the assumption that the Company will not declare a dividend over the life of the options. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant for bonds with maturities consistent with the expected term of the related award.