ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Except for the historical information contained herein, the matters discussed in this management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations (“MD&A”), including discussions of our product development plans, business strategies, future operations, financial condition and prospects, developments in and the impacts of government regulation and legislation, and market factors influencing our results, may include forward-looking statements that involve certain risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ from those anticipated by us as a result of various factors, both foreseen and unforeseen, including, but not limited to, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and measures taken in response thereto, as well as our ability to continue to develop new products and increase systems sales in markets characterized by rapid technological evolution, consolidation and competition from larger, better-capitalized competitors. Many other economic, competitive, governmental and technological factors could affect our ability to achieve our goals, and interested persons are urged to review the risk factors discussed in “Item 1A. Risk Factors” as set forth herein, as well as in our other public disclosures and filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC").
This MD&A is provided as a supplement to the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K ("Report") in order to enhance your understanding of our results of operations and financial condition and should be read in conjunction with, and is qualified in its entirety by, the consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Report. Historical results of operations, percentage margin fluctuations and any trends that may be inferred from the discussion below are not necessarily indicative of the operating results for any future period. For information regarding the year ended March 31, 2019, including a year-to-year comparison of our financial condition and results of operations for the years ended March 31, 2020 and March 31, 2019, refer to Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended March 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on June 1, 2020.
Company Overview
NextGen Healthcare is a leading provider of software and services that empower ambulatory healthcare practices to manage the risk and complexity of delivering care in the rapidly evolving U.S. healthcare system. Our combination of technological breadth, depth and domain expertise makes us a preferred solution provider and trusted advisor for our clients. In addition to highly configurable core clinical and financial capabilities, our portfolio includes tightly integrated solutions that deliver on ambulatory healthcare imperatives including: population health, care management, patient outreach, telemedicine, and nationwide clinical information exchange.
We serve clients across all 50 states. Over 100,000 providers use NextGen Healthcare solutions to deliver care in nearly every medical specialty in a wide variety of practice models including accountable care organizations (“ACOs”), independent physician associations (“IPAs”), managed service organizations (“MSOs”), Veterans Service Organizations (“VSOs”), and Dental Service Organizations (“DSOs”). Our clients include some of the largest and most progressive multi-specialty groups in the country. With the addition of behavioral health to our medical and oral health capabilities, we continue to extend our share not only in Federally Qualified Health Centers (“FQHCs”), but also in the growing integrated care market.
NextGen Healthcare has historically enhanced our offering through both organic and inorganic activities. In October 2015, we divested our former Hospital Solutions division to focus exclusively on the ambulatory marketplace. In January 2016, we acquired HealthFusion Holdings, Inc. and its cloud-based electronic health record and practice management solution. In April 2017, we acquired Entrada, Inc. and its cloud-based, mobile platform for clinical documentation and collaboration. In August 2017, we acquired EagleDream Health, Inc. and its cloud-based population health analytics solution. In January 2018, we acquired Inforth Technologies for its specialty-focused clinical content. In October 2019, we acquired Topaz Information Systems, LLC (“Topaz”) for its behavioral health solutions. In December 2019, we acquired Medfusion, Inc. (“Medfusion”) for its Patient Experience Platform (i.e., patient portal, self-scheduling, and patient pay) capabilities and OTTO Health, LLC (“OTTO”) for its integrated virtual care solutions, notably telemedicine. The integration of these acquired technologies has made NextGen Healthcare’s solutions among the most comprehensive in the market.
Our company was incorporated in California in 1974. Previously named Quality Systems, Inc., we changed our corporate name to NextGen Healthcare, Inc. in September 2018. Our principal executive offices are located at 3525 Piedmont Rd., NE, Building 6, Suite 700, Atlanta, Georgia, and our principal website is www.nextgen.com. We operate on a fiscal year ending on March 31.
Industry and Regulatory Background, Market Opportunity, and Trends
Over the last decade, the ambulatory healthcare market has experienced significant regulatory change, which has driven the need for improved technology to enable practice transformation. Recognizing it was imperative to digitize the U.S. health system to stem the escalating cost of healthcare and improve the quality of care being delivered, Congress enacted the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act in 2009 (“HITECH Act”). The legislation stimulated healthcare organizations to not only adopt electronic health records, but to use them to collect discrete data that could be used to drive quality care. This standardization supported early pay-for-reporting and pay-for-performance programs.
In 2010, the Affordable Care Act (“ACA”) established the roadmap for shifting American healthcare from volume (fee-for-service) to a value-based care (“VBC”) system that rewards improved outcomes at lower costs (fee-for-value). This was followed by the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015 (“MACRA”), bipartisan legislation that further changed the way Medicare rewards clinicians for value vs. volume. Initially focused on government-funded care, the domain of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (“CMS”), these programs are now firmly established on the commercial insurance side of the industry as well.
Importantly, the introduction of VBC programs was only an element of the broader approach to reducing healthcare expenditure. The drive to reduce costs initially led to consolidation in the healthcare system that was followed by a significant shift of care from the inpatient to lower cost outpatient setting. Among other factors, consumerism is set to play a major role in driving volume increases outside of the hospital. In addition, providers continue to seek new tools and means to connect with patients in new ways. Patients are expecting care to be personalized and tailored to their preferences and are seeking much greater transparency about the costs for visits, medications, and procedures as well as improved convenience and access to care. Along with the continued expansion of telehealth, there will be growth in technologies which facilitate the digital connection between patient and provider.
The need to sustain revenue has made it extremely important for practices to secure their patient market share, elevating patient loyalty to a significant determinant of provider success. In addition to being loyal, groups participating in value-based contracts realized that patients also needed to be engaged in their care and interested in improving their own health. The need to attract, retain and engage patients has made patient experience one of the most important aspects of evolving care delivery in the United States. Capturing patient market share and thriving in a market driven by VBC requires both an integrated platform and a full view of the patient population’s clinical and cost data, neither of which could be accomplished without new technologies to collect and analyze multi-sourced patient data. Effectively implemented, these new technologies allow organizations to enhance financial viability while exercising the freedom to join, affiliate, integrate or interoperate in ways that maximize strategic control.
Although the HITECH Act led to the meaningful adoption of electronic health records, many in the healthcare industry were dissatisfied with the level of exchange of health information between different providers and across different software platforms. With the passing of the MACRA law in 2015, the U.S. Congress declared it a national objective to achieve widespread exchange of health information through interoperable certified electronic health records (“EHR") technology. Then, in December 2016, the 21st Century Cures Act (“Cures Act”) was passed and signed into law. Among many other policies, the law includes numerous provisions intended to encourage nationwide interoperability.
In March 2020, the HHS Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (“ONC”) released a final regulation which implements the key interoperability provisions included in the Cures Act. The rule calls on developers of certified EHRs to adopt standardized application programming interfaces (“APIs”) and to meet a list of other new certification and maintenance of certification requirements in order to retain approved federal government certification status.
The ONC rule also implements the information blocking provisions of the Cures Act, including identifying reasonable and necessary activities that do not constitute information blocking. Under the Cures Act, HHS has the regulatory authority to investigate and assess civil monetary penalties of up to $1,000,000 against certified HIT developers found to be in violation of “information blocking.”
The new regulations will require significant compliance efforts for healthcare providers, information networks, exchanges, and HIT companies. However, the Cures Act also creates opportunities for improving care delivery and outcomes through increased data exchange between providers and easier patient access to their own health information. Key to unlocking these benefits is the introduction of new Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources (“FHIR”) standards, which ONC requires certified HIT companies to adopt through APIs. Meanwhile, CMS is requiring hospitals to provide electronic admission, discharge and transfer notification to other healthcare facilities, providers and designated care team members.
Refer also to the discussion of regulatory risks within “Item 1A. Risk Factors” for governmental regulations and policies that may affect our business.
Through the expansion of our NextGen® Share interoperability services platform and API partner marketplace, we will address the increased demand for moving and sharing patient data from the EHR easily, quickly and securely. Interoperability improves patient experience and care coordination, enhances patient safety, and reduces costs. We are also expanding resources such as educational webinars, blogs and videos on interoperability to help educate and support healthcare providers.
In recent years, there has been incremental investment to improve the delivery of behavioral healthcare. One of the central drivers of this investment has been the opioid epidemic which claims more than 80,000 lives a year in the United States. The integrated care model prevalent in FQHCs, a model which calls for integration of behavioral health and primary care in single care settings, has also gained momentum. Both behavioral health and the integrated care workflows require broad, purpose built, tailored HIT capabilities, many of which are supported by the NextGen Healthcare platform. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, ambulatory practices have come to appreciate the importance of business continuity, particularly in administrative business functions which are non-core to medical care and may turn to NextGen Healthcare more often for managed services.
COVID-19 Pandemic
In late 2019, the emergence of a novel coronavirus, or COVID-19, was reported and in January 2020, the World Health Organization (“WHO”), declared it a Public Health Emergency of International Concern. In March 2020, the WHO escalated COVID-19 as a pandemic. We proactively responded to the pandemic by creating an executive task force to monitor the COVID-19 situation daily and immediately restricted non-essential travel and migrated to a fully remote workforce while maintaining complete operational effectiveness.
The need to access care while still social distancing was addressed early on with the limited use of telemedicine (also known as virtual visits) and was energized when the federal government reduced regulatory barriers and addressed payment parity between virtual and in-person visits. With these tailwinds, telemedicine quickly became regarded as a safer way for patients and providers to engage each other while also relieving economic pressure on the medical practice. We believe that the uptake of telemedicine will transcend COVID-19 and that virtual visits will become a permanent and important change in the way care is delivered. Keeping patients out of the transit system, out of the waiting room and away from other sick patients is simply good medicine.
Since the mid-March 2020 timing of government orders to shelter in place and restrict non-essential medical services, the COVID-19 pandemic caused declines in patient volume. This negatively impacted our revenue in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, most notably for purchases of software and hardware. The impact of the disruption also impacted the first half of fiscal 2021, primarily in managed services and EDI, which are volume driven. During this challenging and uncertain period, we made some important decisions, including cost reduction activities with a primary goal of preserving cash and protecting the employee base. Most of these cost reductions were temporary as we believed that preserving our employee base, organizational momentum, and robust capabilities was the right decision for the Company and our shareholders. As the impact of the pandemic and related restrictive measures began to subside in the second half of fiscal 2021, patient volume has returned to close to pre-pandemic levels, and thus revenue returned to more normal levels. At present, we are conducting business as usual with certain modifications to employee travel, employee work locations, and marketing events, among other modifications. We continue to monitor the broader implications of the global COVID-19 pandemic and may take further actions that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers, partners, suppliers, and shareholders.
We assessed certain accounting matters that generally require consideration of forecasted financial information in context with the information reasonably available to the Company and the unknown future impacts of COVID-19 at March 31, 2021 and through the date of this Report. The accounting matters assessed included, but were not limited to, our allowances for doubtful accounts and the carrying value of goodwill and other long-lived assets. While there was not a material impact to our consolidated financial statements at and for the year ended March 31, 2021, our future assessment of the magnitude and duration of COVID-19, as well as other factors could result in material impacts to our consolidated financial statements in future reporting periods.
Our Strategy
We empower the transformation of ambulatory care by delivering solutions that enable groups to be successful under all models of care, including emerging value-based care models that include down-side risk. We primarily serve organizations that provide care in an ambulatory setting and do so across diverse practice sizes, specialties, and business models. Furthermore, we support the advances in integrated care that focuses on the whole person. Our platform is uniquely positioned to successfully enable our clients to expand access to care, enhance the coordination and management of care, and optimize patient outcomes through an integrated medical record that extends across their medical, mental, and oral health and care needs.
Effective and frictionless interoperability is essential to all models of care. Our experience powering many of the nation’s Health Information Exchanges (“HIE’s”) places us in a unique position to enable our clients to leverage this technology to lower the cost of care and improve the patient and provider experience by providing an integrated community patient record.
Patient experience is directly correlated to patient engagement and an engaged patient is a key to positive outcomes. Today’s patient is also an active consumer of their healthcare, each searching for the best experience. Our platform enables our clients to create a personalized care experience that enhances trust and drives patient loyalty.
Our longstanding success in the ambulatory market has enabled us to build significant expertise across many relevant disciples that are clients actively request. We partner with our clients to operate and optimize their IT systems and operations, enhance revenue cycle processes, service line expansion and operations, as well as advise on long-term strategy.
As one of the leading healthcare information technology players in the U.S. ambulatory marketplace, we plan to continue investing in our current capabilities as well as building and/or acquiring new capabilities as we guide our clients through the market’s transformation. We expect to continue to empower the transformation of care through the following strategic priorities:
•
Be a learning organization and transform ahead of the industry
•
Be a trusted advisor for our customers and prospects
•
Deliver breadth, depth and configurability to enable our clients to effectively execute their strategies
•
Use automation to drive unwanted variability and cost from our clients’ operations
•
Drive real innovation in patient experience and patient-provider interactions
•
Help our clients be recognized as interoperability leaders in their regions and areas of specialty
•
Integrate new capabilities (whether organic or inorganic) more quickly and successfully than others.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth the percentage of revenue represented by each item in our consolidated statements of net income and comprehensive income for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020 (certain percentages below may not sum due to rounding):
Revenues
The following table presents our consolidated revenues for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
We generate revenue from sales of licensing rights and subscriptions to our software solutions, hardware and third-party software products, support and maintenance, managed services, electronic data interchange (“EDI”) and data services, and other non-recurring services, including implementation, training, and consulting services performed for clients who use our products.
Consolidated revenue for the year ended March 31, 2021 increased $16.6 million compared to the prior year due to a $13.5 million increase in recurring revenues and a $3.1 million increase in software, hardware and other non-recurring revenues. The increase in recurring revenues was primarily due to $20.8 million higher subscription services driven by incremental revenue from our patient experience and virtual visits platforms acquired from Medfusion and OTTO, combined with growth in subscriptions associated with our population health and analytics, mobile, connected health, core NextGen, and NextGen Office cloud-based solutions. The increase in recurring revenues from the higher subscription services was partially offset by $5.7 million lower support and maintenance revenue from client attrition and our transition to a subscription-based revenue model. Managed services revenue declined $1.4 million related to declines in cash and collections and revenue cycle management (“RCM”) bookings that were largely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and client attrition, partially offset by higher managed cloud services revenues and incremental patient pay services revenue acquired from Medfusion. Total software, hardware, and other non-recurring revenues increased primarily due to $1.6 million higher software license and hardware sales from increased bookings and $1.5 million increase in other non-recurring services related to the completion of professional services projects.
Bookings reflect the estimated annual value of our executed contracts, adjusted to include the effect of pre-acquisition bookings, and are believed to provide a broad indicator of the general direction and progress of the business. Total bookings were $129.4 million for the year ended March 31, 2021 compared to $130.9 million in the prior year, primarily reflecting a decline in RCM bookings, as noted above, partially offset by higher bookings of subscriptions associated with our patient experience and virtual visits platforms.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Profit
The following table presents our consolidated cost of revenue and gross profit for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Cost of revenue consists primarily of compensation expense, including share-based compensation, for personnel that deliver our products and services. Cost of revenue also includes amortization of capitalized software costs and acquired technology, third party consultant and outsourcing costs, costs associated with our EDI business partners and clearinghouses, hosting service costs, third party software costs and royalties, and other costs directly associated with delivering our products and services. Refer to Note 9, "Intangible Assets" and Note 10, "Capitalized Software Costs" of our notes to consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report for additional information on current period amortization of capitalized software costs and acquired technology and an estimate of future expected amortization.
Share-based compensation expense included in cost of revenue was $2.0 million and $2.1 million for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Gross profit for the year ended March 31, 2021 increased $8.6 million compared to the prior year while our gross margin percentage remained consistent at 50.5% for the year ended March 31, 2021 compared to the prior year period. The increase in gross profit was primarily due to higher revenues as discussed above, partially offset by an increase in cost of revenue associated with the higher revenues and higher amortization of previously capitalized software development costs.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
The following table presents our consolidated selling, general and administrative expense for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist of compensation expense, including share-based compensation, for management and administrative personnel, selling and marketing expense, facilities costs, depreciation, professional service fees, including legal, consulting, and accounting services, acquisition and transaction-related costs, and other general corporate and administrative expenses.
Share-based compensation expense included in selling, general and administrative expenses was $16.7 million and $13.8 million for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in share-based compensation expense is due to increased utilization of share-based awards to incentivize our executives and employees. Refer to Note 15, "Share-Based Awards" of our notes to consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report for additional information on equity award grants.
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $15.4 million for the year ended March 31, 2021 compared to the prior year primarily due to increased share-based compensation expense, as noted above, higher legal fees associated with our ongoing shareholder litigation matter and increases in discretionary and annual bonus expenses, partially offset by lower travel and conferences spend associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, lower acquisition costs, and lower facilities and infrastructure costs.
Research and Development Costs, net
The following table presents our consolidated net research and development costs, capitalized software costs, and gross expenditures prior to capitalization, for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Gross research and development expenditures consist of compensation expense, including share-based compensation for research and development personnel, certain third-party consultant fees, software maintenance costs, and other costs related to new product development and enhancement to our existing products.
The healthcare information systems and services industry is characterized by rapid technological change, requiring us to engage in continuing investments in our research and development to update, enhance and improve our systems. This includes expansion of our software and service offerings that support pay-for-performance initiatives around accountable care organizations, bringing greater ease of use and intuitiveness to our software products, enhancing our managed cloud and hosting services to lower our clients' total cost of ownership, expanding our interoperability and enterprise analytics capabilities, and furthering development and enhancements of our portfolio of specialty-focused templates within our electronic health records software.
The capitalization of software development costs results in a reduction to our reported net research and development costs. Our software capitalization rate, or capitalized software costs as a percentage of gross expenditures, has varied historically and may continue to vary based on the nature and status of specific projects and initiatives in progress. Although changes in software capitalization rates have no impact on our overall cash flows, it results in fluctuations in the amount of software development costs being expensed up front and the amount of net research and development costs reported in our consolidated statement of net income and comprehensive income.
Share-based compensation expense included in research and development costs was $4.0 million and $3.9 million for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Net research and development costs for the year ended March 31, 2021 decreased $7.8 million compared to the prior year due to $5.2 million higher capitalization of software costs and a $2.6 million decrease in our gross expenditures. Our software capitalization rate fluctuates due to differences in the nature and status of our projects and initiatives during a given year, which affects the amount of development costs that may be capitalized and ultimately also affects the future amortization of our previously capitalized software development costs. The decrease in gross expenditures was primarily driven by lower salaries and benefits associated with lower headcount, lower infrastructure costs, and lower travel costs associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by higher consulting costs.
Amortization of Acquired Intangible Assets
The following table presents our amortization of acquired intangible assets for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Amortization of acquired intangible assets included in operating expenses consist of the amortization related to our customer relationships and trade names intangible assets acquired as part of our business combinations. Refer to Note 9, "Intangible Assets" of our notes to consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report for an estimate of future expected amortization.
Amortization of acquired intangible assets for the year ended March 31, 2021 increased $0.3 million, compared to the prior year period due to additional amortization of the customer relationships and trade names intangible assets acquired from Medfusion.
Restructuring Costs and Impairment of Assets
Restructuring costs for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020 were $2.6 million and $2.5 million, respectively, related to the business restructuring plans described in further detail below.
In May 2020, we announced a decision to execute a reduction in our workforce of less than 3% as well as other temporary cost reductions in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. We recorded $2.6 million of restructuring costs, consisting of payroll-related costs, such as severance, outplacement costs, and continuing healthcare coverage, associated with the involuntary separation of employees pursuant to a one-time benefit arrangement, for the year ended March 31, 2021 within operating expenses in our consolidated statements of net income and comprehensive income. These amounts were accrued when it was probable that the benefits would be paid, and the amounts were reasonably estimable. The payroll-related costs were substantially paid as of March 31, 2021.
In June 2019, we implemented a business restructuring plan as part of our continued efforts to preserve and grow the value of the Company through client-focused innovations while reducing our cost structure. As part of the restructuring, we reduced our total workforce by approximately 4% primarily within the research and development function and intend to expand on our research and development resources in India. We recorded $2.5 million of restructuring costs in the year ended March 31, 2020 within operating expenses in our consolidated statements of comprehensive income. The restructuring costs consisted primarily of payroll-related costs, such as severance, outplacement costs, and continuing healthcare coverage, associated with the involuntary separation of employees pursuant to a one-time benefit arrangement.
Impairment of assets for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020 were $5.5 million and $12.6 million, respectively, related to the impairments described in further detail below.
During the year ended March 31, 2021, as part of our response to the COVID-19 pandemic and ongoing cost reduction efforts, we vacated our Cary office, portions of our Irvine and Horsham offices, and the remainder of our San Diego office. We recorded impairments of $5.5 million to our operating right-of-use assets and certain related fixed assets associated with the vacated locations based on projected sublease rental income and estimated sublease commencement dates and the remeasurement of our operating lease liabilities associated with the modification of certain lease expiration dates. The impairment analyses were performed by operating right-of-use asset and the impairment charges were estimated by comparing the fair value of each operating right-of-use asset based on the expected cash flows to its respective book value. We determined the discount rate for each lease based on the approximate interest rate on a collateralized basis with similar remaining terms and payments as of the impairment date. Significant judgment was required to estimate the fair value of each operating right-of-use asset and actual results could vary from the estimates, resulting in potential future adjustments to amounts previously recorded.
During the year ended March 31, 2020, we recorded impairments of $9.4 million to our operating right-of-use assets and certain related fixed assets associated with the vacated locations, or portions thereof, in North Canton, San Diego, Horsham, St. Louis, Irvine, Atlanta, Brentwood, and Phoenix, in connection with our restructuring plans, based on projected sublease rental income and estimated sublease commencement dates.
During the year ended March 31, 2020, we also recorded $3.2 million of impairments related to the write down of previously capitalized software development costs for certain technology that will no longer be utilized in any future software solutions.
Interest Expense
The following table presents our interest expense for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Interest expense relates to our revolving credit agreement and the related amortization of deferred debt issuance costs. Refer to Note 11, “Line of Credit” of our notes to consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report for additional information.
Interest expense for the year ended March 31, 2021 increased $1.6 million compared to the prior year. The changes in interest expense is primarily caused by fluctuations in outstanding balances under our revolving credit agreement and the related amortization of debt issuance costs. As of March 31, 2021, we had no outstanding loans under the revolving credit agreement, compared to an outstanding balance of $129.0 million as of March 31, 2020.
Other income for the year ended March 31, 2021 decreased $0.9 million compared to the prior year, which was primarily associated with fluctuations in the India foreign exchange rates.
Benefit of Income Taxes
The following table presents our benefit of income taxes for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
The change in the effective tax rate for the year ended March 31, 2021 compared to the prior year was driven primarily by lower net benefits from certain return to provision adjustments and a decrease of research and development credits, decrease of certain nondeductible expenses and release of uncertain tax position reserves on prior year tax settlements, partially offset by an increase in current year valuation allowance expense related to certain deferred taxes and increase of net nondeductible compensation related expenses.
The CARES Act and the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 (“Stimulus Bill”), signed into law on March 27, 2020 and December 27, 2020, respectively, have resulted in significant changes to the U.S. federal corporate tax law. Additionally, several state and foreign jurisdictions have enacted additional legislation and or comply with federal changes. We have considered the applicable tax law changes and recognized the impact in our income tax provision, as applicable.
Net Income
The following table presents our net income (in thousands) and net income per share and for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020:
As a result of the foregoing changes in revenue and expense, net income for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 increased $2.0 million compared to the prior year period.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table presents selected financial statistics and information for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
(1)
As of March 31, 2021, we had no outstanding borrowings under our $300.0 million revolving credit agreement.
We had no outstanding borrowings under our revolving credit agreement as of March 31, 2021 compared to $129.0 million as of March 31, 2020.
Our principal sources of liquidity are our cash generated from operations, driven mostly by our net income and working capital management, our cash and cash equivalents, and our revolving credit agreement.
We believe that our cash and cash equivalents on hand at March 31, 2021, together with our cash flows from operating activities and liquidity provided by our revolving credit agreement, will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure requirements for the next twelve months. During the challenging and uncertain period brought on by the initial phases of the COVID-19 pandemic, we made some important decisions, including cost reduction activities with a primary goal of preserving cash and protecting the employee base. Most of these cost reductions were temporary as we believed that preserving our employee base, organizational momentum, and robust capabilities was the right decision for our Company and our shareholders. We had proactively strengthened our cash position by increasing the outstanding borrowings under our revolving credit agreement, which was subsequently repaid based on the reassessment of our short-term cash flow and working capital requirements, such that we have no outstanding borrowings under our revolving credit agreement as of March 31, 2021. At present, we are conducting business as usual with certain modifications to employee travel, employee work locations, and marketing events, among other modifications. However, the extent to which COVID-19 may continue to impact our business, financial results, cash flows, and liquidity requirements depends on numerous evolving factors including, but not limited to, the magnitude and duration of COVID-19; the impact on our employees; the extent to which it impacts worldwide macroeconomic conditions, including interest rates, employment rates, and health insurance coverage; the speed of the recovery; and governmental and business reactions to the pandemic. We will continue to assess the potential effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and actively manage our response accordingly.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
As of March 31, 2021, our cash and cash equivalents balance of $73.3 million compared to $138.0 million as of March 31, 2020.
We may continue to use a portion of our funds as well as available financing from our revolving credit agreement for future acquisitions or other similar business activities, although the specific timing and amount of funds to be used is not currently determinable. We intend to expend some of our available funds for the development of products complementary to our existing product line as well as new versions of certain of our products. These developments are intended to take advantage of more powerful technologies and to increase the integration of our products.
Our investment policy is determined by our Board of Directors. Excess cash, if any, may be invested in very liquid short term assets including tax exempt and taxable money market funds, certificates of deposit and short term municipal bonds with average maturities of 365 days or less at the time of purchase. Our Board of Directors continues to review alternate uses for our cash including an expansion of our investment policy and other items. Any or all of these programs could significantly impact our investment income in future periods.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
The following table summarizes our consolidated statements of cash flows for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
For the year ended March 31, 2021, cash provided by operating activities increased $12.9 million compared to the prior year, consisting of $34.6 million increase from net changes in other assets and liabilities, partially offset by $16.5 million decrease from net changes in accounts receivable and contract balances, and $5.2 million decrease from lower net income, as adjusted for non-cash expenses. The increase in cash from net changes in other assets and liabilities is primarily due to higher accruals of discretionary and annual merit bonuses, higher accrued legal expenses, the deferral of remitting payroll taxes to the taxing authority as permitted under CARES Act to be paid in two equal amounts at the end of calendar 2021 and 2022, increase in care services liabilities due to timing of payments and reimbursements, higher accrued hosting costs, and higher accrued employee benefits costs. These increases were offset by a reduction in operating lease liabilities due to rental payments and the net impact on our lease liabilities from the early termination of certain facility leases, as well as a decrease in cash from changes in accounts payable due to timing of invoice payments. The decrease in cash associated with net changes in contract assets and liabilities is primarily due to timing differences between client invoicing and revenue recognition, lower level of maintenance invoicing as a result of client attrition, and completion of professional service projects. Accounts receivable balances in the prior year benefited from our significant efforts to collect and resolve aged balances, resulting in a corresponding increase in cash provided by operating activities. Non-cash expenses decreased $7.2 million primarily due to lower asset impairment charges, changes in our deferred income taxes, lower amortization of other intangibles, and lower non-cash operating lease costs, partially offset by higher amortization of capitalized software costs and higher share-based compensation expense.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020 was $28.5 million and $96.1 million, respectively. The $67.5 million net decrease in cash used in investing activities compared to the prior year is primarily due to cash payments for our acquisitions of Topaz, Medfusion and OTTO, net of cash acquired, of $71.7 million in the prior year and a $3.7 million decrease in additions to equipment and improvements, offset by $5.1 million higher capitalization of software development costs in the current year and $2.5 million proceeds of over-funded corporate-owned life insurance policies received in the prior year.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash used for financing activities for the year ended March 31, 2021 was $131.7 million compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $116.3 million in the prior year. The increase in cash used for financing activities is due to $129.0 million of net repayments on our revolving credit facility, comprised of $50.0 million of additional borrowings and $179.0 million of principal repayments, $4.8 million of payments for taxes related to net share settlement of equity awards, and $1.4 million paid for debt issuance costs related to the second amendment of our revolving credit agreement, partially offset by $3.5 million of net proceeds from the issuance of shares under employee plans. In comparison, during the prior year, net borrowings on our revolving credit facility were $118.0 million, consisting of $19.0 million of principal repayments and $137.0 million of additional borrowings, $2.4 million of net proceeds from the issuance of shares under employee plans, partially offset by $4.1 million of payments for taxes related to net share settlement of equity awards.
Contractual Obligations
As of March 31, 2021, we had minimum purchase commitments of $45.7 million related to payments due under certain non-cancelable agreements to purchase goods and services.
The following table summarizes our other significant contractual obligations at March 31, 2021 and the effect that such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash in future periods (in thousands):
(1)
Remaining lease obligations for vacated properties relates to remaining lease obligations at certain locations, including Cary, Brentwood, Solana Beach, North Canton, Phoenix and portions of Atlanta, Irvine, Horsham, and St. Louis, that we have vacated and are actively marketing the locations for sublease as part of our reorganization efforts. Refer to Note 6, “Leases” and Note 17, "Restructuring Plan" of our notes to consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report for additional information. Total obligations have not been reduced by projected sublease rentals or by minimum sublease rentals of $1.2 million due in future periods under non-cancelable subleases.
The deferred compensation liability as of March 31, 2021 was $6.6 million, which is not included in the table above as the timing of future benefit payments to employees is not determinable.
The uncertain tax position liability as of March 31, 2021 was $4.4 million, which is not included in the table above as the timing of expected payments is not determinable.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of our notes to consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report for a discussion of recently issued accounting pronouncements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our consolidated financial statements and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ("GAAP"). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect our reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosures. We base our assumptions, estimates and judgments on historical experience, current trends, and other factors we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, and we evaluate these estimates on an ongoing basis. On a regular basis, we review the accounting policies and update our assumptions, estimates, and judgments, as needed, to ensure that our consolidated financial statements are presented fairly and in accordance with GAAP. Actual results could differ materially from our estimates under different assumptions or conditions. To the extent that there are material differences between our estimates and actual results, our financial condition or results of operations will be affected.
Our significant accounting policies, as described in Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of our notes to consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report, should be read in conjunction with management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations. We believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results because application of such policies require significant judgment regarding the effects of matters that are inherently uncertain and that affect our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
Application of the revenue recognition guidance requires a significant amount of judgments and estimates, which may impact the amount and timing of revenue recognition and related disclosures. Refer to Note 3, "Revenue from Contracts with Customers" of our notes to consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report for additional information regarding our revenue recognition policies, significant judgements, and estimates.
Software Development Costs
Software development costs, consisting primarily of employee salaries and benefits and certain third party costs, incurred in the development of new software solutions and enhancements to existing software solutions for external sale are expensed as incurred, and reported as net research and development costs in the consolidated statements of net income and comprehensive income, until technological feasibility has been established. After technological feasibility is established, any additional software development costs are capitalized. Amortization of capitalized software is recorded on a straight-line basis over the estimated economic life of the related product, which is typically three years. The total of capitalized software costs incurred in the development of products for external sale are reported as capitalized software costs within our consolidated balance sheets.
We also incur costs related to the development of software applications for our internal-use and for the development of software-as-a-service ("SaaS") based solutions sold to our clients. The development costs of our SaaS-based solutions are considered internal-use for accounting purposes. Our internal-use capitalized development costs are stated at cost and amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets, which is typically three years. Application development stage costs generally include costs associated with internal-use software configuration, coding, installation and testing. Costs related to the preliminary project stage and post-implementation activities are expensed as incurred. Costs of significant upgrades and enhancements that result in additional functionality are also capitalized, whereas costs incurred for maintenance and minor upgrades and enhancements are expensed as incurred. Capitalized software costs for the development of SaaS-based solutions are reported as capitalized software costs within our consolidated balance sheets and capitalized software costs for the development of our internal-use software applications are reported as equipment and improvements within our consolidated balance sheets.
We periodically reassess the estimated economic life and the recoverability of our capitalized software costs. If we determine that capitalized amounts are not recoverable based on the expected net cash flows to be generated from sales of the applicable software solutions, the amount by which the unamortized capitalized costs exceed the net realizable value is written off as a charge to earnings. The net realizable value is estimated as the expected future gross revenues from that product reduced by the estimated future costs of completing and disposing of that product, including the costs of performing maintenance and client support required to satisfy our responsibility at the time of sale. In addition to the assessment of net realizable value, we review and adjust the remaining estimated lives of our capitalized software costs, if necessary. We also perform a periodic review of our software solutions and dispose of fully amortized capitalized software costs after such products are determined to no longer be used by our clients.
Although we currently believe that our approach to estimates and judgments as described herein is reasonable, actual results could differ and we may be exposed to increases or decreases in revenue that could be material.
Business Combinations
During the year ended March 31, 2020, we completed the acquisitions of Topaz, Medfusion, and OTTO. We accounted for the acquisitions as purchase business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting.
In accordance with the acquisition method of accounting for business combinations, we allocated the purchase price of acquired businesses to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on estimated fair values. Our purchase price allocation methodology contains uncertainties because it requires us to make assumptions and to apply judgment to estimate the fair value of acquired assets and liabilities, including, but not limited to, intangible assets, goodwill, and contingent consideration liabilities. We estimate the fair value of assets and liabilities based upon the carrying value of the acquired assets and widely accepted valuation techniques, including discounted cash flows and market multiple analyses depending on the nature of the assets being sold. We estimate the fair value of the contingent consideration liabilities, as needed, based on our projection of expected results and the estimated probability of achievement. The process to develop the estimate of fair values in many cases requires the use of significant estimates, assumptions and judgments, including determining the timing and estimates of future cash flows and developing appropriate discount rates. Unanticipated events or circumstances may occur which could affect the accuracy of our fair value estimates, including assumptions regarding industry economic factors and business strategies. We finalize the purchase price allocation as soon as practicable within the measurement period, but not later than one year following the acquisition date. Any adjustments to fair value subsequent to the measurement period are reflected in the consolidated statements of net income and comprehensive income.
Refer to Note 7, "Business Combinations" of our notes to consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report for additional information regarding our business combination policies, significant judgements, and estimates.
Goodwill
Goodwill acquired in a business combination is measured as the excess of the purchase price, or consideration transferred, over the net acquisition date fair values of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed. Goodwill is not amortized as it has been determined to have an indefinite useful life.
We test goodwill for impairment annually during our first fiscal quarter, referred to as the annual test date. We will also test for impairment between annual test dates if an event occurs or circumstances change that would indicate the carrying amount may be impaired. Impairment testing for goodwill is performed at a reporting-unit level, which is defined as an operating segment or one level below an operating segment (referred to as a component). We operate as one segment and have a single reporting unit. The measures evaluated by our chief operating decision maker ("CODM"), consisting of our Chief Executive Officer, to assess company performance and make decisions about the allocation of resources include consolidated revenue and consolidated operating results.
As part of our annual goodwill impairment test, we may elect to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of our single reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. We assess events or changes in circumstances in totality, including macroeconomic and industry conditions, market and competitive environment, changes in customers or customer mix, cost factors, loss of key personnel, significant changes in legislative environment or other legal factors, changes in the use of our acquired assets, changes in our strategic direction, significant changes in projected future results of operations, changes in the composition or carrying amount of our net assets, and changes in our stock price. Based on our assessment, if we conclude that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then additional impairment testing is not required. Otherwise, if we determine that a quantitative impairment test should be performed, we then evaluate goodwill for impairment by comparing the estimated fair value of the reporting unit with its book value, including goodwill. If the estimated fair value exceeds book value, goodwill is considered not to be impaired and no additional steps are necessary. If, however, the fair value of the reporting unit is less than book value, then an impairment charge is recorded for the difference between the reporting unit’s fair value and carrying amount, not to exceed the carrying amount of the goodwill.
During the quarter ended June 30, 2020, we elected to bypass the optional qualitative step of the goodwill impairment assessment and proceed directly with the quantitative step, whereby we compared the fair value of our single reporting unit with its carrying amount. The results of the goodwill impairment assessment indicated that the fair value of our reporting unit exceeded its net carrying amount by a significant amount, indicating that no goodwill impairment existed as of the annual test dates ended March 31, 2021 and March 31, 2020. We also did not identify any events or circumstances that would require an interim goodwill impairment test.
Application of the goodwill impairment test required significant judgment, including the identification of reporting units and determination of the fair value of the reporting unit. We determined the fair value of our reporting unit utilizing the average of two valuation methods, consisting of the income approach (based upon estimates of future discounted cash flows for the reporting unit) and a market comparable approach (based upon valuation multiples of companies that operate in similar industries with similar operating characteristics). The cash flows used to determine fair value under the income approach required significant judgments and represent Management's best estimates of projected operating results, terminal and long-term growth rates of our business, useful life over which cash flows will occur, and our weighted average cost of capital, that are dependent on a number of significant assumptions based on historical experience, expectations of future performance, and the expected macroeconomic environment, which are subject to change given the inherent uncertainty in predicting future results. We also considered our stock price and market capitalization as a corroborative step in assessing the reasonableness of the fair values estimated for the reporting unit as part of the goodwill impairment assessment.
The estimates used to calculate the fair value of a reporting unit changes from year to year based on operating results, market conditions, and other factors. Changes in these estimates and assumptions could materially affect the determination of fair value and goodwill impairment for the reporting unit. We currently also do not believe there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a material change in the future estimates or assumptions we used to test for impairment losses on goodwill. However, if actual results are not consistent with our estimates or assumptions, we may be exposed to future impairment charges that could be material.
Refer to Note 8, "Goodwill" of our notes to consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report for additional information regarding our goodwill policies, significant judgements, and estimates.
Intangible Assets
Intangible assets consist of trade names, customer relationships, and software technology, all of which are associated with our acquisitions.
The intangible assets are recorded at fair value and are reported net of accumulated amortization. We currently amortize the intangible assets over periods ranging from 5 to 10 years using a method that reflects the pattern in which the economic benefits of the intangible asset are consumed. We assess the recoverability of intangible assets at least annually or whenever adverse events or changes in circumstances indicate that impairment may have occurred. If the future undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use of the related assets are less than the carrying value of such assets, impairment is deemed to have occurred and a loss is recognized to reduce the carrying value of the intangible assets to fair value, which is determined by discounting estimated future cash flows. In addition to the impairment assessment, we routinely review the remaining estimated lives of our intangible assets and record adjustments, if deemed necessary.
Although currently we believe that our approach to estimates and judgments as described herein is reasonable, actual results could differ and we may be exposed to decreases in the fair value of our intangible assets, resulting in impairment charges that could be material. We test intangible assets for impairment if we believe indicators of impairment exist.
Share-Based Compensation
We record share-based compensation related to share-based awards granted under our employee stock options and incentive plans.
Share-based compensation expense associated with stock options granted under our equity incentive plans is based on the number of options that ultimately vest and adjusted, if needed, as forfeitures occur. We estimate the fair value of stock options on the date of grant using the Black Scholes option-pricing model based on required inputs, including expected term, volatility, risk-free rate, and expected dividend yield. Expected term is estimated based upon the historical exercise behavior and represents the period of time that options granted are expected to be outstanding and therefore the proportion of awards that is expected to vest. Volatility is estimated by using the weighted-average historical volatility of our common stock, which approximates expected volatility. The risk-free rate is the implied yield available on the U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with remaining terms equal to the expected term. The expected dividend yield is the average dividend rate during a period equal to the expected term of the option. The fair value vest is recognized ratably as expense over the requisite service period in our consolidated statements of net income and comprehensive income.
Share-based compensation expense associated with restricted stock awards is estimated using the market price of the common stock on the date of grant. Share-based compensation expense associated with restricted performance stock awards and units are based on the grant date fair value measured at the underlying closing share price on the date of grant using a Monte Carlo-based valuation model.
We currently do not believe there is a reasonable likelihood there will be a material change in the future estimates or assumptions we use to determine share-based compensation expense. However, if actual results are not consistent with our estimates or assumptions, we may be exposed to changes in share-based compensation expense that could be material.
See Note 15, “Share-Based Awards,” of our notes to consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report for a complete discussion of our stock-based compensation plans and our accounting policies, significant judgements, and estimates.
Reserves on Accounts Receivable
We maintain reserves for estimated potential sales returns and uncollectible accounts receivable. Accounts receivable are reported net of uncollectible accounts receivable on our consolidated balance sheets.
Our standard contracts generally do not contain provisions for clients to return products or services. However, we historically have accepted sales returns under limited circumstances. We estimate expected sales returns and other forms of variable consideration considering our customary business practice and contract-specific facts and circumstances, and we consider such estimated potential returns as variable consideration when allocating the transaction price to the extent it is probable that there will not be a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized.
We adopted ASU 2016-13 on April 1, 2020 using the modified retrospective transition approach, which required the recognition of expected credit losses for our accounts receivable and our contract assets, consisting of unbilled receivables. The adoption of the new guidance did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements as the expected credit loss model was not significantly different from our prior policy and methodology for determining the allowance for doubtful accounts.
Allowances for doubtful accounts and other uncollectible accounts receivable related to estimated losses resulting from our clients’ inability to make required payments are established based on our assessment of the collectability of client accounts, including review of our historical experience of bad debt expense and the aging of our accounts receivable balances, net of specifically reserved accounts and amounts billed prior to revenue recognition. Specific reserves are based on our estimate of the probability of collection for certain accounts. As part of our assessment of the adequacy of the allowance for doubtful accounts, we considered a number of factors including, but not limited to, historical credit loss experience and adjustments for certain asset-specific risk characteristics, such as bankruptcy filings, internal assessments of client credit quality, age of the client receivable balances, review of major third-party credit-rating agencies, and evaluation of external factors such as economic conditions, including the potential impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, that may affect a client’s ability to pay, or other client-specific factors. Accounts are written off as uncollectible only after we have expended extensive collection efforts.
If a major client’s creditworthiness or financial condition were to deteriorate, if actual defaults are higher than our historical experience, or if other circumstances arise, our estimates of the recoverability of amounts due to us could be overstated, and additional allowances could be required, which could have an adverse impact on our operating results. Although we currently believe that our approach to estimates and judgments as described herein is reasonable, actual results could differ and we may be exposed to increases or decreases in required reserves that could be material.
See Note 4, “Accounts Receivable,” of our notes to consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report for additional information.
Leases
Our leasing arrangements are reflected on the balance sheet as right-of-use assets and liabilities pertaining to the rights and obligations created by the leased assets. We determine whether an arrangement is a lease at inception and classify it as finance or operating. All of our existing material leases are classified as operating leases. Our leases do not contain any residual value guarantees.
Right-of-use lease assets and corresponding lease liabilities are recognized at commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the expected lease term. Since the interest rate implicit in our lease arrangements is not readily determinable, we determine an incremental borrowing rate for each lease based on the approximate interest rate on a collateralized basis with similar remaining terms and payments as of the lease commencement date to determine the present value of future lease payments. Our lease terms may include options to extend or terminate the lease. Currently, it is not reasonably certain that we will exercise those options and therefore, we utilize the initial, noncancelable, lease term to calculate the lease assets and corresponding liabilities for all our leases. We have certain insignificant short-term leases with an initial term of twelve months or less that are not recorded in our consolidated balance sheets. Operating right-of-use lease assets are classified as operating lease assets on our consolidated balance sheets.
Our lease agreements generally contain lease and non-lease components. Non-lease components primarily include payments for maintenance and utilities. We have applied the practical expedient to combine fixed payments for non-lease components with our lease payments for all of our leases and account for them together as a single lease component, which increases the amount of our lease assets and corresponding liabilities. Payments under our lease arrangements are primarily fixed, however, certain lease agreements contain variable payments, which are expensed as incurred and not included in the operating lease assets and liabilities.
Operating lease costs are recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term and included as a selling, general and administrative expense in the consolidated statements of net income and comprehensive income.
Refer to Note 6, "Leases" of our notes to consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report for additional information.