Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of our operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this filing. In addition to historical consolidated financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. These statements involve risks and uncertainties and our actual results could differ materially from those discussed below. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” above for a discussion of the uncertainties, risks and assumptions associated with these statements. See also the disclosures under “Item 1A. Risk Factors”, above for additional discussion of such risks.
Growth Opportunities and Trends
Our ability to further grow our travel revenue will depend largely on increasing the number of distributors and suppliers, number of units, and revenue per listing for our Booking Engine; increasing the number of subscriptions on our NextTrip Business platform, and increasing the number and dollar value of our bookings in our leisure product.
Our achievement of these objectives will further depend on our ability to successfully enable more online bookable listings. Achieving growth in the number of distributors and the number of listings involves our ability to (i) increase our listing renewal rates, (ii) reach new distributors, property managers and owners through marketing activities, and/or (iii) obtain new listings through geographic expansion, strategic acquisitions, or investments. Increasing revenue per listing and revenue from other products and services will involve our ability to successfully drive more bookings and to successfully introduce new products to our marketplace.
In the future, we believe it will become more important to increase marketing investments to grow and further advertise our brand and products to distributors and travelers. We have seen other companies launch online businesses offering ALRs or other alternatives to hotels and we believe this growing favorable awareness of alternatives to hotels will support growth in our business. However, we have also seen a trend of increased government regulation and taxation of the industry. We continue to monitor the effects of these trends and will take actions as necessary to mitigate their effects.
Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19)
The COVID-19 pandemic, and governmental responses thereto, including travel restrictions, ‘stay-at-home’ orders and required social distancing orders, have severely restricted the level of economic activity around the world, and is having an unprecedented effect on the global travel industry. Additionally, the ability to travel has been curtailed through border closures, mandated travel restrictions and limited operations of hotels, airlines, and may be further limited through additional voluntary or mandated closures of travel-related businesses.
The measures implemented to contain the COVID-19 pandemic have had, and are expected to continue to have, a significant negative effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and liquidity position. In particular, such measures have led to unprecedented levels of cancellations and limited new travel bookings. Moreover, any additional measures or changes in laws or regulations, whether in the United States or other countries, that further impair the ability or desire of individuals to travel, including laws or regulations banning travel, requiring the closure of hotels or other travel-related businesses (such as restaurants) or otherwise restricting travel due to the risk of the spreading of COVID-19, may exacerbate the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and liquidity position.
The duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic are uncertain and difficult to predict at this time. The pandemic could continue to impede global economic activity for an extended period of time, even as restrictions are being lifted in many jurisdictions (including the United States) and vaccines are being made available, leading to decreased per capita income and disposable income, increased and sustained unemployment or a decline in consumer confidence, all of which could significantly reduce discretionary spending by individuals and businesses on travel and may create a recession in the United States or globally. In turn, that could have a negative impact on demand for our services. We also cannot predict the long-term effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our partners and their business and operations or the ways that the pandemic may fundamentally alter the travel industry. The aforementioned circumstances could result in a material adverse impact on our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows, potentially for a prolonged period.
Although we currently cannot predict the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our fiscal 2022 financial results relating to our operations, we anticipate an increase in year-over-year revenue as compared to fiscal year 2021 ended February 28, 2021. However, the ultimate extent of the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on global travel and overall economic activity is constantly changing and impossible to predict currently. Separately, our capital requirements may increase in the near term and long-term due to the impact of the COVID 19 pandemic, the resulting reduced demand for travel services, the increases in cancellations and re-bookings, and the extent to which such pandemic may further impact the ability of our customers to fulfill their payment obligations.
As a result of the above, in the event the HotPlay Share Exchange described above does not close timely, if at all, and/or if the HotPlay Share Exchange is terminated, we may be forced to scale back our operations, adjust our plan of operations, borrow or raise additional funding, which may not be available on favorable terms if at all. In the event we require and are unable to raise additional funding in the future, we may be forced to seek bankruptcy protection.
Recent Significant Funding Transactions
● On November 23, 2020, the Company borrowed $3.5 million from Streeterville and in March 2021, the Company borrowed an additional $8.4 million from Streeterville. On May 26, 2021, Streeterville funded an additional $1.4 million to the Company.
● On September 1, 2020, September 18, 2020, September 30, 2020, on or around November 2, 2020, and on November 24, 2020, and on around December 28, 2020 and on and around January 6, 2021 HotPlay advanced Monaker $300,000, $700,000, $1,000,000, $400,000, $100,000, $450,000, $50,000 respectively, under the terms of the HotPlay Exchange Agreement. On March 16, 2021, March 19, 2021, and April 15, 2021, HotPlay loaned the Company $9 million, $1 million and $2 million, respectively. The loans were made pursuant to the terms of the HotPlay Exchange Agreement and were evidenced by Convertible Promissory Notes dated effective March 16, 2021, March 19, 2021, and April 15, 2021, in the amount of $9,000,000, $1,000,000, and $2,000,000 respectively. The advances were evidenced by HotPlay Convertible Notes in the amount of each advance, and an effective date as of the date of each advance. The HotPlay Convertible Notes totaled $3.0 million as of February 28, 2021 and $15 million as of the date of this Report.
● On December 29, 2020, the Company engaged Kingswood Capital and Aegis Capital Corp. as underwriters for a public offering of 3,080,000 shares of common stock with an offering price of $2.50. The offering was fully subscribed, and the Company received $7,700,000. On January 13, 2021, the underwriters exercised their option and sold the additional 462,000 shares at $2.50 per share. The Company received $1,155,000 in connection with the over-allotment exercise.
● On May 13, 2021, the Company sold an aggregate of 3,714,500 shares of common stock in a public offering with an offering price of $2.50. The offering was fully subscribed, and the representative of the underwriters, Kingswood, exercised its over-allotment option in full. The Company received approximately $8.5 million as a result of the offering.
Additionally, we were significantly dependent during the year ended February 28, 2021, on funds provided by our Chairman, as described in greater detail under “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” - “Note 10 - Related Party Promissory Notes and Transactions”.
Key Financial Highlights
Key financial highlights for the fiscal year ended (FYE) February 28, 2021 include the following:
● Travel and commission revenues were $48,338, compared to $441,769 for the FYE February 29, 2020, a decrease of 89.1%;
● Net loss attributable to the consolidated group was approximately $16.5 million, or $(1.12) per basic and diluted share for the FYE February 28, 2021, compared to a net loss of approximately $9.5 million or $(0.80) per basic and diluted share for the FYE February 29, 2020;
● Cash used in operating activities was approximately $7.4 million for the FYE February 28, 2021, compared to cash used in operating activities of approximately $4.9 million for the FYE February 29, 2020;
● Cash used in investing activities was approximately $2.2 million for the FYE February 28, 2021 compared to cash provided in investing activities of approximately $1.8 million for the FYE February 29, 2020;
● Cash provided by financing investing activities was approximately $12.3 million for the FYE February 28, 2021 compared to cash provided by financing activities of approximately $3.3 million for the FYE February 29, 2020;
● There was a net increase in cash of approximately $2,478,482 for the FYE February 28, 2021, compared to an increase in cash of approximately $129,527 for the FYE February 29, 2020; and
● Cash and cash equivalents as of February 28, 2021 was approximately $2,640,988.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Results of Operations for the Fiscal Year Ended February 28, 2021 Compared to the Fiscal Year Ended February 29, 2020
Revenues
Total travel and commission revenues decreased 89.1% to $48,338 for the fiscal year ended (FYE) February 28, 2021, compared to $441,769 for the FYE February 29, 2020, a decrease of $393,431. The decrease is mainly attributable to COVID-19 and its impact on the travel industry which was felt due to many international locations not being open for travel and tourism, cruise lines not operating, general travel restrictions as well as stay-at-home orders for most of the world.
Cost of Revenues
We had cost of revenues of $43,204 for the year ended February 28, 2021, compared to $352,963 for the year ended February 29, 2020, which decreased similarly to the decrease in revenues over the same period driven mainly by the impacts of COVID-19.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses, including technology and development, salaries and benefits, selling and promotion, amortization of intangibles and general and administrative expenses, increased 32.3% to $7,974,383 for the FYE February 28, 2021, compared to $6,056,421 for the fiscal year ended February 29, 2020, an increase of $1,917,962. The increase in operating expenses were driven by a $924,901 increase in general and administrative expenses, primarily due to an increase in Professional Legal fees of approximately $1,070,216 related to the IDS and Axion matters; an increase in salaries and benefits of $990,886; an increase in selling and promotion expense of $326,303; and an increase in stock-based compensation of $256,332 and an increase of $211,510 in depreciation and amortization which were partially offset by a $791,970 decrease in technology and development expenses.
Other Income (Expenses)
Other income/(expense) includes gain on sale of assets, valuation gain/(loss), interest expense, loss on legal settlement, contract settlement expenses, realized gain/(loss) on sale of unconsolidated affiliates and non-controlling interest in consolidated affiliates. Total other expenses increased to $8,539,405 for FYE February 28, 2021, as compared to $3,487,071 for FYE February 29, 2020 or a change of $5,052,334. The increased expenses were mainly due to $551,763 of realized losses on the sale of unconsolidated affiliates for the FYE of February 28, 2021 as compared to realized gains on the sale of unconsolidated affiliates of $1,984,870 for the FYE February 28, 2020, or a decrease of $2,536,633, which was mainly related to the sale of Verus and Recruiter holdings securities. Additionally, the Company recorded an impairment of the intangible asset related to IDS of $2,070,000 for the FYE February 28, 2021, due to the settlement of the prior pending legal matter with IDS.
Net Income/Loss
We had net loss of $16,508,665 for the FYE February 28, 2021, compared to net loss of $9,454,686 for the FYE February 29, 2020, an increase in net loss of $7,053,969 from the prior period. The increased loss is primarily attributed to an increase of $2,001,634 in operating (loss) and an increase in other (expense) of $5,052,334 for the reasons described above.
Contractual Obligations
The following schedule represents obligations and commitments on the part of the Company that are not included in liabilities:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On February 28, 2021, we had $2,640,988 of cash on-hand which was an increase of $2,478,482 from $162,506 at February 29, 2020. The increase in cash on hand was mainly attributed to net proceeds received from financing activities of $11,991,438, which was partially offset by cash used for operating expenses of $7,356,215 and cash used by investing activities of $2,156,740.
As of February 28, 2021, the Company had total current liabilities of $6,835,072, consisting mainly of notes payable in the form of a Note Purchase Agreement with Streeterville Capital LLC of $2,260,000 and convertible notes payable to HotPlay of $3,000,000, as well as Accounts Payable and Accrued Expenses of $1,793,239. We anticipate that we will satisfy these amounts from proceeds derived from equity sales, sales of marketable securities, financing, cash on hand and revenue generated from sales.
As of February 28, 2021, we had $26.0 million in total assets, $6.8 million in total liabilities, working capital of $6.1 million and a total accumulated deficit of $132.3 million.
Net cash used in operating activities increased to $7,356,216 for the FYE February 28, 2021, compared to $4,937,697 of cash used in operating activities during the FYE February 29, 2020. The increase was mainly the result of the Company’s net loss from operations, payments relating to prepaid expenses for software, licenses and games along with increases in other current assets.
Net cash used in investing activities decreased to $2,156,740 for the FYE February 28, 2021 as compared to net cash provided by investing activities of $1,781,491 for FYE February 29, 2020. The decrease can be attributed mainly to cash used for the purchase of intangible assets related to the business acquisition of Longroot, Inc., a decrease in proceeds from the sale of unconsolidated affiliates related to the Verus and Recruiter holdings, and payments related to website development costs.
Net cash provided by financing activities increased to $11,991,438 for the FYE February 28, 2021, compared to $3,285,733 for the FYE February 29, 2020. The increase was primarily due to funds received from the sale of common stock and net cash provided by promissory notes activity.
On June 15, 2016, we entered into a revolving line of credit agreement with Republic Bank, Inc. of Duluth, Minnesota, which merged with National Bank of Commerce, which continued as the surviving entity, on July 8, 2019 (“National Bank”). The revolving line of credit has been amended various times to date, and on May 7, 2020, we entered a new Promissory Note with National Bank (“New Note”) in connection with the line of credit. The New Note replaced a prior promissory Note we had in place with National Bank in connection with our $1,200,000 revolving line of credit and extended the due date of the prior Note from June 30, 2020 to December 31, 2020. The New Note also amended the interest rate of the prior Note to provide that amounts due under the New Note accrue interest at the rate of prime plus 3% (which rate is currently 6.25%)(the interest rate of the prior Note was prime plus 1%), subject to a floor of 4.5%, which interest is payable monthly in arrears. The New Note may be prepaid at any time without penalty. The New Note contains standard and customary events of default. On December 1, 2020 the company paid off the full balance of the New Note of $1,192,746.
Additional information regarding our notes payable, notes receivable, investments in equity instruments, acquisitions and dispositions and line of credit can be found under “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” - “Note 4 - Notes Receivable”; “Note 10 - Related Party Promissory Notes and Transactions”, “Note 5 - Investment in Equity Instruments”, “Note 6 - Acquisitions and Dispositions”, “Note 8 - Line of Credit”; and “Note 17 - Subsequent Events”.
We have very limited financial resources. We currently have a monthly cash requirement of approximately $600,000, exclusive of capital expenditures. We anticipate funds raised through the May 2021 underwritten offering and funds borrowed from Streeterville, will be sufficient to provide us working capital through the closing of the HotPlay Share Exchange. In the event the HotPlay Share Exchange does not close on a timely basis or the HotPlay Share Exchange is terminated, we anticipate requiring additional funding, because our projected cash generated from operations is not sufficient to meet our cash needs for working capital and capital expenditures, and if such additional funds are required, management intends to seek additional equity or obtain additional credit facilities or loans. However, we may be unable to raise additional capital upon terms acceptable to us. The sale of additional equity will result in additional dilution to our shareholders. A portion of our cash may be used to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, or to increase our ownership of Axion or products or to obtain the right to use complementary technologies. From time to time, in the ordinary course of business, we evaluate potential acquisitions of such businesses, products or technologies.
We will need substantial additional capital to support the on-going operation and increased market penetration of our products including the development of national advertising relationships, increases in operating costs resulting from additional staff and office space until such time as we generate revenues sufficient to support ourselves. We believe that in the aggregate, we could require several millions of dollars to support and expand the marketing and development of our travel products, repay debt obligations, provide capital expenditures for additional equipment and development costs, payment obligations, office space and systems for managing the business, and cover other operating costs until our planned revenue streams from all products are fully implemented and begin to offset our operating costs. Our failure to obtain additional capital to finance our working capital needs on acceptable terms, or at all, will negatively impact our business, financial condition, and liquidity. As of February 28, 2021, we had approximately $6.8 million of current liabilities. We currently do not have the resources to satisfy these obligations, and our inability to do so could have a material adverse effect on our business and ability to continue as a going concern.
To date, we have funded our operations with the proceeds from equity and debt financings and we anticipate we will need to meet our funding requirements through the sale of equity or debt financing, which funds may not be available on favorable terms, if at all. We anticipate that we would need several millions of dollars to properly market our services and fund the operations for the next 12 months.
Separately, our capital requirements may increase in the near term and long-term due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, the resulting reduced demand for travel services, the increases in cancellations and re-bookings, and the extent to which such pandemic may further impact the ability of our customers to fulfill their payment obligations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs and expenses, and related disclosures. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions. To the extent there are material differences between these estimates and our actual results, our consolidated financial statements will be affected.
Our significant accounting policies are described in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” - “Note 1 - Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
The methods, estimates and judgments we use in applying our accounting policies have a significant impact on our results of operations. We believe that the policies listed below involve the greatest degree of complexity and judgment by our management and are critical for understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations. If actual results significantly differ from the Company’s estimates, the Company’s financial condition and results of operations could be materially impacted.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue when the customer has purchased the product, the occurrence of the earlier of date of travel or the date of cancellation has expired, the sales price is fixed or determinable and collectability is reasonably assured.
Revenues for customer travel packages purchased directly from the Company are recorded in gross amounts (the amount paid to the Company by the customer is shown as revenue and the cost of providing the respective travel package is recorded to cost of revenues).
We generate our travel revenues from sales directly to customers as well as through other distribution channels of tours and activities at destinations throughout the world. We also generate revenue from commissions on bookings and sales of ancillary products and services. We generate revenue in the form of commissions from the sale of cryptocurrency offerings which are recognized at the time funds are raised.
Payments for tours or activities received in advance of services being rendered are recorded as deferred revenue and recognized at the earlier of the date of travel or the last date of cancellation (i.e., the customer’s refund privileges lapse).
Business Combinations
The purchase prices of acquired businesses or acquired assets have been allocated to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, based upon their estimated fair value at the date control is obtained. The difference between the purchase price and the fair value of the net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill.
Most of the businesses we have acquired did not have a significant amount of tangible assets. We typically identified the following identifiable intangible assets in each acquisition: trade name, licenses, customer relationships and internal software. In making certain assumptions on valuation and useful lives, we considered the unique nature of each acquired asset.
Determining the estimated fair value of assets involves the use of significant estimates, judgment and assumptions, such as future cash flows and selection of comparable companies. Future changes in our assumptions or the interrelationship of those assumptions may negatively impact future valuations and could result in an impairment of goodwill or intangible assets that may have a material effect on our financial condition and operating results.
Definite-lived intangible assets are recorded at cost and amortized using a method that reflects our best estimate of the pattern in which the economic benefit of the related intangible asset is utilized.
Goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets, such as certain trade names and licenses, are not amortized and are subject to annual impairment tests during the fourth quarter, or whenever events or circumstances indicate impairment may have occurred. For goodwill and indefinite lived intangible assets, we complete a quantitative analysis that compares the fair value of our reporting unit or indefinite-lived intangible assets to the carrying amounts, and an impairment loss is recognized equivalent to the excess of the carrying amount over the fair value.
Accounts Receivable
We extend credit to our customers in the normal course of business. Further, we regularly review outstanding receivables, and provide for estimated losses through an allowance for doubtful accounts. In evaluating the level of established loss reserves, we make judgments regarding our customers’ ability to make required payments, economic events, and other factors. As the financial condition of these parties’ change, circumstances develop or additional information becomes available, and adjustments to the allowance for doubtful accounts may be required. We maintain reserves for potential credit losses, and such losses traditionally have been within our expectations. As of February 28, 2021, and February 29, 2020, we had $0 and $0 of accounts receivable, respectively. Our allowance for doubtful accounts was $0 as of February 28, 2021.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
In accordance with Accounting Standards Codification 360-10, “Property, Plant and Equipment”, we periodically review our long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be fully recoverable. We recognize an impairment loss when the sum of expected undiscounted future cash flows is less than the carrying amount of the asset. The amount of impairment is measured as the difference between the asset’s estimated fair value and its book value. As of February 28, 2021, we had not impaired any long-lived assets.
Website Development Costs
We account for website development costs in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification 350-50 “Website Development Costs”. Accordingly, all costs incurred in the planning stage are expensed as incurred, costs incurred in the website application and infrastructure development stage that meet specific criteria are capitalized subject to straight-line amortization over a three-year period and costs incurred in the day-to-day operation of the website are expensed as incurred.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
In accordance with ASC 350-30-65 “Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets”, we assess the impairment of identifiable intangible assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Factors we consider important, which could trigger an impairment review include the following:
1. Significant underperformance to historical or projected future operating results;
2. Significant changes in the manner or use of the acquired assets or the strategy for the overall business; and
3. Significant negative industry or economic trends.
When we determine that the carrying value of an intangible asset may not be recoverable based upon the existence of one or more of the above indicators of impairment and the carrying value of the asset cannot be recovered from projected undiscounted cash flow, we record an impairment charge. We measure any impairment based on a projected discounted cash flow method using a discount rate determined by management to be commensurate with the risk inherent to the current business model. Significant management judgment is required in determining whether an indicator of impairment exists and in projecting cash flows. We evaluated the remaining useful life of the intangibles and wrote-down the intellectual property assets related to IDS in the amount of $2,070,000, during the year ended February 28, 2021, but had no write-downs or impairments for the fiscal year ended February 29, 2020.
Intellectual properties that have finite useful lives are amortized over their useful lives. We incurred amortization expense of $210,507 and $293,804 for the years ended February 28, 2021 and February 29, 2020, respectively, which is included in operating expenses.
Convertible promissory notes
Upon issuance of convertible promissory senior notes, we separated the notes into liability and equity components. We record debt net of debt discount for beneficial conversion features and warrants, on a relative fair value basis. Beneficial conversion features are recorded pursuant to the Beneficial Conversion and Debt Topics of the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) Accounting Standards Codification (ASC). The carrying amount of the liability component was calculated by measuring the fair value of a similar liability that does not have an associated convertible feature. The carrying amount of the equity component representing the conversion option was determined by deducting the fair value of the liability component from the par value of the notes. The excess of the principal amount of the liability component over its carrying amount (“debt discount”) is amortized to interest expense over the term of the notes using the effective interest rate method. The equity component is not re-measured if it continues to qualify for equity classification. The balance of convertible promissory senior notes, as of February 28, 2021 and February 29, 2020, was $3,000,000 and $0, respectively.
In accounting for the transaction costs related to the Note issuance, we allocated the total amount incurred to the liability and equity components based on their relative values. Transaction costs attributable to the liability component are being amortized to expense over the term of the notes using the effective interest rate method, and transaction costs attributable to the equity component were netted with the equity component in stockholders’ equity.
Derivative Instruments
We enter into financing arrangements that consist of freestanding derivative instruments or are hybrid instruments that contain embedded derivative features. We account for these arrangements in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification topic 815, Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities (“ASC 815”) as well as related interpretation of this standard. In accordance with this standard, derivative instruments are recognized as either assets or liabilities in the balance sheet and are measured at fair values with gains or losses recognized in earnings. Embedded derivatives that are not clearly and closely related to the host contract are bifurcated and are recognized at fair value with changes in fair value recognized as either a gain or loss in earnings. We determine the fair value of derivative instruments and hybrid instruments based on available market data using appropriate valuation models, considering all of the rights and obligations of each instrument.
We estimate fair values of derivative financial instruments using various techniques (and combinations thereof) that are considered consistent with the objective measuring fair values. In selecting the appropriate technique, we consider, among other factors, the nature of the instrument, the market risks that it embodies and the expected means of settlement. For less complex derivative instruments, such as freestanding warrants, we generally use the Black-Scholes model, adjusted for the effect of dilution, because it embodies all of the requisite assumptions (including trading volatility, estimated terms, dilution and risk-free rates) necessary to fair value these instruments. Estimating fair values of derivative financial instruments requires the development of significant and subjective estimates that may, and are likely to, change over the duration of the instrument with related changes in internal and external market factors. In addition, option-based techniques (such as Black-Scholes model) are highly volatile and sensitive to changes in the trading market price of our common stock. Since derivative financial instruments are initially and subsequently carried at fair values, our income (expense) going forward will reflect the volatility in these estimates and assumption changes. Under the terms of the new accounting standard, increases in the trading price of our common stock and increases in fair value during a given financial quarter result in the application of non-cash derivative expense. Conversely, decreases in the trading price of our common stock and decreases in trading fair value during a given financial quarter result in the application of non-cash derivative income.
Based upon ASC 815-25 the Company has adopted a sequencing approach regarding the application of ASC 815-40 to its outstanding convertible debentures. Pursuant to the sequencing approach, the Company evaluates its contracts based upon earliest issuance date.
In July 2017, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2017-11, Earnings Per Share (Topic 260) Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (Topic 480) Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815): I. Accounting for Certain Financial Instruments with Down Round Features, and II. Replacement of the Indefinite Deferral for Mandatorily Redeemable Financial Instruments of Certain Nonpublic Entities and Certain Mandatorily Redeemable Noncontrolling Interests with a Scope Exception. ASU 2017-11 intends to reduce the complexity associated with the issuer’s accounting for certain financial instruments with characteristics of liabilities and equity. Specifically, the FASB determined that a down round feature (as defined) would no longer cause a freestanding equity-linked financial instrument (or an embedded conversion option) to be accounted for as a derivative liability at fair value with changes in fair value recognized in current earnings and is effective in fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019, and interim periods within fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020. The Company adopted the new standard during 2017, preventing the need to account for several outstanding warrants that contain down round features as derivative instruments.
Stock-Based Compensation
We have stock-based compensation plans which allow for the issuance of stock-based awards, including stock options, restricted stock units and restricted stock awards. We compute share-based payments in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification 718-10 “Compensation” (ASC 718-10). ASC 718-10 establishes standards for the accounting for transactions in which an entity exchanges its equity instruments for goods and services at fair value, focusing primarily on accounting for transactions in which an entity obtains employees services in share-based payment transactions. It also addresses transactions in which an entity incurs liabilities in exchange for goods and services that are based on the fair value of an entity’s equity instruments or that may be settled by the issuance of those equity instruments.
SAB No. 107, Share-Based Payment (“SAB 107”) provides guidance regarding the interaction of ASC 718-10 and certain SEC rules and regulations. We have applied the provisions of SAB 107 in its adoption of ASC 718-10. We account for stock-based compensation expense by amortizing the fair value of each stock-based award expected to vest over the requisite service or performance period. The fair value of restricted stock awards is based on the number of shares granted and the closing price of our common stock on the date of grant. The fair value of each stock option award is calculated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model.
The Black-Scholes model requires various assumptions including fair value of the underlying stock, volatility, expected term, risk-free interest rate and expected dividends. We use our historical experience to estimate the expected forfeiture rate of awards, and only recognize expense for those awards expected to vest. To the extent the actual forfeiture rate is different from the estimate, the stock-based compensation expense is adjusted accordingly. If any of the assumptions we use in estimating the fair value of awards change significantly or the actual forfeiture rate is different than the estimate, stock-based compensation expense may differ materially in the future.
We have implemented all new relevant accounting pronouncements that are in effect through the date of these financial statements. These pronouncements did not have a material impact on the financial statements and unless otherwise disclosed, we do not believe that there are any other new accounting pronouncements that have been issued that might have a material impact on our financial position or results of operations.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes pursuant to the provisions of ASC 740-10, “Accounting for Income Taxes” in accordance with the liability method, whereby deferred tax asset and liability account balances are determined based on differences between financial reporting and the tax bases of assets and liabilities and are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. These differences result in deferred tax assets and liabilities, which are included in our consolidated balance sheets. We then assess the likelihood that the deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income and the reversal of temporary taxable differences. A valuation allowance is established against deferred tax assets to the extent we believe that recovery is not likely. Significant judgment is required in determining any valuation allowance to be recorded. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we consider all available evidence, including past operating results, estimates of future taxable income, reversals of taxable temporary differences and the feasibility of tax planning over the periods in which the temporary differences are deductible. In the event we change our determination as to the amount of deferred tax assets that can be realized, we will adjust our valuation allowance with a corresponding impact to the provision for income taxes in the period in which the determination is made.
The difference between our effective income tax rate and the federal statutory rate is primarily a function of the mix of uncertain tax positions and permanent differences including non-deductible charges. Our provision for income taxes is subject to volatility and could be adversely impacted if earnings or tax rates differ from our expectations or if new tax laws are enacted.
Significant judgment is required in evaluating any uncertain tax positions, including the timing and amount of deductions and allocations of income among various tax jurisdictions. We are required to identify, evaluate and measure all uncertain tax positions taken or to be taken on tax returns and to record liabilities for the amount of these positions that may not be sustained, or may only partially be sustained, upon examination by the relevant taxing authorities. Although we believe that our estimates and judgments are reasonable, actual results may differ from these estimates. Some or all of these judgments are subject to review by the taxing authorities. We adjust these reserves in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the closing of an audit or the refinement of an estimate. To the extent that the final outcome of a matter is different than the amount recorded, such differences will impact the provision for income taxes in the period in which the determination is made. The provision for income taxes includes the impact of reserve provisions and changes to reserves that are considered appropriate, as well as any related net interest and penalties.
We have adopted ASC 740-10-25 Definition of Settlement, which provides guidance on how an entity should determine whether a tax position is effectively settled for the purpose of recognizing previously unrecognized tax benefits and provides that a tax position can be effectively settled upon the completion of an examination by a taxing authority without being legally extinguished. For tax positions considered effectively settled, an entity would recognize the full amount of tax benefit, even if the tax position is not considered more likely than not to be sustained based solely on the basis of its technical merits and the statute of limitations remains open. As of February 28, 2021, the Company’s income tax returns for tax years ending February 29, 2020, February 28, 2019, 2018, 2017, February 29, 2016, February 28, 2015, and 2014 remain potentially subject to audit by the taxing authorities.
We follow the guidance of ASC 740, “Income Taxes.” Deferred income taxes reflect the net effect of (a) temporary difference between carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial purposes and the amounts used for income tax reporting purposes, and (b) net operating loss carry- forwards. No current tax provision has been made in the accompanying statement of income (loss) because no taxes are due currently or were paid previously. Similarly, no deferred tax asset attributable to the net operating loss carry- forward has been recognized, as it is not deemed likely to be realized.
Earnings per Share
Basic earnings per share are computed by dividing net income by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. Diluted earnings per share is computed by dividing net income by the weighted average number of shares of common stock, common stock equivalents and potentially dilutive securities outstanding during each period. Diluted loss per common share is not presented because it is anti-dilutive.