ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
For the purpose of this discussion and analysis, the words “we,” “us,” “our,” and the “Company” are used to refer to New York Community Bancorp, Inc. and our consolidated subsidiaries, including New York Community Bank (the “Bank”).
Executive Summary
New York Community Bancorp, Inc. is the holding company for New York Community Bank, with 237 branches in Metro New York, New Jersey, Ohio, Florida, and Arizona. At December 31, 2020, we had total assets of $56.3 billion, including total loans of $43.0 billion, total deposits of $32.4 billion, and total stockholders’ equity of $6.8 billion.
Chartered in the State of New York, the Bank is subject to regulation by the FDIC, the CFPB, and the NYSDFS. In addition, the holding company is subject to regulation by the FRB, the SEC, and to the requirements of the NYSE, where shares of our common stock are traded under the symbol “NYCB” and shares of our preferred stock trade under the symbol “NYCB PA.”
As a publicly traded company, our mission is to provide our shareholders with a solid return on their investment by producing a strong financial performance, maintaining a solid capital position, and engaging in corporate strategies that enhance the value of their shares. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, net income totaled $511.1 million, up 29% compared to the $395.0 million we reported for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. Full-year 2020 results were impacted by $68.4 million income tax benefit related to certain tax provisions for corporations under the CARES ACT. Excluding this tax benefit, net income, on a non-GAAP basis, for full-year 2020 was $442.7 million up 12% compared to full-year 2019.
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, net income available to common shareholders was $478.3 million, up 32% compared to $362.2 million we reported for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. On a non-GAAP, net income available to common shareholders for full-year 2020 was $409.9 million, up 13% compared to full-year 2019.
The key trends during 2020 were:
Double-Digit Expansion in the Net Interest Margin
During full-year 2020, our NIM increased by double-digits compared to full-year 2019. This improvement was driven by a significant decline in our overall cost of funds largely fueled by lower deposit costs. During 2020, the Company benefited by the FRB’s near-zero interest rate policy as we proactively reduced our CDs. This was partially offset by a decline in asset yields.
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, the NIM was 2.24%, up 22 bp compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. Prepayment income contributed 11 bp to the NIM in 2020 compared to 12 bp in 2019. Excluding the impact from prepayment income, the NIM for full-year, on a non-GAAP basis, was 2.13%, up 23 bp compared to 2019. During the fourth quarter of 2020, the NIM increased 43 bp to 2.47% compared to the fourth quarter of 2019. Excluding the impact from prepayment income, the fourth-quarter 2020 NIM, on a non-GAAP basis, was 2.30%, up 40 bp compared to the year-ago fourth quarter.
Strong Growth in Net Interest Income
The double-digit improvement in the NIM was a key driver of the strong growth in net interest income we experienced during 2020. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 net interest income totaled $1.1 billion, up $142.7 million or 15% compared to $957.4 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The year-over-year improvement was due to lower interest expense, owing to lower funding cost, which was primarily the result of lower CD rates. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, prepayment income totaled $54.4 million, relatively unchanged compared to prepayment income for the twelve months ended
December 31, 2019. Excluding the impact from prepayment income, net interest income, on a non-GAAP basis, increased $142.5 million or 16% to $1.0 billion for full-year 2020 compared to $903.2 million for full-year 2019.
Our Asset Quality Metrics and Loan Deferrals Improved
The Company’s overall asset quality metrics remain very strong during 2020 as NPAs declined significantly compared to full year 2019. NPAs at December 31, 2020 totaled $46.1 million or eight bp of total assets, down $27.4 million or 37% compared to $73.5 million or 14 bp of total assets at December 31, 2019.
To date, we have also been successful with our loan deferral to help those borrowers impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. The majority of our full-payment loan deferrals were eligible to come off their six-month deferral period during fourth quarter 2020. Accordingly, at December 31, 2020, 99% or $6.0 billion of our full-payment loan deferrals have returned to payment status. As of that date, $83.6 million of full-payment deferrals currently remain on deferral and are eligible to come off their deferral period during the first two months of 2021.
External Factors
The following is a discussion of certain external factors that tend to influence our financial performance and the strategic actions we take.
Interest Rates
Among the external factors that tend to influence our performance, the interest rate environment is key. Just as short-term interest rates affect the cost of our deposits and that of the funds we borrow, market interest rates affect the yields on the loans we produce for investment and the securities in which we invest.
As further discussed under “Loans Held for Investment” later on in this discussion, the interest rates on our multi-family loans and CRE credits generally are based on the five-year and seven-year CMT. The following table summarizes the high, low, and average five- and seven-year CMT rates in 2020 and 2019:
Because the multi-family and CRE loans we produce generate income when they prepay (which is recorded as interest income), the impact of repayment activity can be especially meaningful. In 2020, prepayment income from loans contributed $52.1 million to interest income; in the prior year, the contribution was $48.9 million.
Economic Indicators
While we attribute our asset quality to the nature of the loans we produce and our conservative underwriting standards, the quality of our assets can also be impacted by economic conditions in our local markets and throughout the United States. The information that follows consists of recent economic data that we consider to be germane to our performance and the markets we serve.
The following table presents the generally negative trend in unemployment rates, as reported by the U.S. Department of Labor, both nationally and in the various markets that comprise our footprint. The year-over-year
increase in the unemployment rates across our footprint is due to the COVID-19 pandemic and resultant business shutdowns.
The CPI measures the average change over time in the prices paid by urban consumers for a market basket of consumer goods and services. The following table indicates the change in the CPI for the twelve months ended at each of the indicated dates:
Economic activity also is indicated by the Consumer Confidence Index®, which declined to 87.1 in December 2020 compared to 128.2 in December 2019. An index level of 90 or more is considered indicative of a strong economy.
The following chart illustrates the relative stability of the rental vacancy rate in New York City for all rental units and for rent stabilized units, from 1991 through 2017, as compared to the changes in average unemployment rates in New York City during those years. As the New York City rental vacancy rate is only reported every three years, the annual average unemployment rate in New York City is provided for those years only. As you can see the vacancy rates for rent stabilized units are lower, in some years, meaningfully lower, then the vacancy rates for all rental units.
New York City Rental Vacancy Rates to Unemployment Rates
(1)
Source: Selected Initial Findings of the New York City Housing and Vacancy Survey
(2)
Source: http://www.labor.ny.gov/stats/laus.asp
Critical Accounting Policies
We consider certain accounting policies to be critically important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations, since they require management to make complex or subjective judgments, some of which may relate to matters that are inherently uncertain. The inherent sensitivity of our consolidated financial statements to these critical accounting policies, and the judgments, estimates, and assumptions used therein, could have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations.
We have identified the following to be critical accounting policies: the determination of the allowance for loan losses and the determination of the amount, if any, of goodwill impairment.
The judgments used by management in applying these critical accounting policies may be influenced by adverse changes in the economic environment, which may result in changes to future financial results.
Allowance for Credit Losses
The Company’s January 1, 2020, adoption of ASU No. 2016-13, “Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments,” resulted in a significant change to our methodology for estimating the allowance since December 31, 2019. ASU No. 2016-13 replaced the incurred loss methodology with an expected loss methodology that is referred to as the CECL methodology. The measurement of expected credit losses under CECL is applicable to financial assets measured at amortized cost, including loan receivables. It also applies to off-balance sheet exposures not accounted for as insurance and net investments in leases accounted for under ASC Topic 842. At December 31, 2019, the allowance for credit losses on loans and leases totaled $147.6 million. On January 1, 2020, the Company adopted the CECL methodology under ASU Topic 326 and recognized an increase in the allowance for credit losses on loans and leases of $1.9 million as a “Day 1” transition adjustment from changes in methodology, with a corresponding decrease in retained earnings. Separately, at December 31, 2019, the Company had an allowance for unfunded commitments of $461,000. Upon adoption, the Company recognized an increase in the allowance for unfunded commitments of $12.5 million as a “Day 1” transition adjustment with a corresponding decrease in retained earnings.
The allowance for credit losses on loans and leases is deducted from the amortized cost basis of a financial asset or a group of financial assets so that the balance sheet reflects the net amount the Company expects to collect. Amortized cost is the unpaid loan balance, net of deferred fees and expenses, and includes negative escrow. Subsequent changes (favorable and unfavorable) in expected credit losses are recognized immediately in net income as a credit loss expense or a reversal of credit loss expense. Management estimates the allowance by projecting and multiplying together the probability-of-default, loss-given-default and exposure-at-default depending on economic parameters for each month of the remaining contractual term. Economic parameters are developed using available information relating to past events, current conditions, and economic forecasts. The Company’s economic forecast period is 24 months, and afterwards reverts to a historical average loss rate on a straight line basis over a 12 month period. Historical credit experience provides the basis for the estimation of expected credit losses, with qualitative adjustments made for differences in current loan-specific risk characteristics such as differences in underwriting standards, portfolio mix, delinquency levels and terms, as well as for changes in environmental conditions, such as changes in legislation, regulation, policies, administrative practices or other relevant factors. Expected credit losses are estimated over the contractual term of the loans, adjusted for forecasted prepayments when appropriate. The contractual term excludes potential extensions or renewals. The methodology used in the estimation of the allowance for loan and lease losses, which is performed at least quarterly, is designed to be dynamic and responsive to changes in portfolio credit quality and forecasted economic conditions. Each quarter the Company reassesses the appropriateness of the economic forecasting period, the reversion period and historical mean at the portfolio segment level, considering any required adjustments for differences in underwriting standards, portfolio mix, and other relevant data shifts over time.
The allowance for credit losses on loans and leases is measured on a collective (pool) basis when similar risk characteristics exist. The portfolio segment represents the level at which a systematic methodology is applied to estimate credit losses. Management believes the products within each of the entity’s portfolio segments exhibit similar risk characteristics. Smaller pools of homogenous financing receivables with homogeneous risk characteristics were modeled using the methodology selected for the portfolio segment. The macroeconomic data used in the quantitative models are based on a reasonable and supportable forecast period of 24 months. The Company leverages economic projections including property market and prepayment forecasts from established independent third parties to inform its loss drivers in the forecast. Beyond this forecast period, the Company reverts to a historical average loss rate. This reversion to the historical average loss rate is performed on a straight-line basis over 12 months.
Loans that do not share risk characteristics are evaluated on an individual basis. These include loans that are in nonaccrual status with balances above management determined materiality thresholds depending on loan class and also loans that are designated as TDR or “reasonably expected TDR” (criticized, classified, or maturing loans that will have a modification processed within the next three months). In addition, all taxi medallion loans are individually evaluated. If a loan is determined to be collateral dependent, or meets the criteria to apply the collateral dependent practical expedient, expected credit losses are determined based on the fair value of the collateral at the reporting date, less costs to sell as appropriate.
The Company maintains an allowance for credit losses on off-balance sheet credit exposures. The Company estimates expected credit losses over the contractual period in which the Company is exposed to credit risk via a contractual obligation to extend credit, unless that obligation is unconditionally cancellable by the Company. The allowance for credit losses on off-balance sheet credit exposures is adjusted as a provision for credit losses expense. The estimate includes consideration of the likelihood that funding will occur and an estimate of expected credit losses on commitments expected to be funded over their estimated life. The Company examined historical credit conversion factor (“CCF”) trends to estimate utilization rates, and chose an appropriate mean CCF based on both management judgment and quantitative analysis. Quantitative analysis involved examination of CCFs over a range of fund-up windows (between 12 and 36 months) and comparison of the mean CCF for each fund-up window with management judgment determining whether the highest mean CCF across fund-up windows made business sense. The Company applies the same standards and estimated loss rates to the credit exposures as to the related class of loans.
Goodwill Impairment
The Company adopted, on a prospective basis, ASU No. 2017-04, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other (Topic 350): Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment on January 1, 2020. We have significant intangible assets related to goodwill and as of December 31, 2020, we had goodwill of $2.4 billion. In connection with our acquisitions, the assets acquired and liabilities assumed are recorded at their estimated fair values. Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price of our acquisitions over the fair value of identifiable net assets acquired, including other identified intangible assets. We test our goodwill for impairment at the reporting unit level. We have identified one reporting unit which is the same as our operating segment and reportable segment. If we change our strategy or if market conditions shift, our judgments may change, which may result in adjustments to the recorded goodwill balance.
We perform our goodwill impairment test in the fourth quarter of each year, or more often if events or circumstances warrant. For annual goodwill impairment testing, we have the option to first perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, including goodwill and other intangible assets. If we conclude that this is the case, we would compare the fair value the reporting unit with its carrying amount and recognize an impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value. The loss recognized, however, would not exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. Additionally, we would consider income tax effects from any tax deductible goodwill on the carrying amount of the reporting unit when measuring the goodwill impairment loss, if applicable. As of December 31, 2020, the Company’s goodwill was not impaired.
FINANCIAL CONDITION
Balance Sheet Summary
At December 31, 2020, total assets were $56.3 billion, up $2.7 billion or 5.0% on a year-over-year basis. Our asset growth was largely the result of loan growth and, a $1.2 billion increase in the balance of cash and cash equivalents. This was funded through a combination of growth in deposits and in wholesale borrowings.
Total loans held for investment rose $989.4 million or 2.4% on a year-over-year basis to $42.9 billion, as the multi-family loan portfolio increased $1.1 billion or 3.5% to $32.3 billion and the specialty finance portfolio rose $439.2 million or 16.8% to $3.1 billion.
Total securities, consisting mainly of available-for-sale securities declined modestly to $5.8 billion compared to $5.9 billion on a year-over-year basis.
On the liability side, total deposits rose $779.7 million or 2.5% to $32.4 billion compared to the balance at year-end 2019, while total borrowed funds increased $1.5 billion or 10.5% to $16.1 billion. Most of the growth in borrowings occurred in the fourth quarter of the year.
Total stockholders’ equity at December 31, 2020 was $6.8 billion, up $130.0 million compared to the balance at December 31, 2019. Common stockholders’ equity to total assets was 11.26% compared to 11.57% at December 31, 2019. Book value per common share was $13.66 at December 31, 2020 compared to $13.29 at December 31, 2019.
On a non-GAAP basis and excluding goodwill of $2.4 billion at both December 31, 2020 and 2019, tangible common stockholders’ equity totaled $3.9 billion at year-end 2020, compared to $3.8 billion at year-end 2019. Tangible common stockholders’ equity to tangible assets was 7.26% at December 31, 2020 compared to 7.39% at December 31, 2019. Tangible book value per common share at December 31, 2020 was $8.43 compared to $8.09 at December 31, 2019.
Loans
Loans Held for Investment
The majority of the loans we produce are multi-family loans. Our production of multi-family loans began several decades ago in the five boroughs of New York City, where the majority of the rental units currently consist of rent-regulated apartments featuring below-market rents. In addition to multi-family loans, our loan portfolio contains a large number of CRE credits, most of which are secured by income-producing properties located in New York City and on Long Island.
In addition to multi-family loans and CRE loans, our specialty finance loans and leases have become an increasingly larger portion of our overall loan portfolio. The remainder of our portfolio includes smaller balances of C&I loan, one-to-four family loans, ADC loans, and other loans held for investment. The majority of our C&I loans consist of loans to small- and mid-size businesses.
In 2020, we originated $12.9 billion of loans, a $2.3 billion or a 21.3% increase from the prior year. The higher level of originations was largely driven by a 46% increase in multi-family originations, offset by declines in each of the other loan segments.
Multi-Family Loans
Multi-family loans are our principal asset. The loans we produce are primarily secured by non-luxury residential apartment buildings in New York City that feature rent-regulated units and below-market rents-a market we refer to as our “primary lending niche.” Consistent with our emphasis on multi-family lending, multi-family loan originations represented $8.7 billion, or 67.8%, of the loans we produced for investment in 2020.
At December 31, 2020, multi-family loans represented $32.2 billion, or 75.3%, of total loans held for investment, reflecting a year-over-year increase of $1.1 billion, or 3.5%. The multi-family portfolio has an average principal balance of $6.6 million and a weighted average life of 2.3 years at December 31, 2020 compared to $6.4 million and 2.0 years, respectively, at December 31, 2019.
The majority of our multi-family loans were secured by rental apartment buildings.
At December 31, 2020, $26.5 billion or 82.1% of the Company’s total multi-family loan portfolio is secured by properties in New York State and, therefore, are subject to the new rent regulation laws. The weighted average LTV of the NYS rent regulated multi-family portfolio was 54.08% as of December 31, 2020, compared to a weighted average LTV of 57.26% for the entire multi-family loan portfolio at that date.
In addition to underwriting multi-family loans on the basis of the buildings’ income and condition, we consider the borrowers’ credit history, profitability, and building management expertise. Borrowers are required to present evidence of their ability to repay the loan from the buildings’ current rent rolls, their financial statements, and related documents.
While a percentage of our multi-family loans are ten-year fixed rate credits, the vast majority of our multi-family loans feature a term of ten or twelve years, with a fixed rate of interest for the first five or seven years of the loan, and an alternative rate of interest in years six through ten or eight through twelve. The rate charged in the first five or seven years is generally based on intermediate-term interest rates plus a spread.
During the remaining years, the loan resets to an annually adjustable rate that is tied to the prime rate of interest, plus a spread. Alternately, the borrower may opt for a fixed rate that is tied to the five-year fixed advance rate of the FHLB-NY, plus a spread. The fixed-rate option also requires the payment of one percentage point of the then-outstanding loan balance. In either case, the minimum rate at repricing is equivalent to the rate in the initial five-or seven-year term. As the rent roll increases, the typical property owner seeks to refinance the mortgage, and generally does so before the loan reprices in year six or eight.
Multi-family loans that refinance within the first five or seven years are typically subject to an established prepayment penalty schedule. Depending on the remaining term of the loan at the time of prepayment, the penalties normally range from five percentage points to one percentage point of the then-current loan balance. If a loan extends past the fifth or seventh year and the borrower selects the fixed-rate option, the prepayment penalties typically reset to a range of five points to one point over years six through ten or eight through twelve. For example, a ten-year multi-family loan that prepays in year three would generally be expected to pay a prepayment penalty equal to three percentage points of the remaining principal balance. A twelve-year multi-family loan that prepays in year one or two would generally be expected to pay a penalty equal to five percentage points.
Because prepayment penalties are recorded as interest income, they are reflected in the average yields on our loans and interest-earning assets, our net interest rate spread and net interest margin, and the level of net interest income we record. No assumptions are involved in the recognition of prepayment income, as such income is only recorded when cash is received.
Our success as a multi-family lender partly reflects the solid relationships we have developed with the market’s leading mortgage brokers, who are familiar with our lending practices, our underwriting standards, and our long-standing practice of basing our loans on the cash flows produced by the properties. The process of producing such loans is generally four to six weeks in duration and, because the multi-family market is largely broker-driven, the expense incurred in sourcing such loans is substantially reduced.
Our emphasis on multi-family loans is driven by several factors, including their structure, which reduces our exposure to interest rate volatility to some degree. Another factor driving our focus on multi-family lending has been the comparative quality of the loans we produce. Reflecting the nature of the buildings securing our loans, our underwriting standards, and the generally conservative LTV ratios our multi-family loans feature at
origination, a relatively small percentage of the multi-family loans that have transitioned to non-performing status have actually resulted in losses, even when the credit cycle has taken a downward turn.
We primarily underwrite our multi-family loans based on the current cash flows produced by the collateral property, with a reliance on the “income” approach to appraising the properties, rather than the “sales” approach. The sales approach is subject to fluctuations in the real estate market, as well as general economic conditions, and is therefore likely to be more risky in the event of a downward credit cycle turn. We also consider a variety of other factors, including the physical condition of the underlying property; the net operating income of the mortgaged premises prior to debt service; the DSCR, which is the ratio of the property’s net operating income to its debt service; and the ratio of the loan amount to the appraised value (i.e., the LTV) of the property.
In addition to requiring a minimum DSCR of 120% on multi-family buildings, we obtain a security interest in the personal property located on the premises, and an assignment of rents and leases. Our multi-family loans generally represent no more than 75% of the lower of the appraised value or the sales price of the underlying property, and typically feature an amortization period of 30 years. In addition, our multi-family loans may contain an initial interest-only period which typically does not exceed two years; however, these loans are underwritten on a fully amortizing basis.
Accordingly, while our multi-family lending niche has not been immune to downturns in the credit cycle, the limited number of losses we have recorded, even in adverse credit cycles, suggests that the multi-family loans we produce involve less credit risk than certain other types of loans. In general, buildings that are subject to rent regulation have tended to be stable, with occupancy levels remaining more or less constant over time. Because the rents are typically below market and the buildings securing our loans are generally maintained in good condition, they have been more likely to retain their tenants in adverse economic times. In addition, we exclude any short-term property tax exemptions and abatement benefits the property owners receive when we underwrite our multi-family loans.
Commercial Real Estate Loans
At December 31, 2020, CRE loans represented $6.8 billion, or 16.0%, of total loans held for investment, reflecting a year-over-year decrease of $246.1 million or 3.5% compared to December 31, 2019. The average CRE loan had a principal balance of $6.7 million at the end of this December, as compared to $6.6 million at the prior year-end. In addition, the portfolio had an expected weighted average life of 2.4 years and 2.3 years at the corresponding dates.
CRE loans represented $958.2 million, or 7.5%, of the loans we originated in 2020, as compared to $1.2 billion, or 11.6%, in the prior year.
The CRE loans we produce are secured by income-producing properties such as office buildings, retail centers, mixed-use buildings, and multi-tenanted light industrial properties. At December 31, 2020, 85.3% of our CRE loans were secured by properties in the metro New York City area, while properties in other parts of New York State accounted for 2.3% of the properties securing our CRE credits, while all other states accounted for 12.4%, combined.
The terms of our CRE loans are similar to the terms of our multi-family credits. While a small percentage of our CRE loans feature ten-year fixed-rate terms, they primarily feature a fixed rate of interest for the first five or seven years of the loan that is generally based on intermediate-term interest rates plus a spread. During years six through ten or eight through twelve, the loan resets to an annually adjustable rate that is tied to the prime rate of interest, plus a spread. Alternately, the borrower may opt for a fixed rate that is tied to the five-year fixed advance rate of the FHLB-NY plus a spread. The fixed-rate option also requires the payment of an amount equal to one percentage point of the then-outstanding loan balance. In either case, the minimum rate at repricing is equivalent to the rate in the initial five- or seven-year term.
Prepayment penalties apply to our CRE loans, as they do our multi-family credits. Depending on the remaining term of the loan at the time of prepayment, the penalties normally range from five percentage points
to one percentage point of the then-current loan balance. If a loan extends past the fifth or seventh year and the borrower selects the fixed rate option, the prepayment penalties typically reset to a range of five points to one point over years six through ten or eight through twelve. Our CRE loans tend to refinance within two to three years of origination, as reflected in the expected weighted average life of the CRE portfolio noted above.
The repayment of loans secured by commercial real estate is often dependent on the successful operation and management of the underlying properties. To minimize our credit risk, we originate CRE loans in adherence with conservative underwriting standards, and require that such loans qualify on the basis of the property’s current income stream and DSCR. The approval of a loan also depends on the borrower’s credit history, profitability, and expertise in property management, and generally requires a minimum DSCR of 130% and a maximum LTV of 65%. In addition, the origination of CRE loans typically requires a security interest in the fixtures, equipment, and other personal property of the borrower and/or an assignment of the rents and/or leases. In addition, our CRE loans may contain an interest-only period which typically does not exceed three years; however, these loans are underwritten on a fully amortizing basis.
Specialty Finance Loans and Leases
At December 31, 2020, specialty finance loans and leases totaled $3.0 billion or 7.1% of total loans held for investment, up $429.7 million or 16.6% compared to December 31, 2019.
We produce our specialty finance loans and leases through a subsidiary that is staffed by a group of industry veterans with expertise in originating and underwriting senior securitized debt and equipment loans and leases. The subsidiary participates in syndicated loans that are brought to them, and equipment loans and leases that are assigned to them, by a select group of nationally recognized sources, and are generally made to large corporate obligors, many of which are publicly traded, carry investment grade or near-investment grade ratings, and participate in stable industries nationwide.
The specialty finance loans and leases we fund fall into three categories: asset-based lending, dealer floor-plan lending, and equipment loan and lease financing. Each of these credits is secured with a perfected first security interest in, or outright ownership of, the underlying collateral, and structured as senior debt or as a non-cancelable lease. Asset-based and dealer floor-plan loans are priced at floating rates predominately tied to LIBOR, while our equipment financing credits are priced at fixed rates at a spread over Treasuries.
During 2020, the Company originated $2.7 billion of specialty finance loans and leases, representing 21.0% of total originations compared to $2.8 billion during 2019, representing 26.4% of total originations.
Since launching our specialty finance business in the third quarter of 2013, no losses have been recorded on any of the loans or leases in this portfolio.
C&I Loans
In the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, C&I loans declined $26.8 million or 6.3% to $393.3 million, or 0.9% of total loans, and represented $393.0 million or 3.1% of the held-for-investment loans we produced.
In contrast to the loans produced by our specialty finance subsidiary, the C&I loans we produce are primarily made to small and mid-size businesses in the five boroughs of New York City and on Long Island. Such loans are tailored to meet the specific needs of our borrowers, and include term loans, demand loans, revolving lines of credit, and, to a much lesser extent, loans that are partly guaranteed by the Small Business Administration.
A broad range of C&I loans, both collateralized and unsecured, are made available to businesses for working capital (including inventory and accounts receivable), business expansion, the purchase of machinery and equipment, and other general corporate needs. In determining the term and structure of C&I loans, several factors are considered, including the purpose, the collateral, and the anticipated sources of repayment. C&I loans
are typically secured by business assets and personal guarantees of the borrower, and include financial covenants to monitor the borrower’s financial stability.
The interest rates on our C&I loans can be fixed or floating, with floating-rate loans being tied to prime or some other market index, plus an applicable spread. Our floating-rate loans may or may not feature a floor rate of interest. The decision to require a floor on C&I loans depends on the level of competition we face for such loans from other institutions, the direction of market interest rates, and the profitability of our relationship with the borrower.
Acquisition, Development, and Construction Loans
At December 31, 2020, ADC loans represented $89.8 million, or 0.2%, of total loans held for investment, as compared to $200.6 million, or 0.5%, at the prior year-end. Originations of ADC loans totaled $35.1 million in 2020, down from $91.4 million at December 31, 2019.
Because ADC loans are generally considered to have a higher degree of credit risk, especially during a downturn in the credit cycle, borrowers are required to provide a guarantee of repayment and completion. In the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we did not recover any losses against guarantees. The risk of loss on an ADC loan is largely dependent upon the accuracy of the initial appraisal of the property’s value upon completion of construction; the developer’s experience; the estimated cost of construction, including interest; and the estimated time to complete and/or sell or lease such property.
When applicable, as a condition to closing an ADC loan, it is our practice to require that properties meet pre-sale or pre-lease requirements prior to funding.
One-to-Four Family Loans
At December 31, 2020, one-to-four family loans represented $236.0 million, or 0.6%, of total loans held for investment, as compared to $380.4 million, or 0.91%, at the prior year-end. These loan balances include certain mixed-use CRE loans with less than five residential units being classified as one-to-four family loans. Other than these types of loans, we do not currently expect to originate traditional one-to-four family loans.
Other Loans
At December 31, 2020, other loans totaled $6.5 million and consisted primarily of consumer loans, most of which were overdraft loans and loans to non-profit organizations. We currently do not offer home equity loans or lines of credit.
Lending Authority
The loans we originate for investment are subject to federal and state laws and regulations, and are underwritten in accordance with loan underwriting policies approved by the Management Credit Committee, the Commercial Credit Committee and the Mortgage and Real Estate and Credit Committees of the Board, and the Board of Directors of the Bank.
All multifamily, CRE, ADC, and Specialty Finance loans regardless of amount and C&I loans in excess of $3.0 million are required to be presented to the Management Credit Committee for approval. Multifamily, CRE and C&I loans in excess of $5.0 million in new dollars to NYCB and Specialty Finance in excess of $15.0 million are also required to be presented to the Commercial Credit Committee and the Mortgage and Real Estate Committee of the Board, as applicable. All C&I loans less than or equal to $3.0 million are approved by the joint authority of lending officers.
All mortgage loans in excess of $50.0 million, Specialty Finance loans in excess of $15.0 million and all other C&I loans in excess of $5.0 million require approval by the Mortgage and Real Estate Committee or the
Credit Committee of the Board, as applicable. In addition, all loans of $20.0 million or more originated by the Bank continue to be reported to the Board of Directors.
The various Committees have authority to direct changes in lending practices as they deem necessary or appropriate in order to address individual or aggregate risks and credit exposures in accordance with the Bank’s strategic objectives and risk appetites.
In 2020, 252 loans greater than $10.0 million were originated by the Bank, with an aggregate loan balance of $7.5 billion at origination. In 2019, by comparison, 146 loans greater than $10.0 million were originated, with an aggregate loan balance at origination of $4.1 billion.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the largest mortgage loan in our portfolio was a $329.0 million multi-family loan, which is collateralized by six properties located in Brooklyn, New York. As of the date of this report, the loan has been current since origination.
Geographical Analysis of the Portfolio of Loans Held for Investment
The following table presents a geographical analysis of the multi-family and CRE loans in our held-for-investment loan portfolio at December 31, 2020:
At December 31, 2020, the majority of our other loans held for investment, excluding specialty finance loans and leases, were secured by properties and/or businesses located in Metro New York.
Loan Maturity and Repricing Analysis: Loans Held for Investment
The following table sets forth the maturity or period to repricing of our portfolio of loans held for investment at December 31, 2020. Loans that have adjustable rates are shown as being due in the period during which their interest rates are next subject to change.
The following table sets forth, as of December 31, 2020, the dollar amount of all loans held for investment that are due after December 31, 2021, and indicates whether such loans have fixed or adjustable rates of interest:
Loans Held for Sale
At December 31, 2020, we had $117.1 million of loans held for sale. This balance consists entirely of Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loans. The Company is a participant in the Small Business Administration Paycheck Protection Program, a loan program established to help consumers and small businesses. The original funding was fully allocated by mid-April, and additional funding was made available on April 24, 2020, under the Paycheck Protection Program and Health Care Enhancement Act and an additional round of financing resumed in January 2021. We did not have any loans held for sale as of December 31, 2019.
Loan Origination Analysis
The following table summarizes our production of loans held for investment in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Loan Portfolio Analysis
The following table summarizes the composition of our loan portfolio at each year-end for the five years ended December 31, 2020:
Outstanding Loan Commitments
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had outstanding loan commitments of $2.5 billion and $2.0 billion, respectively. We also had commitments to issue letters of credit totaling $375.9 million and $509.9 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The fees we collect in connection with the issuance of letters of credit are included in “Fee income” in the Consolidated Statements of Income and Comprehensive Income.
The letters of credit we issue consist of performance stand-by, financial stand-by, and commercial letters of credit. Financial stand-by letters of credit primarily are issued for the benefit of other financial institutions, municipalities, or landlords on behalf of certain of our current borrowers, and obligate us to guarantee payment of a specified financial obligation. Performance stand-by letters of credit are primarily issued for the benefit of local municipalities on behalf of certain of our borrowers. Performance letters of credit obligate us to make payments in the event that a specified third party fails to perform under non-financial contractual obligations. Commercial letters of credit act as a means of ensuring payment to a seller upon shipment of goods to a buyer. Although commercial letters of credit are used to effect payment for domestic transactions, the majority are used to settle payments in international trade. Typically, such letters of credit require the presentation of documents that describe the commercial transaction, and provide evidence of shipment and the transfer of title.
For more information about our outstanding loan commitments and commitments to issue letters of credit at the end of this December, see the discussion of “Liquidity” later in this discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations.
Asset Quality
Loans Held for Investment and Repossessed Assets
Total NPAs were $46.1 million or 0.08% of total assets at December 31, 2020, down 37.3% or $27.4 million compared to $73.5 million or 0.14% of total assets at December 31, 2019. Total non-accrual mortgage loans declined $4.1 million to $17.9 million, while other non-accrual loans, consisting mainly of taxi medallion-related loans, declined $19.4 million to $19.9 million compared to $39.3 million at December 31, 2019. Included in these amounts were non-accrual taxi medallion-related loans of $18.6 million and $30.4 million, respectively.
Repossessed assets totaled $8.3 million, down $4.0 million or 32.2% compared to the balance at December 31, 2019. As is the case with other non-accrual loans, the majority of the Company’s repossessed assets consist of taxi medallions. Taxi medallions represented $6.5 million of total repossessed assets at December 31, 2020 compared to $10.3 million at December 31, 2019.
The following table presents our non-performing loans by loan type and the changes in the respective balances from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020:
(1)
Includes $18.6 million and $30.4 million of non-accrual taxi medallion-related loans at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
At the end of this December, taxi medallion-related loans totaled $25.1 million, representing 0.06% of our total held-for-investment loan portfolio. Last December, taxi medallion-related loans totaled $55.0 million, representing 0.18% of our total held-for-investment loan portfolio
The following table sets forth the changes in non-performing loans over the twelve months ended December 31, 2020:
A loan generally is classified as a “non-accrual” loan when it is 90 days or more past due or when it is deemed to be impaired because we no longer expect to collect all amounts due according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement. When a loan is placed on non-accrual status, we cease the accrual of interest owed, and previously accrued interest is reversed and charged against interest income. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, all of our non-performing loans were non-accrual loans. A loan is generally returned to accrual status when the loan is current and we have reasonable assurance that the loan will be fully collectible.
We monitor non-accrual loans both within and beyond our primary lending area in the same manner. Monitoring loans generally involves inspecting and re-appraising the collateral properties; holding discussions with the principals and managing agents of the borrowing entities and/or retained legal counsel, as applicable; requesting financial, operating, and rent roll information; confirming that hazard insurance is in place or force-placing such insurance; monitoring tax payment status and advancing funds as needed; and appointing a receiver, whenever possible, to collect rents, manage the operations, provide information, and maintain the collateral properties.
It is our policy to order updated appraisals for all non-performing loans, irrespective of loan type, that are collateralized by multi-family buildings, CRE properties, or land, in the event that such a loan is 90 days or more past due, and if the most recent appraisal on file for the property is more than one year old. Appraisals are ordered annually until such time as the loan becomes performing and is returned to accrual status. It is not our policy to obtain updated appraisals for performing loans. However, appraisals may be ordered for performing loans when a borrower requests an increase in the loan amount, a modification in loan terms, or an extension of a maturing loan. We do not analyze current LTVs on a portfolio-wide basis.
Non-performing loans are reviewed regularly by management and discussed on a monthly basis with the Mortgage Committee, the Credit Committee, and the Board of Directors of the Bank, as applicable. In accordance with our charge-off policy, collateral-dependent non-performing loans are written down to their current appraised values, less certain transaction costs. Workout specialists from our Loan Workout Unit actively pursue borrowers who are delinquent in repaying their loans in an effort to collect payment. In addition, outside counsel with experience in foreclosure proceedings are retained to institute such action with regard to such borrowers.
Properties and other assets that are acquired through foreclosure are classified as repossessed assets, and are recorded at fair value at the date of acquisition, less the estimated cost of selling the property. Subsequent declines in the fair value of the assets are charged to earnings and are included in non-interest expense. It is our policy to require an appraisal and an environmental assessment of properties classified as OREO before foreclosure, and to re-appraise the properties on an as-needed basis, and not less than annually, until they are sold. We dispose of such properties as quickly and prudently as possible, given current market conditions and the property’s condition.
To mitigate the potential for credit losses, we underwrite our loans in accordance with credit standards that we consider to be prudent. In the case of multi-family and CRE loans, we look first at the consistency of the cash flows being generated by the property to determine its economic value using the “income approach,” and then at the market value of the property that collateralizes the loan. The amount of the loan is then based on the lower of the two values, with the economic value more typically used.
The condition of the collateral property is another critical factor. Multi-family buildings and CRE properties are inspected from rooftop to basement as a prerequisite to approval, with a member of the Mortgage or Credit Committee participating in inspections on multi-family loans to be originated in excess of $7.5 million, and a member of the Mortgage or Credit Committee participating in inspections on CRE loans to be originated in excess of $4.0 million. Furthermore, independent appraisers, whose appraisals are carefully reviewed by our experienced in-house appraisal officers and staff, perform appraisals on collateral properties. In many cases, a second independent appraisal review is performed.
In addition, we work with a select group of mortgage brokers who are familiar with our credit standards and whose track record with our lending officers is typically greater than ten years. Furthermore, in New York City, where the majority of the buildings securing our multi-family loans are located, the rents that tenants may be charged on certain apartments are typically restricted under certain rent-control or rent-stabilization laws. As a result, the rents that tenants pay for such apartments are generally lower than current market rents. Buildings with a preponderance of such rent-regulated apartments are less likely to experience vacancies in times of economic adversity.
Reflecting the strength of the underlying collateral for these loans and the collateral structure, a relatively small percentage of our non-performing multi-family loans have resulted in losses over time.
To further manage our credit risk, our lending policies limit the amount of credit granted to any one borrower, and typically require minimum DSCRs of 120% for multi-family loans and 130% for CRE loans. Although we typically lend up to 75% of the appraised value on multi-family buildings and up to 65% on commercial properties, the average LTVs of such credits at origination were below those amounts at December 31, 2020. Exceptions to these LTV limitations are minimal and are reviewed on a case-by-case basis.
The repayment of loans secured by commercial real estate is often dependent on the successful operation and management of the underlying properties. To minimize our credit risk, we originate CRE loans in adherence with conservative underwriting standards, and require that such loans qualify on the basis of the property’s current income stream and DSCR. The approval of a CRE loan also depends on the borrower’s credit history, profitability, and expertise in property management. Given that our CRE loans are underwritten in accordance with underwriting standards that are similar to those applicable to our multi-family credits, the percentage of our non-performing CRE loans that have resulted in losses has been comparatively small over time.
Multi-family and CRE loans are generally originated at conservative LTVs and DSCRs, as previously stated. Low LTVs provide a greater likelihood of full recovery and reduce the possibility of incurring a severe loss on a credit; in many cases, they reduce the likelihood of the borrower “walking away” from the property. Although borrowers may default on loan payments, they have a greater incentive to protect their equity in the collateral property and to return their loans to performing status. Furthermore, in the case of multi-family loans, the cash flows generated by the properties are generally below-market and have significant value.
With regard to ADC loans, we typically lend up to 75% of the estimated as-completed market value of multi-family and residential tract projects; however, in the case of home construction loans to individuals, the limit is 80%. With respect to commercial construction loans, we typically lend up to 65% of the estimated as-completed market value of the property. Credit risk is also managed through the loan disbursement process. Loan proceeds are disbursed periodically in increments as construction progresses, and as warranted by inspection reports provided to us by our own lending officers and/or consulting engineers.
To minimize the risk involved in specialty finance lending and leasing, each of our credits is secured with a perfected first security interest or outright ownership in the underlying collateral, and structured as senior debt or as a non-cancellable lease. To further minimize the risk involved in specialty finance lending and leasing, we re-underwrite each transaction. In addition, we retain outside counsel to conduct a further review of the underlying documentation.
Other C&I loans are typically underwritten on the basis of the cash flows produced by the borrower’s business, and are generally collateralized by various business assets, including, but not limited to, inventory, equipment, and accounts receivable. As a result, the capacity of the borrower to repay is substantially dependent on the degree to which the business is successful. Furthermore, the collateral underlying the loan may depreciate over time, may not be conducive to appraisal, and may fluctuate in value, based upon the operating results of the business. Accordingly, personal guarantees are also a normal requirement for other C&I loans.
The procedures we follow with respect to delinquent loans are generally consistent across all categories, with late charges assessed, and notices mailed to the borrower, at specified dates. We attempt to reach the borrower by telephone to ascertain the reasons for delinquency and the prospects for repayment. When contact is made with a borrower at any time prior to foreclosure or recovery against collateral property, we attempt to obtain full payment, and will consider a repayment schedule to avoid taking such action. Delinquencies are addressed by our Loan Workout Unit and every effort is made to collect rather than initiate foreclosure proceedings.
The following table presents our loans 30 to 89 days past due by loan type and the changes in the respective balances from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2019:
Fair values for all multi-family buildings, CRE properties, and land are determined based on the appraised value. If an appraisal is more than one year old and the loan is classified as either non-performing or as an accruing TDR, then an updated appraisal is required to determine fair value. Estimated disposition costs are deducted from the fair value of the property to determine estimated net realizable value. In the instance of an outdated appraisal on an impaired loan, we adjust the original appraisal by using a third-party index value to determine the extent of impairment until an updated appraisal is received.
While we strive to originate loans that will perform fully, adverse economic and market conditions, among other factors, can negatively impact a borrower’s ability to repay. Historically, our level of charge-offs has been relatively low in downward credit cycles, even when the volume of non-performing loans has increased. In 2020, we recorded net charge-offs of $18.8 million, as compared to net charge-offs of $19.3 million in the prior year. Taxi medallion-related net charge-offs accounted for $11.9 million of this year’s amount and $10.2 million of last year’s amount.
Partially reflecting the net charge-offs noted above, and the provision of $63.3 million for the allowance for loan losses, the allowance for losses on loans increased $46.4 million, equaling $194.0 million at the end of this December from $147.6 million at December 31, 2019. Reflecting the decrease in non-performing loans cited earlier in this discussion, the allowance for credit losses represented 513.55% of non-performing loans at December 31, 2020, as compared to 241.07% at the prior year-end.
Based upon all relevant and available information at the end of this December, management believes that the allowance for losses on loans was appropriate at that date.
The following table presents information about our five largest non-performing loans at December 31, 2020:
(1)
There are no funds available for further advances on the five largest non-performing loans.
(2)
Loan is a Troubled Debt Restructure.
The following is a description of the five loans identified in the preceding table. It should be noted that allocations for the loan loss allowance was not required for any loan listed, as determined by using the present value of expected cash flows method in ASC 310-10-35.
No. 1 -
The borrower is an owner of real estate and is based in New York. The loan is collateralized by an 8,566 square foot, retail condo unit located in New York, New York.
No. 2 -
The borrower is an owner of real estate and is based in New Jersey. The loan is collateralized by two contiguous multi-family buildings containing 44 residential units and 4 commercial units, located in Atlantic City, NJ. An updated appraisal has been ordered.
No. 3 -
The borrower is an owner of a finance company in New York. The loan is collateralized by various taxi medallions in New York, and Chicago, Illinois.
No. 4 -
The borrower is an owner of real estate and is based in New York. This loan is collateralized by a 19,508 square foot commercial building in Woodhaven, New York.
No. 5 -
The borrower is an owner of real estate and is based in New York. This loan is collateralized by a four story, multi-family building containing 8 residential units located in Brooklyn, NY.
Troubled Debt Restructurings
In an effort to proactively manage delinquent loans, we have selectively extended such concessions as rate reductions and extensions of maturity dates, as well as forbearance agreements, to certain borrowers who have experienced financial difficulty. In accordance with GAAP, we are required to account for such loan modifications or restructurings as TDRs.
The eligibility of a borrower for work-out concessions of any nature depends upon the facts and circumstances of each transaction, which may change from period to period, and involve management’s judgment regarding the likelihood that the concession will result in the maximum recovery for the Company.
Loans modified as TDRs are placed on non-accrual status until we determine that future collection of principal and interest is reasonably assured. This generally requires that the borrower demonstrate performance according to the restructured terms for at least six consecutive months.
At December 31, 2020, loans modified as TDRs totaled $34.3 million, including accruing loans of $15.0 million and non-accrual loans of $19.3 million. At the prior year-end, loans modified as TDRs totaled $40.5 million, including accruing loans of $1.3 million and non-accrual loans of $39.2 million.
Analysis of Troubled Debt Restructurings
The following table sets forth the changes in our TDRs over the twelve months ended December 31, 2020:
Loans on which concessions were made with respect to rate reductions and/or extensions of maturity dates totaled $18.1 million and $32.7 million, respectively, at December 31, 2020 and 2019; loans in connection with which forbearance agreements were reached amounted to $16.2 million and $7.8 million at the respective dates.
Based on the number of loans performing in accordance with their revised terms, our success rate for restructured CRE loans was 100%; for one-to-four loans it was 33% at the end of this December; our success rate for other loans was 18%, at that date.
On a limited basis, we may provide additional credit to a borrower after the loan has been placed on non-accrual status or modified as a TDR if, in management’s judgment, the value of the property after the additional loan funding is greater than the initial value of the property plus the additional loan funding amount. In 2020, no such additional credit was provided. Furthermore, the terms of our restructured loans typically would not restrict us from cancelling outstanding commitments for other credit facilities to a borrower in the event of non-payment of a restructured loan.
For additional information about our TDRs at December 31, 2020 and 2019, see the discussion of “Asset Quality” in Note 5, “Loans and Leases” in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Except for the non-accrual loans and TDRs disclosed in this filing, we did not have any potential problem loans at December 31, 2020 that would have caused management to have serious doubts as to the ability of a borrower to comply with present loan repayment terms and that would have resulted in such disclosure if that were the case.
Loan Deferrals
Under U.S. GAAP, banks are required to assess modifications to a loan’s terms for potential classification as a TDR. A loan to a borrower experiencing financial difficulty is classified as a TDR when a lender grants a concession that it would otherwise not consider, such as a payment deferral or interest concession. In order to encourage banks to work with impacted borrowers, the CARES Act and bank regulators have provided relief from TDR accounting. The main benefits of TDR relief include a capital benefit in the form of reduced risk-weighted assets, as TDRs are more heavily risk-weighted for capital purposes; aging of the loans is frozen, i.e., they will continue to be reported in the same delinquency bucket they were in at the time of modification; and the loans are generally not reported as non-accrual during the modification period.
Under the CARES Act, the Company made the election to deem that loan modifications do not result in TDRs if they are (1) related to the novel coronavirus disease (“COVID-19”); (2) executed on a loan that was not more than 30 days past due as of December 31, 2019; and (3) executed between March 1, 2020, and the earlier of (A) 60 days after the date of termination of the COVID-19 national emergency declaration or (B) December 31, 2020. In December 2020, Congress amended the CARES Act through the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021, which provided additional COVID-19 relief to American families and businesses, including extending TDR relief under the CARES Act until the earlier of December 31, 2021, or 60 days following the termination of the national emergency.
During the second quarter of 2020, the Company implemented various loan modification programs with some of its borrowers, in accordance with the CARES Act and interagency regulatory guidance. These modifications were primarily full payment deferrals for an initial six month period, with the ability to extend again at the end of the deferral period, at the Bank’s discretion. Most of these deferrals were entered into during April and May, and were therefore, they were eligible to come off of their deferral period beginning in the fourth quarter of 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, multi-family and CRE full payment (interest and principal) deferrals totaled $80.4 million or 0.2% of their respective portfolios, compared to $5.9 billion, or 15.5% of their respective portfolios as of June 30, 2020. Additionally, the Bank entered into $2.5 billion of principal-only deferrals with borrowers, under essentially the same terms as the full-payment deferral program, except that these borrowers are paying the interest due each on their loans, while deferring the principal. Including these principal-only deferrals, total multi-family and CRE deferrals were $2.6 billion at December 31, 2020 or 6.5% of their respective portfolios, and 6.1% of the entire loan portfolio.
As of December 31, 2020, 99.8% of these deferrals returned to payment status, while the remaining 0.2% or $14.1 million have come off deferral but are still due for their first payment. We continue to work with these borrowers on a case-by-case basis to provide additional assistance, if needed, in line with regulatory guidance and the CARES Act.
The following tables reflect, as of December 31, 2020 the aggregate amount of full-payment multi-family and CRE deferred loans by various categories:
Additionally, the allowance for credit losses on accrued interest receivable on loans, including loans in the deferral program, was $1.0 million, as of December 31, 2020.
Asset Quality Analysis
The following table presents information regarding our consolidated allowance for losses on loans, our non-performing assets, and our loans 30 to 89 days past due at each year-end in the five years ended December 31, 2020. The 2016 amounts exclude covered loans, covered OREO, and non-covered Purchased Credit-impaired (“PCI”) loans.
Covered loans and non-covered PCI loans are considered to be performing due to the application of the yield accretion method. Therefore, covered loans and non-covered PCI loans are not reflected in the amounts or ratios provided in this table.
(1)
The December 31, 2016 amounts exclude loans 90 days or more past due of $131.5 million, that are covered by FDIC loss sharing agreements. The December 31, 2016 amount also excludes $869,000 of non-covered PCI loans.
(2)
The December 31, 2016 amount excludes OREO of $17.0 million that were covered by FDIC loss sharing agreements.
(3)
Average loans for 2016 includes covered loans.
(4)
The December 31, 2016 amount excludes loans 30 to 89 days past due of $22.6 million that are covered by FDIC loss sharing agreements. The December 31, 2016 amount also excludes $6,000 of non-covered PCI loans. There were no non-covered PCI loans 30 to 89 days past due at any of the prior year-ends.
The following table sets forth the allocation of the consolidated allowance for losses on loans, excluding the allowance for losses on non-covered PCI loans, at each year-end for the five years ended December 31, 2020:
Each of the preceding allocations was based upon an estimate of various factors, as discussed in “Critical Accounting Policies” earlier in this report, and a different allocation methodology may be deemed to be more appropriate in the future. In addition, it should be noted that the portion of the allowance for losses on non-covered loans allocated to each non-covered loan category does not represent the total amount available to absorb losses that may occur within that category, since the total loan loss allowance is available for the entire non-covered loan portfolio.
The following table presents a geographical analysis of our non-performing loans at December 31, 2020:
Securities
Total securities were $5.8 billion, or 10.4%, of total assets at the end of this December, as compared to $5.9 billion, or 11.0%, of total assets at December 31, 2019. During the second quarter of 2017, we reclassified our entire securities portfolio as “Available-for-Sale”. Accordingly, at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, we had no securities designated as “Held-to-Maturity”. At December 31, 2020, 29% of the securities portfolio was tied to floating rates, 28% of which is currently at floating rates, mainly one and three month LIBOR and prime.
At December 31, 2020, available-for-sale securities were $5.8 billion and had an estimated weighted average life of 4.9 years. Included in the year-end amount were mortgage-related securities of $3.0 billion and other debt securities of $2.8 billion.
At the prior year-end, available-for-sale securities were $5.9 billion, and had an estimated weighted average life of 4.4 years. Mortgage-related securities accounted for $3.4 billion of the year-end balance, with other debt securities accounting for the remaining $2.5 billion.
The investment policies of the Company and the Bank are established by the Board of Directors and implemented by the ALCO. ALCO meets monthly or on an as-needed basis to review the portfolios and specific capital market transactions. In addition, the securities portfolios and investment activities are reviewed monthly by the Board of Directors. Furthermore, the policy governing the investment portfolio activities is reviewed at least annually by the ALCO and ratified by the Board of Directors.
Our general investment strategy is to purchase liquid investments with various maturities to ensure that our overall interest rate risk position stays within the required limits of our investment policies. We generally limit our investments to GSE obligations and U.S. Treasury obligations. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, GSE obligations and U.S. Treasury obligations together represented 81.9% and 82.6% of total securities, respectively. The remainder of the portfolio at those dates was comprised of corporate bonds, foreign notes, capital trust notes, asset-backed securities, and municipal obligations.
Federal Home Loan Bank Stock
As a member of the FHLB-NY, the Bank is required to acquire and hold shares of its capital stock. At December 31, 2020, the Bank held FHLB-NY stock in the amount of $714.0 million. At December 31, 2019, the Bank held FHLB-NY stock in the amount of $647.6 million. Dividends from the FHLB-NY to the Bank totaled $36.3 million and $39.5 million, respectively, in 2020 and 2019.
Bank-Owned Life Insurance
BOLI is recorded at the total cash surrender value of the policies in the Consolidated Statements of Condition, and the income generated by the increase in the cash surrender value of the policies is recorded in “Non-interest income” in the Consolidated Statements of Income and Comprehensive Income. Reflecting an increase in the cash
surrender value of the underlying policies, our investment in BOLI rose $19.1 million year-over-year to $1.2 billion at December 31, 2020.
Goodwill
We record goodwill in our consolidated statements of condition in connection with certain of our business combinations. Goodwill, which is tested at least annually for impairment, refers to the difference between the purchase price and the fair value of an acquired company’s assets, net of the liabilities assumed.
For more information about the Company’s goodwill, see the discussion of “Critical Accounting Policies” earlier in this report.
Sources of Funds
The Parent Company has four primary funding sources for the payment of dividends, share repurchases, and other corporate uses: dividends paid to the Parent Company by the Bank; capital raised through the issuance of securities; funding raised through the issuance of debt instruments; and repayments of, and income from, investment securities.
On a consolidated basis, our funding primarily stems from a combination of the following sources: retail, institutional, and brokered deposits; borrowed funds, primarily in the form of wholesale borrowings; cash flows generated through the repayment and sale of loans; and cash flows generated through the repayment and sale of securities.
In 2020, loan repayments and sales generated cash flows of $11.9 billion, as compared to $8.9 billion in 2019. Cash flows from repayments accounted for $11.9 billion and $8.8 billion of the respective totals and cash flows from sales accounted for $3.1 million and $115.3 million, of the respective totals.
In 2020, cash flows from the repayment and sale of securities respectively totaled $2.1 billion and $483.9 million, while the purchase of securities amounted to $2.5 billion for the year. By comparison, cash flows from the repayment and sale of securities totaled $2.0 billion and $361.3 million, respectively, in 2019, and were offset by the purchase of securities totaling $2.5 billion.
In 2020, the cash flows from loans and securities were primarily deployed into the production of multi-family loans held for investment, as well as held-for-investment CRE loans and specialty finance loans and leases.
Deposits
Total deposits increased $779.7 million or 2.5% on a year-over-year basis to $32.4 billion. Deposit growth was driven by growth in savings accounts and non-interest bearing accounts and offset by a decline in CDs. Compared to the fourth quarter of last year, CDs declined $3.9 billion or 27.3% to $10.3 billion, while savings accounts increased $1.6 billion or 34.2% to $6.4 billion and interest bearing checking and money market accounts increased over the same timeframe by $2.4 billion or 23.3% to $12.6 billion.
While the vast majority of our deposits are retail in nature (i.e., they are deposits we have gathered through our branches or through business combinations), institutional deposits and municipal deposits are also part of our deposit mix. Retail deposits rose $429.4 million year-over-year to $24.8 billion, while institutional deposits rose $150.1 million to $1.3 billion at year-end. Municipal deposits represented $1.0 billion of total deposits at the end of this December, a $19.5 million increase from the balance at December 31, 2019.
Depending on their availability and pricing relative to other funding sources, we also include brokered deposits in our deposit mix. Brokered deposits accounted for $5.3 billion of our deposits at the end of this December, compared to $5.2 billion at December 31, 2019. Brokered money market accounts represented $3.0 billion of total brokered deposits at December 31, 2020 and $1.5 billion at December 31, 2019; brokered interest-bearing checking accounts represented $1.3 billion and $1.2 billion, respectively, at the corresponding dates. At December 31, 2020, we had $1.0 billion of brokered CDs, compared to $2.5 billion at December 31, 2019.
Borrowed Funds
The majority of our borrowed funds are wholesale borrowings and consist of FHLB-NY advances, repurchase agreements, and federal funds purchased, and, to a lesser extent, junior subordinated debentures and subordinated notes. At December 31, 2020, total borrowed funds increased $1.5 billion or 10.5% to $16.1 billion compared to the balance at December 31, 2019. The bulk of the year-over-year increase was driven by a $1.5 billion or 11.0% increase in the balance of wholesale borrowings.
Wholesale Borrowings
Wholesale borrowings totaled $15.4 billion and $13.9 billion, respectively, at December 31, 2020 and 2019, representing 27.4% and 25.9% of total assets at the respective dates. FHLB-NY advances accounted for $14.6 billion of the year-end 2020 balance, as compared to $13.1 billion at the prior year-end. Pursuant to blanket collateral agreements with the Bank, our FHLB-NY advances and overnight advances are secured by pledges of certain eligible collateral in the form of loans and securities. (For more information regarding our FHLB-NY advances, see the discussion that appears earlier in this report regarding our membership and our ownership of stock in the FHLB-NY.) At December 31, 2020 and 2019, $8.3 billion of our wholesale borrowings had callable features.
Also included in wholesale borrowings were repurchase agreements of $800.0 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019. Repurchase agreements are contracts for the sale of securities owned or borrowed by the Bank with an agreement to repurchase those securities at agreed-upon prices and dates.
Our repurchase agreements are primarily collateralized by GSE obligations, and may be entered into with the FHLB-NY or certain brokerage firms. The brokerage firms we utilize are subject to an ongoing internal financial review to ensure that we borrow funds only from those dealers whose financial strength will minimize the risk of loss due to default. In addition, a master repurchase agreement must be executed and on file for each of the brokerage firms we use.
We had no federal funds purchased at both December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Junior Subordinated Debentures
Junior subordinated debentures totaled $360.3 million at December 31, 2020, slightly higher than the balance at the prior year-end reflecting discount accretion.
Subordinated Notes
At December 31, 2020, the balance of subordinated notes was $295.6 million, relatively unchanged from December 31, 2019.
See Note 9, “Borrowed Funds,” in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for a further discussion of our wholesale borrowings, our junior subordinated debentures and subordinated debt.
Liquidity, Contractual Obligations and Off-Balance Sheet Commitments, and Capital Position
Liquidity
We manage our liquidity to ensure that our cash flows are sufficient to support our operations, and to compensate for any temporary mismatches between sources and uses of funds caused by variable loan and deposit demand.
We monitor our liquidity daily to ensure that sufficient funds are available to meet our financial obligations. Our most liquid assets are cash and cash equivalents, which totaled $1.9 billion and $741.9 million, respectively, at December 31, 2020 and 2019. As in the past, our loan and securities portfolios provided meaningful liquidity in 2020, with cash flows from the repayment and sale of loans totaling $8.1 billion and cash flows from the repayment and sale of securities totaling $2.5 billion.
Additional liquidity stems from deposits and from our use of wholesale funding sources, including brokered deposits and wholesale borrowings. In addition, we have access to the Bank’s approved lines of credit with various
counterparties, including the FHLB-NY. The availability of these wholesale funding sources is generally based on the amount of mortgage loan collateral available under a blanket lien we have pledged to the respective institutions and, to a lesser extent, the amount of available securities that may be pledged to collateralize our borrowings. At December 31, 2020, our available borrowing capacity with the FHLB-NY was $7.3 billion. In addition, the Bank had available-for-sale securities of $5.8 billion, of which, $4.6 billion is unpledged.
Furthermore, the Bank has agreements with the FRB-NY that enable it to access the discount window as a further means of enhancing their liquidity. In connection with these agreements, the Bank has pledged certain loans and securities to collateralize any funds they may borrow. At December 31, 2020, the maximum amount the Bank could borrow from the FRB-NY was $1.1 billion. There were no borrowings against these lines of credit at December 31, 2020.
Our primary investing activity is loan production, and the volume of loans we originated for investment totaled $12.9 billion in 2020. During this time, the net cash used in investing activities totaled $1.0 billion; the net cash provided by our operating activities totaled $334.2 million. Our financing activities provided net cash of $1.9 billion.
CDs due to mature or reprice in one year or less from December 31, 2020 totaled $9.1 billion, representing 88% of total CDs at that date. Our ability to attract and retain retail deposits, including CDs, depends on numerous factors, including, among others, the convenience of our branches and our other banking channels; our customers’ satisfaction with the service they receive; the rates of interest we offer; the types of products we feature; and the attractiveness of their terms.
Our decision to compete for deposits also depends on numerous factors, including, among others, our access to deposits through acquisitions, the availability of lower-cost funding sources, the impact of competition on pricing, and the need to fund our loan demand.
The Parent Company is a separate legal entity from the Bank and must provide for its own liquidity. In addition to operating expenses and any share repurchases, the Parent Company is responsible for paying any dividends declared to our shareholders. As a Delaware corporation, the Parent Company is able to pay dividends either from surplus or, in case there is no surplus, from net profits for the fiscal year in which the dividend is declared and/or the preceding fiscal year.
The Parent Company’s ability to pay dividends may also depend, in part, upon dividends it receives from the Bank. The ability of the Bank to pay dividends and other capital distributions to the Parent Company is generally limited by New York State Banking Law and regulations, and by certain regulations of the FDIC. In addition, the Superintendent of the New York State Department of Financial Services (the “Superintendent”), the FDIC, and the FRB, for reasons of safety and soundness, may prohibit the payment of dividends that are otherwise permissible by regulations.
Under New York State Banking Law, a New York State-chartered stock-form savings bank or commercial bank may declare and pay dividends out of its net profits, unless there is an impairment of capital. However, the approval of the Superintendent is required if the total of all dividends declared in a calendar year would exceed the total of a bank’s net profits for that year, combined with its retained net profits for the preceding two years. In 2020, the Bank paid dividends totaling $380.0 million to the Parent Company, leaving $301.6 million that it could dividend to the Parent Company without regulatory approval at year-end. Additional sources of liquidity available to the Parent Company at December 31, 2020 included $151.2 million in cash and cash equivalents. If the Bank was to apply to the Superintendent for approval to make a dividend or capital distribution in excess of the dividend amounts permitted under the regulations, there can be no assurance that such application would be approved.
Contractual Obligations and Off-Balance Sheet Commitments
In the normal course of business, we enter into a variety of contractual obligations in order to manage our assets and liabilities, fund loan growth, operate our branch network, and address our capital needs.
For example, we offer CDs with contractual terms to our customers, and borrow funds under contract from the FHLB-NY and various brokerage firms. These contractual obligations are reflected in the Consolidated Statements of Condition under “Deposits” and “Borrowed funds,” respectively. At December 31, 2020, we had CDs of $10.3 billion and long-term debt (defined as borrowed funds with an original maturity one year or more) of $13.8 billion.
We also are obligated under certain non-cancelable operating leases on the buildings and land we use in operating our branch network and in performing our back-office responsibilities. These obligations are included in the Consolidated Statements of Condition and totaled $351.0 million at December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations
The following table sets forth the maturity profile of the aforementioned contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
(1)
Includes FHLB advances, repurchase agreements, junior subordinated debentures, and subordinated notes.
(2)
Excludes imputed interest of $84.2 million.
At December 31, 2020, we also had commitments to extend credit in the form of mortgage and other loan originations, as well as commercial, performance stand-by, and financial stand-by letters of credit, totaling $2.9 billion. These off-balance sheet commitments consist of agreements to extend credit, as long as there is no violation of any condition established in the contract under which the loan is made. Commitments generally have fixed expiration dates or other termination clauses and may require the payment of a fee.
The following table summarizes our off-balance sheet commitments to extend credit in the form of loans and letters of credit at December 31, 2020:
(1)
Includes unadvanced lines of credit.
Based upon our current liquidity position, we expect that our funding will be sufficient to fulfill these obligations and commitments when they are due.
At December 31, 2020, we had commitments to purchase securities totaling $19.8 million.
Capital Position
Total stockholders’ equity rose $130.0 million, or 1.9%, year-over-year to $6.8 billion; common stockholders’ equity represented 11.26% of total assets and a book value per common share of $13.66 at December 31, 2020. At the prior year-end, total stockholders’ equity totaled $6.7 billion, and common stockholders’ equity represented 11.57% of total assets and a book value per common share of $13.29.
On a non-GAAP basis, tangible common stockholders’ equity increased $130.0 million year-over-year to $3.9 billion. The year-end 2020 balance represented 7.26% of tangible common assets and a tangible common book value per common share of $8.43. At the prior year-end, tangible common stockholders’ equity totaled $3.8 billion, representing 7.39% of tangible common assets and a tangible common book value per common share of $8.09.
We calculate tangible common stockholders’ equity by subtracting the amount of goodwill and preferred stock recorded at the end of a period from the amount of stockholders’ equity recorded at the same date. Goodwill totaled $2.4 billion at December 31, 2020 and 2019 while preferred stock was $502.8 million at the end of 2020 and 2019. (See the discussion and reconciliations of stockholders’ equity and tangible common stockholders’ equity, total assets and tangible assets, and the related financial measures that appear on the last page of this discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations.)
Stockholders’ equity and tangible common stockholders’ equity both include AOCL, which is comprised of the net unrealized gain or loss on available-for-sale securities; the net unrealized gain on cash flow hedges; and the Company’s pension and post-retirement obligations at the end of a period. In the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, AOCL totaled $25.5 million and $32.8 million, respectively. The decrease in AOCL was largely the net effect of a $33.9 million decrease in net loss on cash flow hedges to $33.0 million and a $41.4 million increase in the net unrealized gain on securities available for sale recorded at the end of this December compared to December 31, 2019.
As reflected in the following table, our capital measures continued to exceed the minimum federal requirements for a bank holding company at December 31, 2020 and 2019:
At December 31, 2020, the capital ratios for the Company and the Bank continued to exceed the levels required for classification as “well capitalized” institutions, as defined under the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991, and as further discussed in Note 19, “Capital,” in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS: 2020 AS COMPARED TO 2019
Net Interest Income
Net interest income is our primary source of income. Its level is a function of the average balance of our interest-earning assets, the average balance of our interest-bearing liabilities, and the spread between the yield on such assets and the cost of such liabilities. These factors are influenced by both the pricing and mix of our interest-earning assets and our interest-bearing liabilities which, in turn, are impacted by various external factors, including the local economy, competition for loans and deposits, the monetary policy of the FOMC, and market interest rates.
The cost of our deposits and borrowed funds is largely based on short-term rates of interest, the level of which is partially impacted by the actions of the FOMC. The FOMC reduces, maintains, or increases the target federal funds
rate (the rate at which banks borrow funds overnight from one another) as it deems necessary. During 2019, the FRB increased its target for the federal funds rate by 100 bp to a range of 2.25% - 2.50%. However, during 2020, in response to the global COVID-19 pandemic, the FRB took a number of actions to support the flow of credit to businesses and households. The actions included a reduction in the target range for the federal funds rate to 0% - 0.25%.
While the target federal funds rate generally impacts the cost of our short-term borrowings and deposits, the yields on our held-for-investment loans and other interest-earning assets are typically impacted by intermediate-term market interest rates.
Another factor that impacts the yields on our interest-earning assets-and our net interest income-is the income generated by our multi-family and CRE loans and securities when they prepay. Since prepayment income is recorded as interest income, an increase or decrease in its level will also be reflected in the average yields (as applicable) on our loans, securities, and interest-earning assets, and therefore in our net interest income, our net interest rate spread, and our net interest margin.
It should be noted that the level of prepayment income on loans recorded in any given period depends on the volume of loans that refinance or prepay during that time. Such activity is largely dependent on such external factors as current market conditions, including real estate values, and the perceived or actual direction of market interest rates. In addition, while a decline in market interest rates may trigger an increase in refinancing and, therefore, prepayment income, so too may an increase in market interest rates. It is not unusual for borrowers to lock in lower interest rates when they expect, or see, that market interest rates are rising rather than risk refinancing later at a still higher interest rate.
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, net interest income increased $142.7 million or 14.9% to $1.1 billion. Total interest income declined $97.2 million or 5.4% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, while total interest expense dropped $239.9 million or 28.3% for the same time period.
Year-Over-Year Comparison
The following factors contributed to the year-over-year increase in net interest income:
•
Interest income on loans declined a modest $10.8 million or 0.7% due to an 18 bp decline in the average loan yield to 3.67% compared to 3.85%. However, this was largely offset by loan growth. Average loans during 2020 rose $1.6 billion or 4.1% to $42.0 billion in 2020 compared to $40.4 billion in 2019.
•
Interest income on the securities portfolio declined more than the interest income on loans driven by both a lower average balance and lower yields, given the low interest rate environment in place for most of the year. Interest income on securities decreased $72.9 million or 30.9%, while average securities declined $365.0 million or 5.8% to $6.0 billion and the average yield declined 99 bp to 2.73%.
•
Interest expense on average interest-bearing deposits declined significantly mainly the result of a lower average cost of deposits due to the low interest rate environment. The average cost of interest-bearing deposits decreased 78 bp to 1.06% while the average balance of $28.9 billion stayed relatively unchanged.
•
Interest expense on borrowed funds declined $15.6 million or 4.9% driven by a 34 bp decline in the average cost to 2.03%, offset by a $1.4 billion or 10.7% increase in the average balance to $14.8 billion.
Net Interest Margin
The direction of the Company’s net interest margin was consistent with that of its net interest income, and generally was driven by the same factors as those described above. At 2.24%, the margin was 22 basis points wider
than the margin recorded for full-year 2019. Adjusted net interest margin is a non-GAAP financial measure, as more fully discussed below.
RECONCILIATION OF NET INTEREST MARGIN AND ADJUSTED NET INTEREST MARGIN
While our net interest margin, including the contribution of prepayment income and the impact from our recent subordinated notes offering, is recorded in accordance with GAAP, adjusted net interest margin, which excludes the contribution of prepayment income, is not. Nevertheless, management uses this non-GAAP measure in its analysis of our performance, and believes that this non-GAAP measure should be disclosed in this report and other investor communications for the following reasons:
1.
Adjusted net interest margin gives investors a better understanding of the effect of prepayment income on our net interest margin. Prepayment income in any given period depends on the volume of loans that refinance or prepay, or securities that prepay, during that period. Such activity is largely dependent on external factors such as current market conditions, including real estate values, and the perceived or actual direction of market interest rates.
2.
Adjusted net interest margin is among the measures considered by current and prospective investors, both independent of, and in comparison with, our peers.
Adjusted net interest margin should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for net interest margin, which is calculated in accordance with GAAP. Moreover, the manner in which we calculate this non-GAAP measure may differ from that of other companies reporting a non-GAAP measure with a similar name.
The following table sets forth certain information regarding our average balance sheet for the years indicated, including the average yields on our interest-earning assets and the average costs of our interest-bearing liabilities. Average yields are calculated by dividing the interest income produced by the average balance of interest-earning assets. Average costs are calculated by dividing the interest expense produced by the average balance of interest-bearing liabilities. The average balances for the year are derived from average balances that are calculated daily. The average yields and costs include fees, as well as premiums and discounts (including mark-to-market adjustments from acquisitions), that are considered adjustments to such average yields and costs.
Net Interest Income Analysis
(1)
Amounts are net of net deferred loan origination costs/(fees) and the allowances for loan losses and include loans held for sale non-performing loans.
(2)
Amounts are at amortized cost.
(3)
Includes FHLB stock.
The following table presents the extent to which changes in interest rates and changes in the volume of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities affected our interest income and interest expense during the periods indicated. Information is provided in each category with respect to (i) the changes attributable to changes in volume (changes in volume multiplied by prior rate); (ii) the changes attributable to changes in rate (changes in rate multiplied by prior volume); and (iii) the net change. The changes attributable to the combined impact of volume and rate have been allocated proportionately to the changes due to volume and the changes due to rate.
Rate/Volume Analysis
Provision for Credit Losses
The provision for credit losses for 2020 was calculated using the CECL methodology, while the year-ago provision for credit losses was calculated using the “incurred loss” methodology. The CECL methodology reflects the impact of a deterioration in forecasted, future economic conditions due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
During 2020, the provision for credit losses totaled $62.2 million, up $55.1 million compared to the $7.1 million we reported during 2019. For additional information about our methodologies for recording recoveries of, and provisions for, loan losses, see the discussion of the loan loss allowance under “Critical Accounting Policies” and the discussion of “Asset Quality” that appear earlier in this report.
Non-Interest Income
We generate non-interest income through a variety of sources, including-among others-fee income (in the form of retail deposit fees and charges on loans); income from our investment in BOLI; gains on sales of securities; and “other” sources, including the revenues produced through the sale of third-party investment products.
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, non-interest income totaled $61.1 million, down $23.2 million or 27.5% compared to the $84.2 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. This was largely due to a decrease in fee income, as the Company waived certain retail banking fees during the year due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Included in the full-year 2020 period were net gains on securities of $1.3 million compared to a net gain on securities of $7.7 million in full-year 2019. Also during 2019, the Company recorded a branch sale-leaseback gain of $7.9 million, related to a property in Florida.
Non-Interest Income Analysis
The following table summarizes our sources of non-interest income in the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018:
Non-Interest Expense
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 total non-interest expense was $511.2 million unchanged compared to the amount for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. Included in the 2020 amount is a $4.4 million lease termination benefit, while, in 2019, non-interest expense included $10.4 million of certain items related to severance costs and branch rationalization costs.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense includes federal, New York State, and New York City income taxes, as well as non-material income taxes from other jurisdictions where we operate our branches and/or conduct our mortgage banking business.
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, income tax expense totaled $76.7 million compared to $128.3 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. This translates into an effective tax rate of 13.05% in 2020 and 24.51% in 2019. Full-year 2020 results were impacted by a $68.4 million income tax benefit related to certain tax provisions for corporations under the CARES Act. Excluding the impact of the tax benefits, the effective tax rate in 2020, on a non-GAAP basis, was 24.69% compared to 24.51% in 2019.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS: 2019 AS COMPARED TO 2018
The results of operations comparison of 2019 compared to 2018 can be found in the Company’s previously filed Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year-ended December 31, 2019 under Item 7 “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations”- Results of Operations: 2019 As Compared to 2018.”
QUARTERLY FINANCIAL DATA
The following table sets forth selected unaudited quarterly financial data for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
IMPACT OF INFLATION
The consolidated financial statements and notes thereto presented in this report have been prepared in accordance with GAAP, which requires that we measure our financial condition and operating results in terms of historical dollars, without considering changes in the relative purchasing power of money over time due to inflation. The impact of inflation is reflected in the increased cost of our operations. Unlike industrial companies, nearly all of a bank’s assets and liabilities are monetary in nature. As a result, the impact of interest rates on our performance is greater than the impact of general levels of inflation. Interest rates do not necessarily move in the same direction, or to the same extent, as the prices of goods and services.
IMPACT OF RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
In January 2021, the FASB issued ASU No. 2021-01, an update to ASU 2020-04, which clarifies the scope of the optional relief for reference rate reform provided by ASC Topic 848. The ASU permits entities to apply certain of the optional practical expedients and exceptions in ASC 848 to the accounting for derivative contracts and hedging activities that may be affected by changes in interest rates used for discounting cash flows, computing variation margin settlements and calculating price alignment interest (the “discounting transition”). These optional practical expedients and exceptions may be applied to derivative instruments impacted by the discounting transition even if such instruments do not reference a rate that is expected to be discontinued. The ASU was effective upon issuance and can generally be applied through December 31, 2022. The adoption of this ASU is not expected to have a material impact on the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Condition, results of operations, or cash flows.
RECONCILIATIONS OF STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY, COMMON STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY, AND TANGIBLE COMMON STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY; TOTAL ASSETS AND TANGIBLE ASSETS; AND THE RELATED MEASURES
While stockholders’ equity, common stockholders’ equity, total assets, and book value per common share are financial measures that are recorded in accordance with U.S. GAAP, tangible common stockholders’ equity, tangible assets, and tangible book value per common share are not. It is management’s belief that these non-GAAP measures should be disclosed in this report and others we issue for the following reasons:
1.
Tangible common stockholders’ equity is an important indication of the Company’s ability to grow organically and through business combinations, as well as its ability to pay dividends and to engage in various capital management strategies.
2.
Tangible book value per common share and the ratio of tangible common stockholders’ equity to tangible assets are among the capital measures considered by current and prospective investors, both independent of, and in comparison with, the Company’s peers.
Tangible common stockholders’ equity, tangible assets, and the related non-GAAP measures should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for stockholders’ equity, common stockholders’ equity, total assets, or any other measure calculated in accordance with GAAP. Moreover, the manner in which we calculate these non-GAAP measures may differ from that of other companies reporting non-GAAP measures with similar names.
Reconciliations of our stockholders’ equity, common stockholders’ equity, and tangible common stockholders’ equity; our total assets and tangible assets; and the related financial measures for the respective periods follow: