Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis presents our financial condition and results of operations on a consolidated basis. However, we conduct all of our material business operations through our wholly owned bank subsidiary, Origin Bank, and the discussion and analysis that follows primarily relates to activities conducted at the Bank level.
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes contained in Item 8 of this report. To the extent that this discussion describes prior performance, the descriptions relate only to the periods listed, which may not be indicative of our future financial outcomes. In addition to historical information, this discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions that could cause results to differ materially from management's expectations. Factors that could cause such differences are discussed in the sections titled "Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements" and "Item 1A. Risk Factors." We assume no obligation to update any of these forward-looking statements.
Discussion in this Form 10-K includes results of operations and financial condition for 2020 and 2019 and year-over-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. For discussion on results of operations and financial condition pertaining to 2019 and 2018 and year-over-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018, please refer to “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 filed with the SEC on February 28, 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP and with general practices within the financial services industry. Application of these principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under current circumstances. These assumptions form the basis for our judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily available from independent, objective sources. We evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis. Use of alternative assumptions may have resulted in significantly different estimates. Actual results may differ from these estimates. Please refer to Note 1 - Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements contained in Item 8 of this report for a full discussion of our accounting policies, including estimates.
We have identified the following accounting estimates that, due to the difficult, subjective or complex judgments and assumptions inherent in those estimates and the potential sensitivity of the financial statements to those judgments and assumptions, are critical to an understanding of our financial condition and results of operations. We believe that the judgments, estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of the financial statements are appropriate.
Allowance for Credit Losses. Effective January 1, 2020, we adopted CECL, resulting in a change to the our reporting of credit losses for assets held at amortized cost basis and available for sale debt securities. As a result, we recognized a one-time, after tax cumulative effect adjustment of $760,000 to retained earnings at the beginning of the first quarter of 2020, increasing the allowance for credit losses by approximately $1.2 million and decreasing the off-balance sheet reserve by $381,000.
The allowance for loan credit losses represents the estimated losses for loans accounted for on an amortized cost basis. Expected losses are calculated using relevant information about past events, including historical experience, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts that affect the collectability of the reported amount. We evaluate loans held for investment on a pool basis with pools of loans characterized by loan type, collateral, industry, internal credit risk rating and FICO score. The amount of the allowance for loan credit losses is affected by loan charge-offs, which decrease the allowance, recoveries on loans previously charged off, which increase the allowance, as well as the provision for loan credit losses charged to income, which increases the allowance. In determining the provision for loan credit losses, management monitors fluctuations in the allowance resulting from actual charge-offs and recoveries and periodically reviews the size and composition of the loan portfolio in light of current and forecasted economic conditions. If actual losses exceed the amount of allowance for loan credit losses, it could materially and adversely affect our earnings. This evaluation is inherently subjective as it requires estimates that are susceptible to significant revision as more information becomes available. Credit losses are charged against the allowance for credit losses when management believes the loss is confirmed.
In the first quarter of 2020, U.S. federal regulatory authorities issued an interim final rule that provides banking organizations that adopt CECL during the 2020 calendar year with the option to delay the regulatory capital impact for up to two years (beginning January 1, 2020), followed by a three-year transition period. We have elected to use the two-year delay of CECL’s impact on our regulatory capital (from January 1, 2020 through December 31, 2021) followed by the three-year transition period of CECL’s initial impact on our regulatory capital (from January 1, 2022 through December 31, 2024).
Goodwill. Goodwill, which represents the excess of cost over the fair value of the net assets of an acquired business, is not amortized but tested for impairment on an annual basis, which is typically October 1 for the Company, or more often if events or circumstances indicate that there may be impairment. Because of the volatile market conditions during which the Company's market value fell below book value, the Company performed a qualitative assessment of whether it was more likely than not that the fair value was less than carrying value during each quarter of 2020 including a goodwill impairment assessment performed by a third party valuation specialist during the second quarter of 2020. Based on these assessments, it was determined that the Company's fair value exceeded carrying value and no goodwill impairment was recorded during 2020.
Mortgage Servicing Rights. We recognize the rights to service mortgage loans based on the estimated fair value of the Mortgage Servicing Right ("MSR") when loans are sold and the associated servicing rights are retained. We elected to account for the MSR at fair value.
The fair value of the MSR is determined using a valuation model administered by a third party that calculates the present value of estimated future net servicing income. The model incorporates assumptions that market participants use in estimating future net servicing income, including estimates of prepayment speeds, discount rate, default rates, cost to service (including delinquency and foreclosure costs), escrow account earnings, contractual servicing fee income and other ancillary income such as late fees. Management reviews all significant assumptions quarterly. Mortgage loan prepayment speeds, a key assumption in the model, is the annual rate at which borrowers are forecasted to repay their mortgage loan principal. The discount rate used to determine the present value of estimated future net servicing income, another key assumption in the model, is an estimate of the rate of return investors in the market would require for an asset with similar risk. Both assumptions can, and generally will, change as market conditions and interest rates change.
An increase in either the prepayment speed or discount rate assumption will result in a decrease in the fair value of the MSR, while a decrease in these assumptions will result in an increase in the fair value of the MSR. In recent years, there have been significant market-driven fluctuations in loan prepayment speeds and discount rates. These fluctuations can be rapid and may continue to be significant. Therefore, estimating prepayment speed and/or discount rates within ranges that market participants would use in determining the fair value of the MSR requires significant management judgment.
General
We are a financial holding company headquartered in Ruston, Louisiana. Our wholly owned bank subsidiary, Origin Bank, was founded in 1912. Deeply rooted in our history is a culture committed to providing personalized, relationship banking to its clients and communities. We provide a broad range of financial services to businesses, municipalities, high net-worth individuals and retail clients. We currently operate 44 banking centers located from Dallas/Fort Worth and Houston, Texas across North Louisiana and into Mississippi. As a financial holding company operating through one segment, we generate the majority of our revenue from interest earned on loans and investments, service charges and fees on deposit accounts.
We incur interest expense on deposits and other borrowed funds and noninterest expense, such as salaries and employee benefits and occupancy expenses. We analyze our ability to maximize income generated from interest earning assets and expense of our liabilities through our net interest margin. Net interest margin is a ratio calculated as net interest income divided by average interest-earning assets. Net interest income is the difference between interest income on interest-earning assets, such as loans, securities and interest-bearing cash, and interest expense on interest-bearing liabilities, such as deposits and borrowings. Net interest spread is the average yield on interest-earning assets minus the average rate on interest-bearing liabilities.
Changes in market interest rates and the interest rates we earn on interest-earning assets or pay on interest-bearing liabilities, as well as in the volume and types of interest-earning assets, interest-bearing and noninterest-bearing liabilities and stockholders' equity, are usually the largest drivers of periodic changes in net interest spread, net interest margin and net interest income. Fluctuations in market interest rates are driven by many factors, including governmental monetary policies, inflation, deflation, macroeconomic developments, changes in unemployment, the money supply, political and international conditions and conditions in domestic and foreign financial markets. Periodic changes in the volume and types of loans in our loan portfolio are affected by, among other factors, economic and competitive conditions, as well as developments affecting the real estate, technology, financial services, insurance, transportation and manufacturing sectors within our target markets.
Comparison of Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Net Interest Income
Year ended December 31, 2020, compared to year ended December 31, 2019
Net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $191.5 million, an increase of $17.8 million over the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to a $17.6 million reduction in total deposit interest expenses, coupled with a $11.6 million increase in income from mortgage warehouse lines of credit, offset by a $10.9 million total decrease in interest earned on loans held for investment ("LHFI") portfolio, excluding mortgage warehouse loans, during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Deposit interest expense decreased to $27.2 million during the current year, compared to $44.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to a reduction in deposit rates during the year. The average rate on interest-bearing deposit accounts was 0.52% for the current year, down from 1.30% for the year ended December 31, 2019, accounting for $22.6 million of the decrease in interest expense from the year ended December 31, 2019. The average rate on time deposits decreased to 1.62% for the current year ended December 31, 2020, down from 2.10% for the year ended December 31, 2019, providing an additional decrease of $3.5 million in interest expense. These two rate-driven interest expense declines were offset by a $10.5 million increase in interest expense due to an increase in the average balances of savings and interest-bearing transaction accounts when comparing the year ended December 31, 2020, to December 31, 2019.
Interest income on mortgage warehouse lines of credit increased by $11.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, due to higher mortgage activity driven by the low interest rate environment, coupled with additional mortgage warehouse clients being onboarded and funding loans during 2020. There was a 57.7% increase in mortgage warehouse clients at December 31, 2020, when compared to December 31, 2019. Interest income earned on commercial and industrial loans, excluding Paycheck Protection Program ("PPP") loans, decreased by $14.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to December 31, 2019, primarily due to the impact of lower interest rates. The lower interest rates contributed a $24.5 million decrease, which was partially offset by a $10.4 million increase due to higher average commercial and industrial loan balances. PPP loans, which were funded beginning in the second quarter of the 2020 year as part of the CARES Act, contributed an additional $9.8 million in interest income during the year ended December 31, 2020. Please see Item 1 - Lending Activities in the Business section of the this report for more information on the CARES Act.
The following table presents average balance sheet information, interest income, interest expense and the corresponding average yields earned and rates paid for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
____________________________
(1)Nonaccrual loans are included in their respective loan category for the purpose of calculating the yield earned. All average balances are daily average balances.
(2)Includes Government National Mortgage Association ("GNMA") repurchase average balances of $37.7 million, $26.0 million and $30.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The GNMA repurchase asset and liability are recorded as equal offsetting amounts in the consolidated balance sheets, with the asset included in loans held for sale and the liability included in FHLB advances and other borrowings. For more information on the GNMA repurchase option, see Note 9 - Mortgage Banking in the notes to our consolidated financial statements.
(3)In order to present pre-tax income and resulting yields on tax-exempt investments comparable to those on taxable investments, a tax-equivalent adjustment has been computed. This adjustment also includes income tax credits received on Qualified School Construction Bonds and income from tax-exempt investments and tax credits were computed using a Federal income tax rate of 21%.
Rate/Volume Analysis
The following tables present the dollar amount of changes in interest income and interest expense for major components of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. It distinguishes between the changes related to outstanding balances and those due to changes in interest rates. The change in interest attributable to rate changes has been determined by applying the change in rate between periods to average balances outstanding in the earlier period. The change in interest due to volume has been determined by applying the rate from the earlier period to the change in average balances outstanding between periods. For purposes of this table, changes attributable to both rate and volume that cannot be segregated, including the difference in day count, have been allocated to rate.
Provision for Credit Losses
The provision for credit losses, which includes the provisions for loan losses, off-balance sheet commitments and security credit losses, is based on management's assessment of the adequacy of our allowance for credit losses ("ACL") for loans, securities and our reserve for off-balance sheet lending commitments. Factors impacting the provision include inherent risk characteristics in our loan portfolio, the level of nonperforming loans and net charge-offs, both current and historic, local economic and credit conditions, the direction of the change in collateral values, reasonable and supportable forecasts, and the funding probability on unfunded lending commitments. The provision for credit losses is charged against earnings in order to maintain our ACL, which reflects management's best estimate of life of loan credit losses inherent in our loan portfolio at the balance sheet date, and our reserve for off-balance sheet lending commitments, which reflects management's best estimate of losses inherent in our legally binding lending-related commitments. The allowance is increased by the provision for loan credit losses and decreased by charge-offs, net of recoveries.
Year ended December 31, 2020, compared to year ended December 31, 2019
On January 1, 2020, we adopted CECL and recognized a one-time cumulative effect adjustment to the allowance for loan credit losses of $1.2 million. CECL requires recording life-of-loan projected losses in the loan portfolio based on reasonable and supportable forecasts and related loan portfolio credit performance. At adoption on January 1, 2020, the economic effects resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic were unknown. As such, the economic scenario used to develop our estimate of CECL as of the adoption date assumed a continued moderate U.S. economic expansion compared to 2019. The prior accounting standard recorded reserves based on probable losses at the balance sheet date, generally resulting in lower reserve levels at the outset of an economic downturn.
Our earnings for the year ended December 31, 2020, were significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and the uncertainty surrounding the economic outlook and ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, which shaped the forecast we used in our calculation of the CECL estimate at December 31, 2020, and caused us to significantly increase our allowance for loan credit losses. If the pandemic worsens and drives further deterioration in the economic outlook we could continue to see an impact on earnings related to an increase in the provision for the allowance for loan credit losses.
Excluding PPP loans, at December 31, 2020, we had $538.6 million, or 10.4%, of our LHFI invested in key sectors that appear to be heavily affected by COVID-19 including: hotel, energy, non-essential retail, restaurant and assisted living. While we have recorded significant loss reserves, the reserves are an estimate and subject to change. Nonperforming LHFI in these key sectors impacted by COVID-19 was $5.9 million at December 31, 2020, while past due LHFI, defined as loans 30 days or more past due, as a percentage of LHFI, excluding PPP loans, in these key sectors impacted by COVID-19, was 1.0% at December 31, 2020.
We recorded provision expense of $59.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $50.3 million from $9.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in provision expense from the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily driven by an increase in the allowance for loan credit losses within the loan portfolio, primarily due to the COVID-19 impact on the economy and the adoption of CECL. Net charge-offs were $11.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $5.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was driven by $6.6 million in charge-offs from two lending relationships in 2020. The remaining balance, after charge-offs, of these two relationships as of December 31, 2020, were $1.5 million and $2.6 million included in the commercial and industrial and commercial real estate categories, respectively.
Pursuant to rules of the federal banking agencies, we have elected to use a two-year delay of CECL’s impact on our regulatory capital (from January 1, 2020 through December 31, 2021) followed by a three-year transition period of CECL’s initial impact on our regulatory capital (from January 1, 2022 through December 31, 2024).
We continue to gather the latest information available, and as more information becomes available concerning the economic impact and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic, we will update our forecast and related qualitative factors, which could lead to further increases to our allowance for loan credit losses.
Noninterest Income
Our primary sources of recurring noninterest income are service charges on deposit accounts, mortgage banking revenue, insurance commission and fee income, and other fee income.
The table below presents the various components of and changes in our noninterest income for the periods indicated.
____________________________
N/M = Not meaningful.
Year ended December 31, 2020, compared to year ended December 31, 2019
Noninterest income for the year ended December 31, 2020, increased by $18.2 million, or 39.1%, to $64.7 million, compared to $46.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in noninterest income during the year ended December 31, 2020, was largely driven by a $17.3 million increase in mortgage banking revenue, with less significant changes in other categories.
Mortgage banking revenue. The $17.3 million increase in mortgage banking revenue compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily driven by a $18.7 million increase in volume-related gains and income due to higher volumes of purchases and refinance activity during the year driven by falling interest rates, and a $4.0 million hedge gain, partially offset by a $5.7 million decrease in MSR valuation adjustment, net of amortization. After the historic purchase and re-finance market that we experienced in 2020, we expect refinance activity to decrease in 2021 which could reduce our mortgage banking revenue from the 2020 historic high levels.
Noninterest Expense
The following table presents the significant components of noninterest expense for the periods indicated:
Year ended December 31, 2020, compared to year ended December 31, 2019
Noninterest expense increased by $7.9 million, or 5.5%, in 2020 to $151.9 million, primarily due to increases of $2.1 million each in loan related expenses, regulatory assessments, salaries and employee benefits, and a $1.4 million increase in data processing expenses, partially offset by a $1.1 million decrease in office and operations expenses.
Loan related expenses. The increase in loan related expenses was primarily driven by a $1.5 million increase in loan subservicing costs. In the fourth quarter of 2019, we discontinued internal mortgage loan servicing operations and transferred our mortgage loan servicing to a sub-servicer reducing salaries and benefits as discussed below.
Regulatory assessments. The $2.1 million increase in regulatory assessments was primarily due to the recognition of a $1.0 million benefit from the Federal Deposit insurance Corporation ("FDIC") insurance fund, which reduced the total expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019. Additionally, significant growth in our assets during the last 12 months also contributed to the increase.
Salaries and employee benefits. The $2.1 million increase in salaries and employee benefits was primarily due to a $2.2 million increase in mortgage commissions due to the increased mortgage loan production and sale volumes. Bonuses also increased by $718,000 for mortgage warehouse and mortgage departments due to their increased production. Medical self-insurance costs also increased $458,000 due to higher medical claims during the year ended December 31, 2020. These increases were partially offset by a $1.2 million decrease in compensation due to the discontinuation of internal mortgage loan servicing operations.
Data processing. The $1.4 million increase in data processing was driven by various technology enhancements in 2020 including PPP loan origination platform, human resource system conversion and CECL software enhancements, none of which were individually significant factors in the change.
Office and operations. Office and operations expenses decreased by $1.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to reductions in travel and entertainment spending due to the COVID-19 pandemic and related restrictions.
Income Tax Expense
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized income tax expense of $8.0 million, compared to $12.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020, was 18.0%, compared to 19.0% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to the decrease in our pre-tax income compared to 2019, which made the proportional effect on the tax-exempt items larger on the effective income tax rate.
Our effective income tax rates have differed from the applicable U.S. statutory rates of 21% at December 31, 2020, 2019, due to the effect of tax-exempt income from securities, low income housing and qualified school construction bond tax credits, tax-exempt income from life insurance policies and income tax effects associated with stock-based compensation. Because of these items, we expect our effective income tax rate to continue to remain below the applicable U.S. statutory rate. These tax-exempt items can have a larger than proportional effect on the effective income tax rate as net income decreases. Any increases to the statutory tax rate would increase income taxes in the future.
Comparison of Financial Condition at December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019
General
Total assets increased by $2.30 billion, or 43.3%, to $7.63 billion at December 31, 2020, from $5.32 billion at December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to $1.58 billion increase in LHFI and $503.6 million increase in securities available for sale.
Loan Portfolio
Our loan portfolio is our largest category of interest-earning assets and interest income earned on our loan portfolio is our primary source of income. At December 31, 2020, 74.9% of the loan portfolio held for investment was comprised of commercial and industrial loans, including PPP loans, mortgage warehouse lines of credit and commercial real estate loans, which were primarily originated within our market areas of Texas, North Louisiana, and Mississippi.
The following table presents the ending balance of our loan portfolio held for investment at the dates indicated.
At December 31, 2020, total LHFI were $5.72 billion, an increase of $1.58 billion, or 38.2%, compared to $4.14 billion at December 31, 2019. The increase reflected growth in all significant loan categories except for commercial and industrial loans. The largest increases are primarily reflected in mortgage warehouse lines of credit and PPP loans, which increased $809.3 million and $546.5 million, respectively. The increase in mortgage warehouse lines of credit is primarily due to increased mortgage activity driven by the continued low interest rate environment, coupled with additional mortgage warehouse clients being onboarded and funding loans during 2020. This increased mortgage related activity, as well as market disruption following merger activity by our peers and competitors, has allowed us to add new customers in the warehouse lines of credit portfolio, and caused us to increase limits to support the record volume of loan purchase and refinance activity. Our lending focus is on operating companies, including commercial loans and lines of credit as well as owner-occupied commercial real estate loans. We currently do not plan to significantly alter the real estate concentrations within our loan portfolio, however, we believe the volume within our mortgage warehouse lines of credit portfolio will decline over the next year.
Under the CARES Act, Congress allocated funds to the PPP, which is designed to provide short-term loans to certain qualifying businesses who retain employees during the COVID-19 pandemic. These loans, totaling $546.5 million for the Company at December 31, 2020, have maximum maturity of two years, and we anticipate many of them will be forgiven by the Small Business Administration under the terms of the PPP before their maturity date. As of February 18, 2021, $88.8 million of Origin Bank originated PPP loans have been forgiven under this program. The loans will bear a fixed rate of interest at one percent for the entire term.
Loan Portfolio Maturity Analysis
The table below presents the maturity distribution of our LHFI at December 31, 2020. The table also presents the portion of our loans that have fixed interest rates, rather than interest rates that fluctuate over the life of the loans based on changes in the interest rate environment.
Loan Portfolio COVID-19 Impact
The COVID-19 pandemic has continued to have a severe impact on the U.S. economy leading to severe unemployment and a recession. Consequently, the deteriorating economic outlook caused us to significantly increase the allowance for loan credit losses during the year ended December 31, 2020, resulting in additional provision expense and reduced earnings during the period. Due to the ongoing economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and governmental efforts to contain it, we believe that certain sectors of the U.S. economy may be more affected than others. Some of the sectors in which we operate that may experience a more significant impact include hotel, energy, non-essential retail, restaurant and assisted living. At December 31, 2020, we had $538.6 million, or 10.4%, of our LHFI, excluding PPP loans, invested in these sectors and, while we have recorded significant loss reserves, the reserves are an estimate and subject to change. Nonperforming LHFI in the sectors impacted by COVID-19 was $5.9 million at December 31, 2020, while past due LHFI, defined as loans 30 days or more past due, as a percentage of LHFI in these sectors, excluding PPP loans, was 1.0% at December 31, 2020. Loans in COVID-19 related forbearance totaled $97.7 million and represented 1.9% of LHFI, excluding PPP loans, at December 31, 2020. It is difficult to predict the future impact of the COVID-19 pandemic as there is significant ongoing uncertainty surrounding the course of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the possible implementation of new or additional restrictions on economic activity.
Certain key data regarding the sectors that may experience a more significant impact due to COVID-19 at December 31, 2020, is reflected in the table below. The information presented excludes PPP loans.
Nonperforming Assets
Nonperforming assets consist of nonperforming loans and property acquired through foreclosures or repossession, as well as bank-owned property not currently in use and listed for sale.
Loans are considered past due when principal and interest payments have not been received at the date such payments are contractually due. We discontinue accruing interest on loans when we determine the borrower's financial condition is such that collection of interest and principal payments in accordance with the terms of the loan are not reasonably assured. Loans may be placed on nonaccrual status even if the contractual payments are not past due if information becomes available that causes substantial doubt about the borrower's ability to meet the contractual obligations of the loan. All interest accrued but not collected for loans that are placed on nonaccrual status is reversed against interest income. Interest income is subsequently recognized only to the extent cash payments are received in excess of principal outstanding. Loans are returned to accrual status when all principal and interest amounts contractually due are brought current and future payments are reasonably assured. If a loan is determined by management to be uncollectible, regardless of size, the portion of the loan determined to be uncollectible is then charged to the allowance for loan credit losses.
We manage the quality of our lending portfolio in part through a disciplined underwriting policy and through continual monitoring of loan performance and borrowers' financial condition. There can be no assurance, however, that our loan portfolio will not become subject to losses due to declines in economic conditions or deterioration in the financial condition of our borrowers.
Although we have seen an impact from the COVID-19 pandemic, the ultimate impact is still unknown. The ongoing economic uncertainty, possibility of additional governmental restrictions on economic activity and relatively high unemployment rate has created conditions that could cause an increase in nonperforming loans in future periods. At December 31, 2020, we have granted COVID-19 forbearances in the form of principal or interest deferments, rate concessions or principal deferments to 49 loans with outstanding loan amounts totaling $97.7 million.
The following table shows our nonperforming loans and nonperforming assets at the dates indicated:
At December 31, 2020, total nonperforming LHFI decreased by $5.0 million, or 16.0%, from December 31, 2019. The decrease in nonperforming commercial real estate loans is due to a $5.0 million charge-offs for one relationship during the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in other real estate owned was primarily due to the fact that we sold one of our branch properties during the year ended December 31, 2020. Please see Note 4 - Loans within our consolidated financial statements for more information on nonperforming loans.
Potential Problem Loans
From a credit risk standpoint, we classify loans in one of five categories: pass, special mention, substandard, doubtful or loss. The classifications of loans reflect a judgment about the risks of default and loss associated with the loan. We review the ratings on loans and adjust them to reflect the degree of risk and loss that is felt to be inherent in each loan. The methodology is structured so that reserve allocations are increased in accordance with deterioration in credit quality (and a corresponding increase in risk and loss) or decreased in accordance with improvement in credit quality (and a corresponding decrease in risk and loss). Loans rated special mention reflect borrowers who exhibit credit weaknesses or downward trends deserving close attention. If left uncorrected, these potential weaknesses may result in deterioration of the repayment prospects for the asset or in the bank's credit position at some future date. While potentially weak, no loss of principal or interest is envisioned and these borrowers currently do not pose sufficient risk to warrant adverse classification. Loans rated substandard are those borrowers with deteriorating trends and well-defined weaknesses that jeopardize the orderly liquidation of debt. A substandard loan is inadequately protected by the current sound worth and paying capacity of the obligor or by the collateral pledged, if any. Normal repayment from the borrower might be in jeopardy.
Loans rated as doubtful have the weaknesses of substandard assets with the additional characteristic that the weaknesses make collection or liquidation in full questionable and there is a high probability of loss based on currently existing facts, conditions and values. Loans classified as loss are charged-off and we have no expectation of the recovery of any payments in respect to loans rated as loss. Information regarding the internal risk ratings of our loans at December 31, 2020, is included in Note 4 - Loans in the notes to our consolidated financial statements contained in Item 8 of this report.
Allowance for Loan Losses
Effective January 1, 2020, the Company adopted CECL resulting in a change to the Company's reporting of credit losses for assets held at amortized cost basis and available for sale debt securities. Please see the discussion in Note 1 - Significant Accounting Policies in the notes to our consolidated financial statements titled "Effect of Recently Adopted Accounting Standards" for a description of policy revisions resulting from the Company's adoption of ASU 2016-13.
The allowance for loan credit losses represents the estimated losses for loans accounted for on an amortized cost basis. Expected losses are calculated using relevant information about past events, including historical experience, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts that affect the collectability of the reported amount. The Company evaluates LHFI on a pool basis with pools of loans characterized by loan type, collateral, industry, internal credit risk rating and FICO score. The Company applied a probability of default, loss given default loss methodology to the loan pools at January 1 and December 31, 2020. Historical loss rates for each pool are calculated based on charge-off and recovery data beginning with the second quarter of 2012. These loss rates are adjusted for differences between current period conditions, including the ongoing effects of COVID-19 on the U.S. economy, and the conditions existing during the historical loss period. Historical losses are additionally adjusted for the effects of certain economic variables forecast over a one-year period. Subsequent to the forecast effects, historical loss rates are used to estimate losses over the estimated remaining lives of the loans. The estimated remaining lives consist of the contractual lives, adjusted for estimated prepayments. Loans that exhibit characteristics different from their pool characteristics are evaluated on an individual basis. Certain of these loans are considered to be collateral dependent with the borrower experiencing financial difficulty. For these loans, the fair value of collateral practical expedient is elected whereby the allowance is calculated as the amount by which the amortized cost exceeds the fair value of collateral, less costs to sell (if applicable). Those individual loans that are not collateral dependent are evaluated based on a discounted cash flow methodology.
The amount of the allowance for loan credit losses is affected by loan charge-offs, which decrease the allowance, recoveries on loans previously charged off, which increase the allowance, as well as the provision for loan credit losses charged to income, which increases the allowance. In determining the provision for loan credit losses, management monitors fluctuations in the allowance resulting from actual charge-offs and recoveries and periodically reviews the size and composition of the loan portfolio in light of current and forecasted economic conditions. If actual losses exceed the amount of the allowance for loan credit losses, it would materially and adversely affect our earnings.
As a general rule, when it becomes evident that the full principal and accrued interest of a loan may not be collected, or at 90 days past due, we will reflect that loan as nonperforming. It will remain nonperforming until it performs in a manner that it is reasonable to expect that we will collect principal and accrued interest in full. When the amount or likelihood of a loss on a loan has been confirmed, a charge-off will be taken in the period it is determined.
We establish general allocations for each major loan category and credit quality. The general allocation is based, in part, on historical charge-off experience and loss given default methodology, derived from our internal risk rating process. Other adjustments may be made to the allowance for pools of loans after an assessment of internal or external influences on credit quality that are not fully reflected in the historical loss or risk rating data. We give consideration to trends, changes in loan mix, delinquencies, prior losses, reasonable and supportable forecasts and other related information.
In connection with the review of our loan portfolio, we consider risk elements attributable to particular loan types or categories in assessing the quality of individual loans. Some of the risk elements we consider include:
•for commercial real estate loans, the debt service coverage ratio, operating results of the owner in the case of owner occupied properties, the loan to value ratio, the age and condition of the collateral and the volatility of income, property value and future operating results typical of properties of that type;
•for construction, land and land development loans, the perceived feasibility of the project, including the ability to sell developed lots or improvements constructed for resale or the ability to lease property constructed for lease, the quality and nature of contracts for presale or prelease, if any, experience and ability of the developer and loan to value ratio;
•for residential mortgage loans, the borrower's ability to repay the loan, including a consideration of the debt to income ratio and employment and income stability, the loan-to-value ratio, and the age, condition and marketability of the collateral; and
•for commercial and industrial loans, the debt service coverage ratio (income from the business in excess of operating expenses compared to loan repayment requirements), the operating results of the commercial, industrial or professional enterprise, the borrower's business, professional and financial ability and expertise, the specific risks and volatility of income and operating results typical for businesses in that category and the value, nature and marketability of collateral.
The following table presents the allowance for credit loss by loan category:
____________________________
(1)Represents the ratio of each loan type to total LHFI.
Our allowance for credit losses increased by $49.2 million, or 131.0%, to $86.7 million at December 31, 2020, from $37.5 million at December 31, 2019. The ratio of allowance for credit losses to total LHFI at December 31, 2020 and 2019, was 1.51% and 0.91%, respectively. The increase in the total allowance for loan credit losses was primarily driven by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic after the adoption of CECL. Our allowance for loan credit losses may increase in the future as the continuing impact of the COVID-19 is currently unknown and difficult to forecast. Please see the section titled Loan Portfolio COVID-19 Impact included above in this section for additional information and metrics related to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
We recognized a one-time after tax cumulative effect adjustment of $760,000 to retained earnings at the beginning of the first quarter of 2020, increasing the allowance for credit losses by approximately $1.2 million and decreasing the off-balance sheet reserve by $381,000 due to the adoption of Accounting Standards Update ("ASU") No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments. Our investment securities were not materially affected by the adoption of this ASU due to the nature of the portfolio.
The following table presents an analysis of the allowance for credit losses and other related data at the periods indicated.
Securities
Our securities portfolio is the second largest component of earning assets and provides a significant source of revenue. We use the securities portfolio to provide a source of liquidity, provide an appropriate return on funds invested, manage interest rate risk and meet collateral as well as regulatory capital requirements. We manage the securities portfolio to optimize returns while maintaining an appropriate level of risk. Securities within the portfolio are classified as either held-to-maturity, available-for-sale or at fair value through income, based on the intent and objective of the investment and the ability to hold to maturity. Unrealized gains and losses arising in the available for sale portfolio as a result of changes in the fair value of the securities are reported on an after-tax basis as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income in stockholders' equity while securities classified as held to maturity are carried at amortized cost. For further discussion of the valuation components and classification of investment securities, see Note 1 - Significant Accounting Policies in the consolidated financial statements contained in Item 8 of this report.
Our securities portfolio totaled $1.05 billion at December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $513.2 million, or 94.8%, from $541.2 million at December 31, 2019. The increase was a result of increased liquidity on hand and our continued focus on maintaining an appropriately positioned asset mix and earnings profile. For additional information regarding our securities portfolio, please see Note 3 - Securities in the consolidated financial statements contained in Item 8 of this report.
The following table sets forth the composition of our securities portfolio at the dates indicated.
The following table presents the fair value of securities available for sale and amortized cost of securities held to maturity and their corresponding yields at December 31, 2020. The securities are grouped by contractual maturity and use amortized cost for all yield calculations. Mortgage backed securities, collateralized mortgage obligations and asset-backed securities, which do not have contractual payments due at a single maturity date, are shown at the date the last underlying mortgage matures.
____________________________
(1)Tax-exempt security yields are calculated without consideration of their tax benefit status.
The contractual maturity of mortgage-backed securities and collateralized mortgage obligations is not a reliable indicator of their expected life because borrowers have the right to prepay their obligations at any time. Mortgage-backed securities and collateralized mortgage obligations are typically issued with stated principal amounts and are backed by pools of mortgage loans and other loans with varying maturities. The term of the underlying mortgages and loans may vary significantly due to the ability of a borrower to prepay outstanding amounts. Monthly pay downs on mortgage-backed securities tend to cause the average life of the securities to be much different than the stated contractual maturity. During a period of increasing interest rates, fixed rate mortgage-backed securities do not tend to experience heavy prepayments of principal, and, consequently, the average life of this security is typically lengthened. If interest rates begin to fall, prepayments may increase, thereby shortening the estimated average life of these securities.
Other than securities issued by government agencies or government sponsored enterprises, we did not own securities of any one issuer for which aggregate adjusted cost exceeded 10.0% of consolidated stockholders' equity at December 31, 2020 or 2019. Additionally, we do not hold any Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac preferred stock, collateralized debt obligations, structured investment vehicles or second lien elements in the investment portfolio, nor does the investment portfolio contain any securities that are directly backed by subprime or Alt-A mortgages.
Securities Carried at Fair Value through Income
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we held two fixed-rate community investment bonds totaling $11.6 million and $11.5 million, respectively. We elected the fair value option on these securities to offset corresponding changes in the fair value of related interest rate swap agreements.
Deposits
Deposits are the primary funding source used to fund our loans, investments and operating needs. We offer a variety of products designed to attract and retain both consumer and commercial deposit customers. These products consist of noninterest and interest-bearing checking accounts, savings deposits, money market accounts and time deposits. Deposits are primarily gathered from individuals, partnerships and corporations in our market areas. We also obtain deposits from local municipalities and state agencies. Increases of $529.9 million, $512.9 million and $278.6 million in noninterest-bearing, money market and brokered deposits, respectively, drove the increase in total deposits compared to December 31, 2019, partially due to depositors moving into a statistically higher percentage of personal savings rates during the year and also due to the funding of PPP loans into noninterest-bearing demand deposit accounts during the year ended December 31, 2020. Additionally, short-term brokered deposits were utilized to fund the growth in mortgage warehouse lines of credit during the 2020 year.
We manage our interest expense on deposits through specific deposit product pricing that is based on competitive pricing, economic conditions and current and anticipated funding needs. We may use interest rates as a mechanism to attract or deter additional deposits based on our anticipated funding needs and liquidity position. We also consider potential interest rate risk caused by extended maturities of time deposits when setting the interest rates in periods of future economic uncertainty.
The following table presents our deposit mix at the dates indicated:
____________________________
(1)Brokered time deposits of $7.9 million are included in the brokered category for December 31, 2018. There were no brokered time deposits at December 31, 2020 or 2019.
Increases of $529.9 million, $512.9 million and $278.6 million in noninterest-bearing, money market and brokered deposits, respectively, drove the increase in total deposits compared to December 31, 2019, partially due to depositors moving into a statistically higher percentage of personal savings rates during the year. Additionally, due to the high volume of mortgage loans funded under the mortgage warehouse lines of credit, we utilized short term brokered deposits to partially fund the growth in warehouse lines, which drove the increase in brokered deposits from December 31, 2019.
The following schedule reflects the classification of our average deposits and the average rate paid on each deposit category for the periods indicated:
Our average deposit balance was $5.14 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $1.16 billion, or 29.1%, from $3.98 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019. The average annualized rate paid on our interest-bearing deposits for the year ended December 31, 2020, was 0.75%, compared to 1.53% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in the average cost of our deposits was primarily the result of steadily falling interest rates that occurred since December 31, 2019. The Federal Reserve lowered the federal funds target rate twice from January 1, 2020, to December 31, 2020, resulting in an aggregate 150 basis point decrease in the target rate. When the target rate reductions began, we took action to lower deposit rates on nonmaturity deposits. Our Louisiana market deposits also increased $531.8 million compared to December 30, 2019, which historically carry lower cost of deposits than those in Texas, helping to lower our overall cost of deposits.
Average noninterest-bearing deposits at December 31, 2020, were $1.5 billion, compared to $1.1 billion at December 31, 2019, an increase of $445.0 million, or 42.2%, and represented 29.2% and 26.5% of average total deposits for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The following table presents the maturity distribution of our time deposits at December 31, 2020:
Borrowings
Short-term FHLB advances increased $550.0 million at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019, as a result of our decision to fund PPP loans and the increase in mortgage warehouse lines of credit with non-core funding sources. Additionally, long-term advances from the FHLB decreased by $1.9 million, or 0.7%, at December 31, 2020, compared to December 31, 2019.
Borrowed funds are summarized as follows:
____________________________
(1)Short-term FHLB advances at December 31, 2020, carried a fixed interest rate of 0.10% and matured on January 4, 2021; at December 31, 2019, short-term FHLB advances carried a fixed interest rate of 1.35%, and matured on January 2, 2020; at December 31, 2018, short-term FHLB advances carried a fixed interest rate of 2.70%, and matured on January 2, 2019.
(2)Includes a FHLB advance of $250.0 million at December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, callable quarterly with a final maturity in 2033, carrying a rate of 1.65%.
Overnight repurchase agreements with depositors consist of obligations of ours to depositors and mature on a daily basis. These obligations to depositors carried a daily average interest rate of 0.22% and 1.20% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Our long-term debt consists of advances from the FHLB with original maturities greater than one year. Interest rates for FHLB long-term advances outstanding at December 31, 2020, ranged from 1.65% to 5.72% and were subject to restrictions or penalties in the event of prepayment.
At December 31, 2020, we held 35 unfunded letters of credit from the FHLB totaling $527.4 million with expiration dates ranging from January 20, 2021, to November 4, 2022. These letters of credit either support pledges for our public fund deposits or confirm letters of credit we have issued to support our customers' businesses. Security for all indebtedness and outstanding commitments to the FHLB consists of a blanket floating lien on all of our first mortgage loans, commercial real estate and other real estate loans, as well as our investment in capital stock of the FHLB and deposit accounts at the FHLB. The net amounts available under the blanket floating lien at December 31, 2020 and 2019, were $456.9 million and $601.9 million, respectively.
Additionally, at December 31, 2020, we had the ability to borrow $793.2 million from the discount window at the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas ("FRB"), with $999.7 million in commercial and industrial loans pledged as collateral. There were no borrowings against this line at December 31, 2020.
Subordinated Debentures
In February 2020, Origin Bank completed an offering of $70.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 4.25% fixed-to-floating rate subordinated notes due 2030 (the "Notes") to certain accredited investors in a transaction exempt from registration under Section 3(a)(2) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. The Notes initially bear interest at a fixed annual rate of 4.25%, payable semi-annually in arrears, to but excluding February 15, 2025. From and including February 15, 2025, to but excluding the maturity date or earlier redemption date, the interest rate will equal three-month LIBOR (provided, that in the event the three-month LIBOR is less than zero, the three-month LIBOR will be deemed to be zero) plus 282 basis points, payable quarterly in arrears. Origin Bank is entitled to redeem the Notes, in whole or in part, on or after February 15, 2025, and to redeem the Notes at any time in whole upon certain other specified events. The Notes qualify as Tier 2 capital for regulatory capital purposes for Origin Bank.
In October 2020, we completed of an offering of $80.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 4.50% fixed-to-floating rate subordinated notes due 2030 (the “4.50% Notes”). The 4.50% Notes bear a fixed interest rate of 4.50% payable semi-annually in arrears, to but excluding November 1, 2025. From and including November 1, 2025, to but excluding the maturity date or earlier redemption date, the 4.50% Notes bear a floating interest rate expected to equal the three-month term Secured Overnight Financing Rate plus 432 basis points, payable quarterly in arrears. We may redeem the 4.50% Notes at any time upon certain specified events or in whole or in part on or after November 1, 2025. The 4.50% Notes qualify as Tier 2 capital for regulatory capital purposes for the Company and $51.0 million was transferred to Origin Bank during the fourth quarter of 2020, which qualifies as Tier 1 capital for regulatory capital purposes for the Bank.
Liquidity
Management oversees our liquidity position to ensure adequate cash and liquid assets are available to support our operations and satisfy current and future financial obligations, including demand for loan funding and deposit withdrawals. Management continually monitors, forecasts and tests our liquidity and non-core dependency ratios to ensure compliance with targets established by our Asset-Liability Management Committee and approved by our board of directors.
Management measures our liquidity position by giving consideration to both on-balance sheet and off-balance sheet sources of and demands for funds on a daily and weekly basis. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, our cash and liquid securities totaled 13.6% and 8.4% of total assets, respectively, providing liquidity to support our existing operations.
The Company, which is a separate legal entity apart from the Bank, must provide for its own liquidity, including payment of any dividends that may be declared for our common stockholders and interest and principal on any outstanding debt or trust preferred securities incurred by the Company. The Company had available cash balances of $42.9 million and $5.9 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. This cash is available for the general corporate purposes described above, as well as providing capital support to the Bank and financing potential future acquisitions. In addition, the Company has up to $50.0 million available under a line of credit. See Note 11 - Borrowings contained in Item 8 of this report for more information.
There are regulatory restrictions on the ability of the Bank to pay dividends under federal and state laws, regulations and policies. See "Item 1. Business - Regulation and Supervision" above for more information.
As previously discussed, in light of the volatility and disruptions in the capital and credit markets resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and its negative impact on the economy, we took a number of precautionary actions to enhance our financial flexibility by bolstering our liquidity to ensure we have adequate cash readily available to meet both expected and unexpected funding needs. We have accessed and repaid liquidity both under the PPPLF and FHLB advance window during the year ended December 31, 2020, and currently have access to $2.91 billion of contingent liquidity sources including FHLB availability and PPPLF availability. We believe we currently have sufficient liquidity from the available on- and off-balance sheet liquidity sources. We continue to review actions that we may take to further enhance our financial flexibility in the event that market conditions deteriorate further or for an extended period.
In addition to cash generated from operations, we utilize a number of funding sources to manage our liquidity, including core deposits, investment securities, cash and cash equivalents, loan repayments, federal funds lines of credit available from other financial institutions, as well as advances from the FHLB. We may also use the discount window at the FRB as a source of short-term funding.
Core deposits, which are total deposits excluding time deposits greater than $250,000 and brokered deposits, are a major source of funds used to meet cash flow needs. Maintaining the ability to acquire these funds as needed in a variety of markets is the key to assuring our liquidity.
The investment portfolio is another source for meeting our liquidity needs. Monthly payments on mortgage-backed securities are used for short-term liquidity, and our investments are generally traded in active markets that offer a readily available source of cash through sales, if needed. Securities in our investment portfolio are also used to secure certain deposit types, such as deposits from state and local municipalities, and can be pledged as collateral for other borrowing sources.
Other sources available for meeting liquidity needs include long- and short-term advances from the FHLB, and federal funds lines of credit. Long-term funds obtained from the FHLB are primarily used as an alternative source to fund long-term growth of the balance sheet by supporting growth in loans and other long-term interest-earning assets. We typically rely on such funding when the cost of such borrowings compares favorably to the rates that we would be required to pay for other funding sources, including certain deposits. See Note 11 - Borrowings contained in Item 8 of this report for additional borrowing capacity and outstanding advances at the FHLB.
We also had unsecured federal funds lines of credit available to us, with no amounts outstanding at either December 31, 2020, or December 31, 2019. These lines of credit primarily provide short-term liquidity and in order to ensure availability of these funds, we test these lines of credit at least annually. Interest is charged at the prevailing market rate on federal funds purchased and FHLB advances.
Additionally, we had the ability to borrow at the discount window of the FRB using our commercial and industrial loans as collateral. There were no borrowings against this line at December 31, 2020.
In February 2020, Origin Bank completed an offering of $70.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 4.25% fixed-to-floating rate subordinated notes due 2030 (the “Notes”) to certain investors in a transaction exempt from registration under Section 3(a)(2) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. The Notes provided us with $68.8 million in additional liquidity.
In October 2020, we completed an offering of $80.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 4.50% fixed-to floating rate subordinated notes due 2030 (the “4.50% Notes”).
In July 2019, our board of directors authorized a stock buyback program pursuant to which we may, from time to time, purchase up to $40 million of our outstanding common stock. Please see the stock repurchases paragraphs under the Stockholders' Equity section of this Part II, Item 7 for more information on our stock buyback program.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations
In the normal course of business as a financial services provider, we enter into financial instruments, such as certain contractual obligations and commitments to extend credit and letters of credit, to meet the financing needs of our customers. These commitments involve elements of credit risk, interest rate risk and liquidity risk. Some instruments may not be reflected in our consolidated financial statements until they are funded, and a significant portion of commitments to extend credit may expire without being drawn, although they expose us to varying degrees of credit risk and interest rate risk in much the same way as funded loans.
The table below presents the funding requirements of our most significant financial commitments, excluding interest and purchase discounts, at the date indicated:
____________________________
(1)These commitments represent amounts we are obligated to contribute to various limited partnership investments in accordance with the provisions of the respective limited partnership agreements. The capital contributions may be required at any time, and are therefore reflected in the Less than One Year category.
Credit Related Commitments
Commitments to extend credit include revolving commercial credit lines, non-revolving loan commitments issued mainly to finance the acquisition and development or construction of real property or equipment, and credit card and personal credit lines. The availability of funds under commercial credit lines and loan commitments generally depends on whether the borrower continues to meet credit standards established in the underlying contract and has not violated other contractual conditions. Loan commitments generally have fixed expiration dates or other termination clauses and may require payment of a fee by the borrower. Credit card and personal credit lines are generally subject to cancellation if the borrower's credit quality deteriorates. A number of commercial and personal credit lines are used only partially or, in some cases, not at all before they expire, and the total commitment amounts do not necessarily represent future cash requirements.
A substantial majority of the letters of credit are standby agreements that obligate us to fulfill a customer's financial commitments to a third party if the customer is unable to perform. We issue standby letters of credit primarily to provide credit enhancement to our customers' other commercial or public financing arrangements and to help them demonstrate financial capacity to vendors of essential goods and services.
The table below presents our commitments to extend credit by commitment expiration date for the date indicated:
____________________________
(1)Includes $504.6 million of unconditionally cancellable commitments at December 31, 2020.
Stockholders' Equity
Stockholders' equity provides a source of permanent funding, allows for future growth and provides a degree of protection to withstand unforeseen adverse developments. At December 31, 2020, stockholders' equity was $647.2 million, representing an increase of $47.9 million, or 8.0%, compared to $599.3 million at December 31, 2019. Net income of $36.4 million and other comprehensive income of $19.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, were the primary drivers of the increase in stockholders' equity compared to December 31, 2019, and was partially offset by the $8.9 million dividend paid on the Company's common stock and the $723,000 repurchase of the Company's common stock that occurred during the period.
Stock Repurchases
In July 2019, our board of directors authorized a stock buyback program pursuant to which we may, from time to time, purchase up to $40 million of our outstanding common stock. The shares may be repurchased in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions from time to time, depending upon market conditions and other factors, and in accordance with applicable regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission. The stock buyback program is intended to expire in 2022, but may be terminated or amended by our board of directors at any time. The stock buyback program does not obligate us to purchase any shares at any time.
In three transactions that were consummated in March 2020, we repurchased a total of 30,868 shares of our common stock pursuant to our stock buyback program at an average price per share of $23.44 for an aggregate purchase price of $723,000. Prior to 2020, we had repurchased cumulatively $10.1 million of shares under the stock buyback program, and as of the date of this report, our board of directors has approved approximately $29.2 million additional shares to be purchased under the stock buyback program.
Regulatory Capital Requirements
Together with the Bank, we are subject to various regulatory capital requirements administered by federal banking agencies. These requirements are discussed in greater detail in "Item 1. Business - Regulation and Supervision". Failure to meet minimum capital requirements may result in certain actions by regulators that, if enforced, could have a direct material effect on our financial statements. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we and the Bank were in compliance with all applicable regulatory capital requirements, and the Bank was classified as "well capitalized" for purposes of the prompt corrective action regulations of the Federal Reserve. As we deploy capital and continue to grow operations, regulatory capital levels may decrease depending on the level of earnings. However, we expect to monitor and control growth in order to remain "well capitalized" under applicable regulatory guidelines and in compliance with all applicable regulatory capital standards. While we are currently classified as well capitalized, an extended economic recession brought about by COVID-19 could adversely impact our reported and regulatory capital ratios.
The following table presents our regulatory capital ratios, as well as those of the Bank, at the dates indicated:
The Notes and the 4.50% Notes both qualify as Tier 2 capital for the Company, and the $51.0 million that was transferred to Origin Bank during the fourth quarter of 2020, qualifies as Tier 1 capital for regulatory capital purposes at the Bank.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Our accounting and reporting policies conform to GAAP and the prevailing practices in the banking industry. However, we provided other financial measures, such as pre-tax, pre-provision earnings, in this report that are considered “non-GAAP financial measures.” Generally, a non-GAAP financial measure is a numerical measure of a company’s financial performance, financial position or cash flows that excludes (or includes) amounts that are included in (or excluded from) the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
We consider pre-tax, pre-provision earnings as presented in this report as an important measure of financial performance as it provides supplemental information that we use to evaluate our business, to assess underlying operational performance and to allow a comparison to prior periods without the impact of increases in the allowance for credit losses, and related income tax effects, associated with the implementation of CECL and continuing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
We believe non-GAAP measures and ratios, when taken together with the corresponding GAAP measures and ratios, provide meaningful supplemental information regarding our performance and capital strength. We use, and believe that investors benefit from referring to, non-GAAP measures in assessing our operating results and related trends. However, non-GAAP measures should be considered in addition to, and not as a substitute for or preferable to, amounts prepared in accordance with GAAP. In the following table, we have provided a reconciliation of pre-tax pre-provision earnings to the most comparable GAAP financial measure.
____________________________
(1)Including ESOP-owned shares of 34,991 and 28,564 for the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively.
(2)Assumes the conversion of 901,644 shares of Series D preferred stock into common stock on a one-for-one basis for the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively.