ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis (MD&A) is intended to help investors understand Owens Corning, our operations and our present business environment. MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying Notes thereto contained in this report. Unless the context requires otherwise, the terms “Owens Corning,” “Company,” “we,” "its," and “our” in this report refer to Owens Corning and its subsidiaries.
This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in Part II, Item 7 of the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
GENERAL
Owens Corning is a leading global producer of glass fiber reinforcements and other materials for composites and of residential, commercial and industrial building materials. The Company has three reporting segments: Composites, Insulation and Roofing. Through these lines of business, the Company manufactures and sells products worldwide. We maintain leading market positions in many of our major product categories.
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
The COVID-19 pandemic caused significant uncertainty in the markets we serve and increased volatility in the financial markets in 2020. The spread of COVID-19 impacted the Company's operations and financial results in varying ways as the impact and pace of recovery varied throughout the geographies and end markets we serve. While the pandemic continues to pervade much of the globe, we are continuing to serve our customers, while taking significant precautions to provide a safe environment for our employees and customers. The extent of the pandemic’s effect on our operational and financial performance will depend in large part on future developments, which cannot be predicted with confidence at this time. Future developments include the duration, scope and severity of the pandemic, the actions taken to contain or mitigate its impact, the impact on governmental programs and budgets, the effective distribution of vaccines or other treatments, and the continued resumption of widespread economic activity.
Net loss attributable to Owens Corning was $383 million in 2020, compared to Net earnings attributable to Owens Corning of $405 million in 2019. The Company reported a loss of $124 million in earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT) in 2020 compared to earnings of $753 million in 2019. The Company generated $878 million in adjusted earnings before interest and taxes (“Adjusted EBIT”) in 2020 compared to $828 million in 2019. See the Adjusted Earnings Before Interest and Taxes paragraph of MD&A for further information regarding EBIT and Adjusted EBIT, including the reconciliation to net earnings (loss) attributable to Owens Corning. Segment EBIT performance compared to 2019 decreased $82 million in our Composites segment, increased $20 million in our Insulation segment, and increased $136 million in our Roofing segment. Within our Corporate, Other and Eliminations category, General corporate expenses and other increased by $24 million.
Cash and cash equivalents were $717 million as of December 31, 2020, compared to $172 million as of December 31, 2019, as a result of strong cash flow provided by operating activities, lower cash paid for additions to property, plant and equipment and the issuance of $300 million of 2030 senior notes on May 12, 2020. In 2020, the Company's operating activities provided $1,135 million of cash flow, compared to $1,037 million in 2019. The change was primarily driven by lower inventories year-over-year. During 2020, the Company repaid all outstanding borrowings on the term loan associated with the purchase of Paroc.
In December 2020, the Board of Directors approved a share buy-back program under which the Company is authorized to repurchase up to 10 million shares of the Company's outstanding common stock (the "2020 Repurchase Authorization"). The 2020 Repurchase Authorization is in addition to the share buy-back program announced October 24, 2016 (the 2016 Repurchase Authorization and collectively with the 2020 Repurchase Authorization, the "Repurchase Authorization"). The Repurchase Authorization enables the Company to repurchase shares through open market, privately negotiated, or other transactions. The actual number of shares repurchased will depend on timing, market conditions and other factors and is at the Company's discretion. In 2020, the Company repurchased 4.1 million shares of the Company’s common stock for $292 million under a previously announced repurchase authorization. As of December 31, 2020, 9.5 million shares remain available for repurchase under the repurchase authorization.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (continued)
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Consolidated Results (in millions)
The Consolidated Results discussion below provides a summary of our results and the trends affecting our business, and should be read in conjunction with the more detailed Segment Results discussion that follows.
NET SALES
Net sales decreased $105 million in 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease in net sales was primarily driven by lower selling prices across all three segments. Higher sales volumes in our Roofing segment were partially offset by lower third party asphalt sales, lower sales volumes in our Composites segment and an unfavorable product mix in our Composites and Insulation segments.
GROSS MARGIN
Gross margin in 2020 was largely flat compared to 2019.
MARKETING AND ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES
Marketing and administrative expenses decreased $34 million in 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by cost control actions across the Company.
GOODWILL IMPAIRMENT CHARGE
The Company recorded a non-cash impairment charge of $944 million in the first quarter of 2020 related to the Insulation reporting unit, which was equal to the excess of the reporting unit's carrying value over its fair value.
OTHER EXPENSES, NET
Other expenses, net increased $21 million in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase was primarily driven by intangible asset impairment charges of $43 million and $13 million of higher restructuring charges, partially offset by $26 million of gains on sale of precious metals used in production tooling as needs changed in response to economic and technological factors.
NON-OPERATING EXPENSE (INCOME)
Non-operating expense (income) decreased $48 million compared to 2019, primarily due to the $43 million favorable year-over-year comparison to pension settlement losses recognized in 2019.
INTEREST EXPENSE, NET
Interest expense, net in 2020 was largely flat compared to 2019.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (continued)
LOSS ON EXTINGUISHMENT OF DEBT
During 2020, there were no extinguishments of debt. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recognized a $32 million loss on extinguishment of debt in connection with the repurchase of a portion of its outstanding 2022 senior notes and 2036 senior notes in a tender offer.
INCOME TAX EXPENSE
Income tax expense for 2020 was $129 million compared to $186 million in 2019. The Company’s effective tax rate for 2020 was (50%) on pre-tax losses of $256 million. The difference between the (50%) effective tax rate and the U.S. federal statutory tax rate of 21% is primarily attributable to charges related to the impairment of goodwill and certain other indefinite-lived intangible assets recorded in the first quarter of 2020, which were largely non-deductible. In addition, non-cash charges were recorded related to adjustments to valuation allowances against certain deferred tax assets. The company also recorded an amortizable asset in the US related to its transfer of economic rights of its non-US based Intellectual Property to the U.S., as further discussed in the following paragraph.
In December 2020, the Company completed an intercompany restructuring that resulted in the transfer of certain intellectual property rights held by wholly owned foreign subsidiaries to the U.S. The intellectual property rights transferred to the U.S. resulted in a step-up in the tax basis for U.S. tax purposes resulting in the Company recognizing a deferred tax asset of $37 million and a current year tax expense of $5 million. The recognized tax benefit of $37 million is amortizable for U.S. tax purposes over a fifteen-year period.
On July 20, 2020 the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) issued final regulations under IRC Section 951A permitting a taxpayer to elect to exclude from its inclusion of global intangible low-taxed income (GILTI), income subject to a high foreign effective tax rate. As a result of the final regulations, the Company recorded a net non-cash income tax benefit of $13 million in the third quarter relating to the 2018 and 2019 tax years.
On March 6, 2019, the U.S. Treasury and the IRS proposed regulations that provide guidance on determining the amount of a domestic corporation’s deduction for GILTI and foreign-derived intangible income (FDII) recently added by the Tax Act. The proposed regulations provide special rules to determine the deduction amount, which adjusted the Company’s 2018 tax estimate and resulted in an increase to tax expense of $12 million for 2019.
The realization of deferred tax assets depends on achieving a certain minimum level of future taxable income. Management currently believes that it is at least reasonably possible that the minimum level of taxable income will be met within the next 12 months to reduce the valuation allowances of certain foreign jurisdictions by a range of zero to $9 million.
The Company’s effective tax rate for 2019 was 31% on pre-tax income of $590 million. The difference between the 31% effective tax rate and the U.S. federal statutory tax rate of 21% is primarily attributable to U.S. state and local income tax expense, legislative changes, the impact of U.S federal tax expense on foreign earnings, an increase in tax valuation allowances recorded against U.S. foreign tax credits and certain foreign deferred tax assets and other discrete adjustments.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (continued)
Restructuring and Acquisition-Related Costs
The Company has incurred restructuring, transaction and integration costs related to acquisitions, along with restructuring costs in connection with its global cost reduction and productivity initiatives. These costs are recorded in the Corporate, Other and Eliminations category. Please refer to Note 10 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on the nature of these costs.
The following table presents the impact and respective location of these income (expense) items on the Consolidated Statements of Earnings (Loss) (in millions):
Adjusted Earnings Before Interest and Taxes (“Adjusted EBIT”)
Adjusted EBIT is a non-GAAP measure that excludes certain items that management does not allocate to our segment results because it believes they are not representative of the Company’s ongoing operations. Adjusted EBIT is used internally by the Company for various purposes, including reporting results of operations to the Board of Directors of the Company, analysis of performance and related employee compensation measures. Although management believes that these adjustments result in a measure that provides a useful representation of our operational performance, the adjusted measure should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for Net earnings (loss) attributable to Owens Corning as prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States.
Adjusting (expense) income items to EBIT are shown in the table below (in millions):
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (continued)
The reconciliation from Net earnings (loss) attributable to Owens Corning to EBIT and Adjusted EBIT is shown in the table below (in millions):
Segment Results
EBIT by segment consists of net sales less related costs and expenses and is presented on a basis that is used internally for evaluating segment performance. Certain items, such as general corporate expenses or income and certain other expense or income items, are excluded from the internal evaluation of segment performance. Accordingly, these items are not reflected in EBIT for our reportable segments and are included in the Corporate, Other and Eliminations category, which is presented following the discussion of our reportable segments.
Composites
The table below provides a summary of net sales, EBIT and depreciation and amortization expense for the Composites segment (in millions):
NET SALES
Net sales in our Composites segment decreased $99 million in 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease was due to lower sales volumes of approximately 1% due to the impact on demand from the COVID-19 pandemic, lower selling prices of $27 million, the unfavorable impact of $20 million from translating sales denominated in foreign currencies into United States Dollars, and the impact of unfavorable customer and product mix.
EBIT
EBIT in our Composites segment decreased $82 million in 2020 compared to 2019. The decline was driven by the $86 million unfavorable impact of production curtailment actions taken in response to the decline in demand from the COVID-19 pandemic. Favorable manufacturing performance of $43 million was offset by lower selling prices and the unfavorable impact of lower sales volumes. The $19 million unfavorable impact of translating sales and costs denominated in foreign currencies into United States Dollars was offset by lower selling, general and administrative expenses. Lower transportation costs and input cost deflation more than offset the impact of unfavorable customer mix.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (continued)
OUTLOOK
Global glass reinforcements market demand has historically been correlated with global industrial production and we believe this relationship will continue. The Company expects the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to create uncertainty in its end markets. The magnitude of the impact will depend on the depth and duration of the crisis, as well as the timing of the recovery in the markets served by the Composites segment. The company continues to focus on managing costs, capital expenditures, and working capital.
Insulation
The table below provides a summary of net sales, EBIT and depreciation and amortization expense for the Insulation segment (in millions):
NET SALES
In our Insulation segment, 2020 net sales decreased $61 million compared to 2019. The decrease was due to the impact of unfavorable customer and product mix, the $18 million unfavorable impact from the divestiture of an immaterial business in the first quarter of 2020, and lower selling prices of $12 million. Volume growth was largely flat across the segment, with positive volume growth in our North American residential fiberglass business offsetting volume declines in our technical and other building insulation businesses.
EBIT
In our Insulation segment, EBIT increased $20 million in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to favorable manufacturing performance partially offset by $12 million in lower selling prices. The $19 million favorable impact of lower selling, general and administrative expenses and the $5 million gain on the divestiture of an immaterial business in the first quarter of 2020 were offset by the unfavorable impact of customer and product mix and higher delivery costs.
OUTLOOK
The outlook for Insulation demand is driven by North American new residential construction, remodeling and repair activity, as well as commercial and industrial construction activity in the United States, Canada, Europe and Asia-Pacific. Demand in commercial and industrial insulation markets is most closely correlated to industrial production growth and overall economic activity in the global markets we serve. Demand for residential insulation is most closely correlated to U.S. housing starts.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, the average Seasonally Adjusted Annual Rate (SAAR) of U.S. housing starts was approximately 1.592 million starts, which was up from 1.433 million starts in the fourth quarter of 2019.
Through the fourth quarter of 2020, the North American new residential construction recovery has continued, while global commercial and industrial construction activity has recovered at a slower pace. The Company expects the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to create uncertainty in its end markets. The magnitude of the impact will depend on the depth and duration of the crisis, and the pace of recovery in the end markets and geographies served by the Insulation segment. The company continues to focus on managing costs, capital expenditures, and working capital.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (continued)
Roofing
The table below provides a summary of net sales, EBIT and depreciation and amortization expense for the Roofing segment (in millions):
NET SALES
In our Roofing segment, net sales increased $61 million in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase was driven by higher sales volumes of about 6% on higher shingle and components volumes, partially offset by $64 million of lower third-party asphalt sales and $51 million of lower selling prices.
EBIT
In our Roofing segment, EBIT increased $136 million in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase was largely driven by the impact of higher sales volumes, favorable manufacturing performance of $19 million, $12 million in lower transportation costs and the $11 million benefit related to the recovery of certain tariffs paid over the past two years, following a short-term exclusion request granted by the U.S. government. The unfavorable impact of lower selling prices was more than offset by $89 million of input cost deflation, primarily asphalt.
OUTLOOK
In our Roofing segment, we expect the factors that have driven strong margins in recent years, such as growth from remodeling demand, along with higher sales of roofing components, to continue to deliver profitability. Uncertainties that may impact our Roofing margins include demand from storm and other weather events, demand from new construction, competitive pricing pressure and the cost and availability of raw materials, particularly asphalt.
Despite recent strength in the U.S. asphalt shingle market, the Company expects the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to create uncertainty in its end markets. The magnitude of the impact will depend on the depth and duration of the crisis, as well as the timing of the recovery in the markets served by the Roofing segment. The company continues to focus on managing costs, capital expenditures, and working capital.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (continued)
Corporate, Other and Eliminations
The table below provides a summary of EBIT and depreciation and amortization expense for the Corporate, Other and Eliminations category (in millions):
EBIT
In Corporate, Other and Eliminations, EBIT losses in 2020 were $951 million higher compared to 2019, primarily due to the $944 million goodwill impairment charge and $43 million of intangible assets impairment charge recorded in the first quarter of 2020. Additional details of this charge are further explained in both the Critical Accounting Estimates paragraph of MD&A and Note 5 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
General corporate expense and other in 2020 was $24 million higher than in 2019, driven primarily by higher performance-based compensation associated with improved Adjusted EBIT results for 2020.
OUTLOOK
In 2021, we expect general corporate expenses to range between $135 and 145 million.
LIQUIDITY, CAPITAL RESOURCES AND OTHER RELATED MATTERS
Liquidity
The Company's primary sources of liquidity are its its balance of Cash and cash equivalents of $717 million as of December 31, 2020, its Senior Revolving Credit Facility and its Receivables Securitization Facility (each as defined below).
The Company has an $800 million senior revolving credit facility (the "Senior Revolving Credit Facility") that has been amended from time to time, which matures in May 2024.
The Company has a $280 million securitization facility (the "Receivables Securitization Facility") that has been amended from time to time, which matures in April 2022.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (continued)
The following table shows how the Company utilized its primary sources of liquidity (in millions):
The Company issued $300 million of 2030 senior notes on May 12, 2020 subject to $3 million of discounts and issuance costs. Interest on the notes is payable semiannually in arrears on June 1 and December 1 each year, beginning on December 1, 2020. The proceeds from these notes were used for general corporate purposes.
The Company issued $450 million of 2029 senior notes on August 12, 2019. Interest on the 2029 senior notes is payable semiannually in arrears on February 15 and August 15 each year, beginning on February 15, 2020. The proceeds from the 2029 senior notes were used to repay portions of the 2022 senior notes and 2036 senior notes. The Company recognized $32 million of loss on extinguishment of debt in the third quarter of 2019 associated with these actions.
The Company obtained a term loan commitment on October 27, 2017 for $600 million (the "Term Loan"). The Company entered into the Term Loan, in part, to pay a portion of the purchase price of the Paroc acquisition. The Term Loan contained quarterly principal repayments and full repayment by February 2021. In the third quarter of 2020, the Company repaid all outstanding borrowings on the Term Loan.
The Receivables Securitization Facility and Senior Revolving Credit Facility mature in 2022 and 2024, respectively. The Company has no significant debt maturities of senior notes before 2022. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had $3.1 billion of total debt and cash and cash equivalents of $717 million.
Cash and cash equivalents held by foreign subsidiaries may be subject to foreign withholding taxes upon repatriation to the U.S. As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the Company had $71 million and $30 million, respectively, in cash and cash equivalents in certain of its foreign subsidiaries. The Company continues to assert indefinite reinvestment in accordance with ASC 740 based on the laws as of enactment of the tax legislation commonly known as the U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017.
As a holding company, we have no operations of our own and most of our assets are held by our direct and indirect subsidiaries. Dividends and other payments or distributions from our subsidiaries will be used to meet our debt service and other obligations and to enable us to pay dividends to our stockholders. Please refer to the Risk Factors disclosed in Item 1A of this Form 10-K for details on the factors that could inhibit our subsidiaries' abilities to pay dividends or make other distributions to the parent company.
Our anticipated uses of cash include capital expenditures, working capital needs, pension contributions, meeting financial obligations, payments of quarterly dividends as authorized by our Board of Directors, acquisitions and repaying outstanding amounts under the Senior Revolving Credit Facility and Receivables Securitization Facility if drawn. We expect that our cash on hand, coupled with future cash flows from operations and other available sources of liquidity, including our Senior Revolving Credit Facility and our Receivables Securitization Facility, will provide ample liquidity to enable us to meet our cash requirements.
We have outstanding share repurchase authorizations and will evaluate and consider repurchasing shares of our common stock, as well as strategic acquisitions, divestitures, joint ventures and other transactions to create stockholder value and enhance financial performance. Such transactions may require cash expenditures beyond current sources of liquidity or generate proceeds.
The credit agreements applicable to our Senior Revolving Credit Facility and Receivables Securitization Facility contain various covenants that we believe are usual and customary. These covenants include a maximum allowed leverage ratio and a minimum required interest expense coverage ratio. We were in compliance with these covenants as of December 31, 2020.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (continued)
Supplier Finance Programs
We review supplier terms and conditions on an ongoing basis, and have negotiated payment terms extensions in recent years in connection with our efforts to reduce working capital and improve cash flow. Separate from those terms extension actions, certain of our subsidiaries have entered into paying agency agreements with third-party administrators. These voluntary supply chain finance programs (collectively, the “Programs”) generally give participating suppliers the ability to sell, or otherwise pledge as collateral, their receivables from the Company to the participating financial institutions, at the sole discretion of both the suppliers and financial institutions. The Company is not a party to the arrangements between the suppliers and the financial institutions. The Company’s obligations to its suppliers, including amounts due and scheduled payment dates, are not impacted by the suppliers’ decisions to sell, or otherwise pledge as collateral, amounts under these arrangements. One of our programs includes a parent guarantee to the participating financial institution for a certain U.S. subsidiary that, at the time of the respective program’s inception in 2015, was a guarantor subsidiary of the Company’s Credit Agreement.
The payables associated with suppliers choosing to voluntarily participate in the Programs were presented as accounts payable within Total current liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets, and totaled $170 million and $117 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The amounts paid that are associated with suppliers once they chose to voluntarily participate in the Programs for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 were $375 million, $344 million and $369 million, respectively, with all activity related to the obligations presented within operating activities on the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows.
The desire of suppliers and financial institutions to participate in the Programs could be negatively impacted by, among other factors, the availability of capital committed by the participating financial institutions, the cost and availability of our suppliers’ capital, a credit rating downgrade or deteriorating financial performance of the Company or its participating subsidiaries, or other changes in financial markets beyond our control. We do not expect these risks, or potential long-term growth of our programs, to materially affect our overall financial condition, as we expect a significant portion of our payments to continue to be made outside of the Programs. Accordingly, we do not believe the programs have materially impacted our current period liquidity, and do not believe that the programs are reasonably likely to materially affect liquidity in the future.
Cash Flows
The following table presents a summary of our cash balance, cash flows, and availability on credit facilities (in millions):
Cash and cash equivalents: Cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020 increased $545 million compared to December 31, 2019, primarily due to higher cash flow provided by operating activities, lower cash paid for property, plant and equipment, and from the issuance of the 2030 senior notes during 2020.
Operating activities: In 2020, the Company generated $1,135 million of cash from operating activities compared to $1,037 million in 2019. The change in cash provided by operating activities was primarily due to lower inventories and higher accounts payable and accrued liabilities compared to 2019.
Investing activities: The $189 million decrease in cash used for investing activities in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily driven by lower cash paid for property, plant and equipment and higher proceeds from the sale of assets and derivative settlements compared to the prior year.
Financing activities: Net cash used for financing activities in 2020 was $358 million compared to $573 million in 2019. The change year-over-year was primarily due to the issuance of the 2030 senior notes during the second quarter of 2020 and lower
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (continued)
payments on the Term Loan (see Note 11 of the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Liquidity section above for further discussion of activities related to debt).
2021 Investments
Capital Expenditures: The Company will continue a balanced approach to the use of its cash flows. Operational cash flow will be used to fund the Company’s growth and innovation. Capital expenditures in 2021 are expected to increase to approximately $460 million, primarily driven by capacity expansion in our Composites segment.
Tax Net Operating Losses and U.S. Foreign Tax Credits (FTCs)
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, our federal tax net operating losses remaining were $111 million and $126 million, respectively. The decrease in U.S. federal tax NOLs is primarily due to the impact of 2020 estimated taxable income. The company generated a significant U.S. FTC in 2017 of approximately $161 million as a result of changes from the Tax Act. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, our remaining U.S. FTCs were $49 million and $119 million, respectively. Our NOL and FTC carryforwards are subject to the limitations imposed under sections 382 and 383 of the Internal Revenue Code. These limits are triggered when a change in control occurs and are computed based upon several variable factors including the share price of the Company’s common stock on the date of the change in control. A change in control is generally defined as a cumulative change of more than 50% in the ownership positions of certain stockholders during a rolling three-year period.
In addition to the United States federal tax NOLs described above, we have NOLs in various state and foreign jurisdictions which totaled $1,160 million and $418 million as of December 31, 2020, respectively, and $1,352 million and $366 million as of December 31, 2019, respectively. The decrease in state NOL is due to our estimate of 2020 taxable income. The evaluation of the amount of NOLs and FTCs expected to be realized necessarily involves forecasting the amount of taxable income that will be generated in future years. In assessing the realizability of our deferred tax assets, we have not relied on any material future tax planning strategies. We have forecasted future results in accordance with the recently enacted Tax Act using estimates management believes to be reasonable, which are based on independent evidence such as expected trends resulting from certain leading economic indicators, such as global industrial production and new U.S. residential housing starts. In order to utilize our NOLs, we estimate that the Company will need to generate future federal, state and foreign earnings before taxes of approximately $111 million, $1,115 million and $395 million, respectively. Management believes the Company will generate sufficient future taxable income within the statutory limitations in order to fully realize the carrying value of its U.S. federal NOLs. As of December 31, 2020, a valuation allowance was established for U.S. FTC carryforwards and certain state and foreign jurisdictions’ NOL carryforwards.
The realization of deferred income tax assets is dependent on future events. Actual results inevitably will vary from management’s forecasts. Should we determine that it is likely that our deferred income tax assets are not realizable, we would be required to reduce our deferred tax assets reflected on our Consolidated Financial Statements to the net realizable amount by establishing an accounting valuation allowance and recording a corresponding charge to current earnings. Such adjustments could be material to the financial statements. To date, we have recorded valuation allowances against certain of these deferred tax assets totaling $133 million as of December 31, 2020.
Pension Contributions
Please refer to Note 12 of the Consolidated Financial Statements. The Company has several defined benefit pension plans. The Company made cash contributions of $122 million and $46 million to the plans during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Company expects to contribute $25 million in cash to its pension plans during 2021. Actual contributions to the plans may change as a result of several factors, including changes in laws that impact funding requirements. The ultimate cash flow impact to the Company, if any, of the pension plan liability and the timing of any such impact will depend on numerous variables, including future changes in actuarial assumptions, legislative changes to pension funding laws, and market conditions.
Derivatives
Please refer to Note 4 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Fair Value Measurement
Please refer to Notes 1, 4, and 11 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (continued)
OFF-BALANCE-SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
The Company has entered into limited off-balance-sheet arrangements, as defined under Securities and Exchange Commission rules, in the ordinary course of business. The Company does not believe these arrangements will have a material effect on the Company’s financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (continued)
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
In the ordinary course of business, the Company enters into contractual obligations to make cash payments to third parties. The Company’s known contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 are as follows (in millions):
(1)Interest on variable rate debt is calculated using LIBOR rates as of December 31, 2020 plus a facility credit spread for all future periods.
(2)Purchase obligations are commitments to suppliers to purchase goods or services, and include take-or-pay arrangements, capital expenditures, and contractual commitments to purchase equipment. The Company did not include ordinary course of business purchase orders in this amount as the majority of such purchase orders may be canceled and are reflected in historical operating cash flow trends. The Company does not believe such purchase orders will adversely affect our liquidity position.
(3)Pension contributions include estimated contributions for our defined benefit pension plans. The Company is not presenting estimated payments in the table above beyond 2021 as funding can vary significantly from year to year based upon changes in the fair value of plan assets, funding regulations and actuarial assumptions.
(4)The Company has not included its accounting for uncertainty in income taxes liability in the contractual obligation table as the timing of payment, if any, cannot be reasonably estimated. The balance of this liability at December 31, 2020 was $19 million.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. On an ongoing basis, management evaluates its estimates and judgments related to these assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. We believe these estimates to be reasonable under the circumstances. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience, expected future outcomes, and on various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
The Company believes that the following accounting estimates are critical to our financial results:
Tax Estimates. The determination of our tax provision is complex due to operations in several tax jurisdictions outside the United States. We apply a more-likely-than-not recognition threshold for all tax uncertainties. Such uncertainties include any claims by the Internal Revenue Service for income taxes, interest, and penalties attributable to audits of open tax years.
In addition, we record a valuation allowance to reduce our deferred tax assets to the amount that we believe is more likely than not to be realized. We estimate future taxable income and the effect of tax planning strategies in our consideration of whether deferred tax assets will more likely than not be realized. In the event we were to determine that we would not be able to realize all or part of our net deferred tax assets in the future, an adjustment to reduce the net deferred tax assets would be charged to
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (continued)
earnings in the period such determination was made. Conversely, if we were to determine that we would be able to realize our net deferred tax assets in the future in excess of their currently recorded amount, an adjustment to increase the net deferred tax assets would be credited to earnings in the period such determination was made.
Impairment of Assets. The Company exercises judgment in evaluating assets for impairment. Goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment annually, or when circumstances arise which indicate there may be an impairment. Long-lived assets are tested for impairment when economic conditions or management decisions indicate an impairment may exist. These tests require comparing recorded values to estimated fair values for the assets under review.
The Company has recorded its goodwill and conducted testing for potential goodwill impairment at a reporting unit level. Our reporting units represent a business for which discrete financial information is available and segment management regularly reviews the operating results. The Company has three reporting units: Composites, Insulation and Roofing.
First Quarter of 2020 Goodwill Impairment Charge
As of the prior year annual goodwill impairment testing date (October 1, 2019), testing indicated that the business enterprise value for the Insulation reporting unit exceeded its carrying value by approximately 10%. As described in our 2019 Form 10-K, there was uncertainty surrounding the macroeconomic factors impacting this reporting unit and a downturn in these factors or a change in the long-term revenue growth or profitability for this reporting unit could increase the likelihood of a future impairment. Accordingly, the Insulation reporting unit was the reporting unit most susceptible to an impairment during an economic downturn.
In the first quarter of 2020, the Company performed its ongoing assessment to consider whether events or circumstances had occurred that could more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying value. The valuation limitation from the Company’s share price decline during the first quarter of 2020, the narrow cushion on the Insulation reporting unit and the high level of near-term macroeconomic uncertainty related to the COVID-19 pandemic caused the Company to perform an interim goodwill impairment test as of March 31, 2020 over the Insulation reporting unit. After evaluating and weighing all relevant events and circumstances, and considering the substantial excess fair values for these reporting units, we concluded that it was not more likely than not that the fair value of the Roofing and Composites reporting units were less than their carrying values. Consequently, we determined that it was not necessary to perform an interim impairment test for the Roofing and Composites reporting units.
As part of our quantitative testing process for goodwill of the Insulation reporting unit, we estimated fair values using a discounted cash flow analysis, a form of the income approach, from the perspective of a market participant. Significant assumptions used in the discounted cash flow analysis were revenue growth rates and EBIT margins used in estimating discrete period cash flow forecasts of the reporting unit, the discount rate, and the long-term revenue growth rate and EBIT margins used in estimating the terminal business value. For our interim test, the cash flow forecasts of the reporting unit were based upon management’s near-term and long-term views of our markets and represented the forecasts used by senior management and the Board of Directors to operate the business during the COVID-19 pandemic and evaluate operating performance in the first quarter of 2020. The discount rate utilized was management’s estimate of what the market’s weighted average cost of capital is for a company with a similar debt rating and stock volatility, as measured by beta, which included an additional risk premium due to uncertainty surrounding the level and pace of economic recovery. The terminal business value was determined by applying the long-term growth rate to the latest year for which a forecast exists. At the time of the analysis, the Company asserted that the Insulation reporting unit’s long-term market-size and profitability outlook had not meaningfully deteriorated since the time of our most recent annual impairment test. The overall enterprise fair value of the Company was limited by the decline in our share price in the first quarter of 2020. The reduction in fair value of the Insulation reporting unit, and corresponding impairment charge, was primarily driven by an increase in the discount rate arising from higher equity risk premiums that reflected significant uncertainty surrounding the effect that the COVID-19 pandemic would have on the reporting unit’s near-term cash flows and a decrease in the reporting unit's forecasted near-term cash flows. As part of our goodwill quantitative testing process, the Company evaluates whether there are reasonably likely changes to management’s estimates that would have a material impact on the results of the goodwill impairment testing. Please refer to Note 5 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details on the impairment charge that was recorded in the first quarter of 2020.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (continued)
2020 Annual Goodwill Impairment Assessment
Goodwill is an intangible asset that is not subject to amortization; however, annual tests are required to be performed to determine whether impairment exists. Prior to performing impairment testing process described in ASC 350-20, the guidance permits companies to assess qualitative factors to determine if it is more likely than not that a reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying value. If, based on the review of the qualitative factors, we determine it is not more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, we would bypass the one-step impairment test. Events and circumstances we consider in performing the qualitative assessment include macro-economic conditions, market and industry conditions, internal cost factors, and the operational stability and the overall financial performance of the reporting units. If it is more likely than not that a reporting unit’s fair value is greater than its carrying value, then no additional testing is required. If it is more likely than not that a reporting unit’s fair value is less than or close to its carrying value, then the impairment test must be performed to determine if impairment is required.
In 2020, the Company has elected to perform the qualitative approach on its Roofing and Composites reporting units, and proceeded in performing a step one analysis for the Insulation reporting unit. After evaluating and weighing all relevant events and circumstances, we concluded that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of the Roofing and Composites reporting units was less than their carrying amounts. Consequently, we did not perform a step one quantitative analysis for the Roofing and Composites reporting units and determined goodwill was not impaired for 2020.
As part of our quantitative testing process for goodwill of the Insulation reporting unit, we estimated fair values using a discounted cash flow approach from the perspective of a market participant. Significant assumptions used in the discounted cash flow approach are revenue growth rates and EBIT margins used in estimating discrete period cash flow forecasts of the reporting unit, the discount rate, and the long-term revenue growth rate and EBIT margins used in estimating the terminal business value. The cash flow forecasts of the reporting unit are based upon management’s long-term view of our markets and are the forecasts that are used by senior management and the Board of Directors to evaluate operating performance. The discount rate utilized is management’s estimate of what the market’s weighted average cost of capital is for a company with a similar debt rating and stock volatility, as measured by beta. The terminal business value is determined by applying the long-term growth rate to the latest year for which a forecast exists. As part of our goodwill quantitative testing process, the Company evaluates whether there are reasonably likely changes to management’s estimates that would have a material impact on the results of the goodwill impairment testing.
Our annual test of goodwill for impairment was conducted as of October 1, 2020. As a result of the Insulation reporting unit's improved financial performance throughout 2020, an improved outlook in the macroeconomic factors impacting the Insulation reporting unit, and the significant recovery of the Company's stock price since the first quarter of 2020, the fair value of the Insulation reporting unit was significantly in excess of its carrying value and, thus, no impairment exists.
The following table summarizes the segment allocation of recorded goodwill on our Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2020 (in millions):
First Quarter of 2020 Intangible Assets Impairment Charge
Other indefinite-lived intangible assets are the Company’s trademarks. Our prior year annual test of indefinite-lived intangibles was conducted as of October 1, 2019. The fair value of each of our indefinite-lived intangible assets was in excess of its carrying value and thus, no impairment existed. The fair value of these assets substantially exceeded the carrying value as of the date of that assessment.
During the first quarter of 2020, we performed an interim impairment test on certain trademarks and trade names used by our Insulation segment. Fair values used in testing for potential impairment of our trademarks were calculated by applying an estimated market value royalty rate to the forecasted revenues of the businesses that utilize those assets. The assumed cash flows from this calculation were discounted at a rate based on a market participant discount rate, which included a risk premium
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (continued)
due to the near-term economic uncertainty from the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on the projected revenue derived from the trademarks. For two assets used by our Insulation segment, the reduction in fair values, and corresponding impairment charges, were driven by a lower expected near-term sales outlook, the compounding effect of lower expected sales following an immaterial divestiture in the first quarter of 2020 and a higher discount rate associated with the near-term economic uncertainty from the COVID-19 pandemic. Please refer to Note 5 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details on the impairment charges that were recorded in the first quarter of 2020. The assets affected by the impairment charge had an aggregate carrying value of $264 million as of December 31, 2020.
Annual 2020 Indefinite-lived Intangible Asset Impairment Assessment
Fair values used in testing for potential impairment of our trademarks are calculated by applying an estimated market value royalty rate to the forecasted revenues of the businesses that utilize those assets. The assumed cash flows from this calculation are discounted at a rate based on a market participant discount rate. Our annual test of indefinite-lived intangibles was conducted as of October 1, 2020. The fair value of each of our indefinite-lived intangible assets was in excess of its carrying value and thus, no impairment exists.
Testing indicated that the outlook had improved for the macroeconomic factors impacting our global cellular glass insulation products such that the fair value of the trademark that was previously impaired in the first quarter of 2020 now substantially exceeds its carrying value.
Testing also indicated that the fair value of a trade name used by our European building and technical insulation business within our Insulation segment exceeded its carrying value by approximately 7%. A change in the estimated long-term revenue growth rate or increase in the discount rate assumption could increase the likelihood of a future impairment for this asset. Assuming all other assumptions remain constant, a 50 basis point increase in the selected discount rate of 11.0% would decrease the fair value of the trade name by approximately 5%, and a 50 basis point decrease in the selected long-term growth rate of 1.5% would decrease the fair value of the trade name by approximately 3%. The affected asset had a carrying value of $173 million as of December 31, 2020.
The fair value of the remaining assets substantially exceeded the carrying value as of the date of our assessment.
Long-lived Asset Recoverability Assessment
Fair values for long-lived asset testing are calculated by estimating the undiscounted cash flows from the use and ultimate disposition of the asset or by estimating the amount that a willing third party would pay. For impairment testing, long-lived assets are grouped at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other groups of assets and liabilities. The Company groups long-lived assets based on manufacturing facilities that produce similar products either globally or within a geographic region. Management tests asset groups for potential impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Current market conditions have caused the Company to have idle capacity. We consider such temporary idled capacity to be unimpaired because there has not been a significant change in the forecasted long-term cash flows at the asset group level to indicate that the carrying values may not be recoverable. While management’s current strategy is to utilize this capacity to meet expected future demand, any significant decrease in this expectation or change in management’s strategy could result in future impairment charges related to this excess capacity. We evaluated and concluded that there are not any reasonably likely changes to management’s estimates that would indicate that the carrying value of our long-lived assets is unrecoverable.
However, changes in management intentions, market conditions, operating performance and other similar circumstances could affect the assumptions used in these impairment tests. Changes in the assumptions could result in impairment charges that could be material to our Consolidated Financial Statements in any given period.
Pensions and Other Postretirement Benefits. Accounting for pensions and other postretirement benefits involves estimating the cost of benefits to be provided well into the future and attributing that cost over the time period each employee works. To accomplish this, extensive use is made of assumptions about investment returns, discount rates, inflation, mortality, turnover, and medical costs. Changes in assumptions used could result in a material impact to our Consolidated Financial Statements in any given period.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (continued)
Two key assumptions that could have a significant impact on the measurement of pension liabilities and pension expense are the discount rate and the expected return on plan assets. For our largest plan, the United States plan, the discount rate used for the December 31, 2020 measurement date is based on a yield curve approach where the expected future benefit payments are matched with a yield curve derived from certain AA-rated corporate bonds.
The result supported a discount rate of 2.50% at December 31, 2020 compared to 3.30% at December 31, 2019. A 25 basis point increase (decrease) in the discount rate would decrease (increase) the December 31, 2020 projected benefit obligation for the United States pension plan by approximately $26 million. A 25 basis point increase (decrease) in the discount rate would decrease (increase) 2021 net periodic pension cost by less than $1 million.
The expected return on plan assets in the United States was derived by taking into consideration the target plan asset allocation, historical rates of return on those assets, projected future asset class returns and net outperformance of the market by active investment managers and plan related and investment related expenses paid from the plan trust. The Company uses the target plan asset allocation because we rebalance our portfolio to target on a quarterly basis. An asset return model was used to develop an expected range of returns on plan investments over a 20-year period, with the expected rate of return selected from a best estimate range within the total range of projected results. This process resulted in the selection of an expected return of 4.75% at the December 31, 2020 measurement date, which is used to determine net periodic pension cost for the year 2021. This assumption is down from the 6.50% return selected at the December 31, 2019 measurement date. A 25 basis point increase (decrease) in return on plan assets assumption would result in a respective decrease (increase) of 2021 net periodic pension cost by approximately $2 million.
The discount rate for our United States postretirement plan was selected using the same method as described for the pension plan. The result supported a discount rate of 2.25% at December 31, 2020 compared to 3.10% at December 31, 2019. A 25 basis point increase (decrease) in the discount rate would decrease (increase) the United States postretirement benefit obligation by approximately $4 million and decrease (increase) 2021 net periodic postretirement benefit cost by less than $1 million.
The methods corresponding to those described above are used to determine the discount rate and expected return on assets for non-U.S. pension and postretirement plans, to the extent applicable.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
Please refer to Note 1 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
ENVIRONMENTAL MATTERS
Please refer to Note 14 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (continued)
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT CONCERNING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
Our disclosures and analysis in this report, including Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, contain forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (the "Exchange Act"). Forward-looking statements present our current forecasts and estimates of future events. These statements do not strictly relate to historical or current results and can be identified by words such as “anticipate,” "appear," "assume," “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” "forecast," “intend,” “likely,” “may,” “plan,” “project,” "seek," "should," “strategy,” "will" and other terms of similar meaning or import in connection with any discussion of future operating, financial or other performance. These forward-looking statements are subject to risks, uncertainties and other factors and actual results may differ materially from those results projected in the statements. These risks, uncertainties and other factors include, without limitation:
•the severity and duration of the current COVID-19 pandemic on our operations, customers and suppliers, as well as related actions taken by governmental authorities and other third parties in response, each of which is uncertain, rapidly changing and difficult to predict;
•levels of residential and commercial or industrial construction activity;
•levels of global industrial production;
•competitive and pricing factors;
•demand for our products;
•relationships with key customers and customer concentration in certain areas;
•issues related to acquisitions, divestitures and joint ventures or expansions;
•legislation and related regulations or interpretations, in the United States or elsewhere;
•industry and economic conditions that affect the market and operating conditions of our customers, suppliers or lenders;
•domestic and international economic and political conditions, policies or other governmental actions;
•climate change, weather conditions and storm activity;
•changes to tariff, trade or investment policies or laws;
•uninsured losses, including those from natural disasters, catastrophes, pandemics, theft or sabotage;
•availability and cost of energy and raw materials;
•environmental, product-related or other legal and regulatory liabilities, proceedings or, actions;
•research and development activities and intellectual property protection;
•issues involving implementation and protection of information technology systems;
•achievement of expected synergies, cost reductions and/or productivity improvements;
•the level of fixed costs required to run our business;
•foreign exchange and commodity price fluctuations;
•our level of indebtedness;
•our liquidity and the availability and cost of credit;
•levels of goodwill or other indefinite-lived intangible assets;
•price volatility in certain wind energy markets in the U.S;
•our ability to utilize our net operating loss carryforwards;
•loss of key employees, labor disputes or shortages; and
•defined benefit plan funding obligations
All forward-looking statements in this report should be considered in the context of the risks and other factors described herein, and in Item 1A above, and as detailed from time to time in the Company’s filings with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. Any forward-looking statements speak only as of the date the statement is made and we undertake no obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by federal securities laws. It is not possible to identify all of the risks, uncertainties and other factors that may affect future results. In light of these risks and uncertainties, the forward-looking events and circumstances discussed in this report may not occur and actual results may differ materially from those anticipated or implied in the forward-looking statements. Accordingly, users of this report are cautioned not to place undue reliance on the forward-looking statements.