Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, include forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions. These statements are based on our beliefs and expectations about future outcomes and are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause our actual results to differ materially from anticipated results. We undertake no obligation to publicly update these forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events, or otherwise. You should read the “Risk Factors” and “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” sections of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
On September 27, 2019, we completed a reverse merger (the "Merger") with Ocugen OpCo, Inc. ("OpCo") in accordance with the terms of the Agreement and Plan of Merger and Reorganization, dated as of April 5, 2019, by and among OpCo, Restore Merger Sub, Inc., our wholly owned subsidiary ("Merger Sub"), and us, as amended, pursuant to which Merger Sub merged with and into OpCo, with OpCo surviving as our wholly owned subsidiary. Immediately after completion of the Merger, we changed our name to Ocugen, Inc. For accounting purposes, the Merger is treated as a “reverse asset acquisition” under generally acceptable accounting principles in the United States (“GAAP”) and OpCo is considered the accounting acquirer. Accordingly, OpCo’s historical results of operations replaced the our historical results of operations for all periods prior to the Merger and, for all periods following the Merger, the results of operations of the combined company will be included in our financial statements.
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company focused on developing gene therapies to cure blindness diseases and developing a vaccine to save lives from COVID-19.
Our cutting-edge technology pipeline includes:
•COVID-19 Vaccine - COVAXIN is a whole-virion inactivated COVID-19 vaccine candidate being developed to prevent COVID-19 infection in humans. We are co-developing COVAXIN with Bharat Biotech International Limited (“Bharat Biotech”) for the U.S. market.
•Modifier Gene Therapy Platform - Based on nuclear hormone receptors ("NHRs"), we believe our gene therapy platform has the potential to address many retinal diseases, including retinitis pigmentosa ("RP"), leber congenital amaurosis ("LCA"), and dry age-related macular degeneration (“AMD”).
•Novel Biologic Therapies for Retinal Diseases - We are developing OCU200, a novel biologic product candidate, to treat diabetic macular edema (“DME”), diabetic retinopathy (“DR”), and wet AMD.
COVID-19 Vaccine
In February 2021, we entered into a Co-Development, Supply and Commercialization Agreement (the “Covaxin Agreement”) with Bharat Biotech, pursuant to which we obtained an exclusive right and license under certain of Bharat Biotech’s intellectual property rights, with the right to grant sublicenses, to develop, manufacture and commercialize COVAXIN for the prevention of COVID-19 in humans in the United States, its territories and possessions (the “Ocugen Covaxin Territory”). Under the Covaxin Agreement, we will be solely responsible for such activities for the Ocugen Covaxin Territory.
COVAXIN is a whole-virion inactivated COVID-19 vaccine candidate being developed by Bharat Biotech, a global leader in vaccine innovation, and has been granted approval for emergency use in India. COVAXIN is formulated with the inactivated SARS-CoV-2 virus, an antigen, and an adjuvant therefore utilizing a historically proven approach to vaccine design. COVAXIN requires a two-dose vaccination regimen given 28 days apart and is stored in standard vaccine storage conditions (2-8°C). The Phase 1 and Phase 2 clinical trials conducted in India reported strong Immunoglobulin G responses against the spike protein, receptor-binding domain, and the nucleocapsid protein of the SARS-CoV-2 virus, along with strong cellular responses. Strong cellular responses are necessary for memory and long-term durability of vaccines. In an analysis from the National Institute of Virology, serum samples collected from individuals vaccinated with COVAXIN showed similar neutralization titer to the U.K. strain as to the original strain. No statistical difference was observed in neutralizing antibodies titer between the U.K. strain and the original strain. These results support COVAXIN's potential to generate immune responses to multiple protein antigens of the virus and thereby potentially reducing or eliminating potential viral escape.
Bharat Biotech is conducting a Phase 3 clinical trial in India. Enrollment in the Phase 3 clinical trial is complete. COVAXIN demonstrated a vaccine efficacy of 81% in the first interim analysis of the Phase 3 clinical trial, and an analysis from the National Institute of Virology indicated potential significant immunogenicity against the U.K. variant and other heterologous strains. We are currently evaluating the clinical and regulatory path for COVAXIN in the United States including obtaining Emergency Use Authorization ("EUA") from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (the "FDA") and, eventually, biologic license application approval in the U.S. market, as well as our commercialization strategy, if authorized or approved. We have initiated discussions with the FDA regarding the development of COVAXIN, but an EUA application has not been submitted at this time. We are also in active discussions with manufacturers in the United States to produce a significant number of doses of COVAXIN to support commercialization of the vaccine in the United States, if authorized or approved.
Modifier Gene Therapy Platform
We are developing a breakthrough modifier gene therapy platform to generate therapies designed to fulfill unmet medical needs in the area of retinal diseases, including inherited retinal diseases ("IRDs") and dry AMD. Our modifier gene therapy platform is based on NHRs, which have the potential to restore homeostasis, the basic biological processes in the retina. Unlike single-gene replacement therapies, which only target one genetic mutation, we believe that our gene therapy platform, through its use of NHRs, represents a novel approach in that it may address multiple retinal diseases with one product. IRDs such as RP, a group of rare genetic disorders that involve a breakdown and loss of cells in the retina and can lead to visual impairment and blindness, affect over 2.0 million people worldwide. Over 150 gene mutations have been associated with RP and this number represents only 60% of the RP population. The remaining 40% of RP patients cannot be genetically diagnosed, making it difficult to develop individual treatments. We believe our first gene therapy candidate, OCU400, has the potential to be broadly effective in restoring retinal integrity and function across a range of IRDs. For example, we believe OCU400 has the potential to eliminate the need for developing more than 150 individual products and provide one treatment option for all RP patients.
OCU400 has received four Orphan Drug Designations from the FDA for the treatment of certain disease genotypes: nuclear receptor subfamily 2 group E member 3 ("NR2E3"), centrosomal protein 290 ("CEP290"), rhodopsin ("RHO"), and phosphodiesterase 6B ("PDE6ß") mutation-associated inherited retinal degenerations. We are planning to initiate two Phase 1/2a clinical trials for OCU400 in the United States in the second half of 2021. OCU400 additionally received Orphan Medicinal Product Designation from the European Commission, based on the recommendation of the European Medicines Agency, for RP and LCA in February 2021, which we believe further supports the potential broad spectrum application of OCU400 to treat many IRDs. We are currently evaluating options to commence OCU400 clinical trials in Europe in 2022. Our second gene therapy candidate, OCU410, is being developed to utilize the nuclear receptor genes RAR-related orphan receptor A for the treatment of dry AMD. This candidate is currently in preclinical development. We are planning to initiate a Phase 1/2a clinical trial for OCU410 in 2022.
Novel Biologic Therapies for Retinal Diseases
We are also conducting preclinical development for our biologic product candidate, OCU200. OCU200 is a novel fusion protein designed to treat DME, DR and wet AMD. We had a pre-Investigational New Drug ("IND") meeting with the FDA in November 2020 and received guidance on IND-enabling preclinical studies to support the Phase 1/2a study. We expect to initiate IND-enabling preclinical studies for OCU200 in 2021 and initiate a Phase 1/2a clinical trial for OCU200 in 2022.
Product Candidates for the Treatment of Ocular Surface Diseases
We were developing OCU300, a small molecule therapeutic for the treatment of symptoms associated with ocular graft-versus-host disease, and OCU310, a treatment for patients with dry eye disease. The Phase 3 clinical trial for OCU300 was discontinued in 2020 based on results of a pre-planned interim sample size analysis conducted by an independent Data Monitoring Committee, which indicated the trial was unlikely to meet its co-primary endpoints upon completion. A Phase 3 clinical trial for OCU310 was completed in 2019 but results of the trial showed OCU310 did not meet its co-primary endpoints. We are no longer pursuing the development of either of these ocular surface diseases product candidates.
Impact of COVID-19 on our Business
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve and we are closely monitoring the situation. If the number of active cases of COVID-19 continues to be high in the United States and elsewhere, the pandemic may delay enrollment in our planned clinical trials. Among other things, continued spread of COVID-19 may result in limitations on global international travel, which may delay key trial activities including necessary interactions with regulators. We may be faced with limitations in employee resources that would otherwise be focused on the conduct of clinical trials, including because of sickness of employees or their families or the desire of employees to avoid contact with large groups of people. Moreover, we may experience additional
disruptions that could severely impact our business and development activities, including, but not limited to, strain on our suppliers and other third parties and the disruption of our ability to raise capital when needed on acceptable terms, if at all. Disruptions in our operations or supply chain, whether as a result of restricted travel, quarantine requirements or otherwise, could negatively impact our ability to proceed with our clinical trials, preclinical development, and other activities and delay our ability to receive product approval and generate revenue. Impacts that may result from the COVID-19 pandemic remain highly uncertain and subject to change. We do not yet know the full extent of potential delays or impacts on our business, our clinical trials, our preclinical development efforts, healthcare systems or the global economy as a whole. However, these effects could have a material impact on our operations, and we will continue to monitor the COVID-19 situation closely.
Financial Operations Overview
We have no products approved for commercial sale and have not generated significant revenue to date. We have never been profitable and have incurred operating losses in each year since inception. We incurred net losses of approximately $21.8 million and $20.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $73.3 million and a cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash balance of $24.2 million. Substantially all of our operating losses resulted from expenses incurred in connection with our research and development programs and from general and administrative costs associated with our operations.
As of December 31, 2020, we viewed our operations and managed our business as one operating segment consistent with how our chief operating decision-maker, our Chief Executive Officer, makes decisions regarding resource allocation and assessing performance. As of December 31, 2020, substantially all of our assets were located in the United States. Our headquarters and operations are located in Malvern, Pennsylvania.
Collaboration revenue
Collaboration revenue consists of royalty payments received in connection with agreements accounted for as collaborative arrangements under Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 808, Collaborative Arrangements. We assess whether royalty payments from collaboration partners represent consideration from a customer. If the collaboration partner is considered a customer, we account for those payments within the scope of FASB ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. However, if we conclude that our collaboration partner is not a customer, we will record royalty payments received as collaboration revenue in the period in which the underlying sale occurs and record expenses and expense reimbursements as either research and development expense or general and administrative expense, or a reduction thereof, based on the underlying nature of the expense or expense reimbursement. See Note 4 in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this report for additional information.
Research and development expense
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. These costs consist of internal and external expenses. Internal expenses include the cost of salaries, benefits, severance, and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel serving in our research and development functions, as well as allocated rent and utilities expenses. External expenses include development, clinical trials, patent costs, and regulatory compliance costs incurred with research organizations, contract manufacturers, and other third-party vendors. License fees paid to acquire access to proprietary technology are expensed to research and development unless it is determined that the technology is expected to have an alternative future use. All patent-related costs incurred in connection with filing and prosecuting patent applications are expensed as incurred to research and development expense due to the uncertainty about the recovery of the expenditure. We record costs for certain development activities, such as clinical trials, based on our evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using data such as patient enrollment, clinical site activations, or information provided to us by our vendors on their actual costs incurred. Payments for these activities are based on the terms of the individual arrangements, which may differ from the pattern of costs incurred, and are reflected in the consolidated financial statements as prepaid or accrued research and development expense, as the case may be.
Research and development expenses account for a significant portion of our operating expenses. We plan to incur research and development expenses for the foreseeable future as we expect to continue the development of our product candidate. We anticipate that our research and development expenses, excluding charges to in-process research and development expense, will increase in 2021 as compared to 2020 as we evaluate the clinical, regulatory, and commercialization path for COVAXIN in the United States as well as conduct preclinical and clinical activities with respect to our other product candidates. We are planning to initiate two Phase 1/2a clinical trials for OCU400 in the United States in the second half of 2021 and Phase 1/2a clinical trials for OCU410 and OCU200 in 2022. We are also currently evaluating options to commence OCU400 clinical trials in Europe in 2022.
Our research and development expenses are not currently tracked on a program-by-program basis for indirect and overhead costs. We use our personnel and infrastructure resources across multiple research and development programs directed toward identifying, developing, and commercializing product candidates.
At this time, due to the inherently unpredictable nature of preclinical and clinical development as well as regulatory approval and commercialization, we are unable to estimate with any certainty the costs we will incur and the timelines we will require in our continued development and commercialization efforts. As a result of these uncertainties, successful development and completion of clinical trials as well a regulatory approval and commercialization are uncertain and may not result in approved products. Completion dates and completion costs can vary significantly for each future product candidate and are difficult to predict. We will continue to make determinations as to which product candidates to pursue and how much funding to direct to each product candidate on an ongoing basis in response to our ability to enter into collaborations with respect to each product candidate, the scientific and clinical success of each product candidate as well as ongoing assessments as to the commercial potential of each product candidates.
General and administrative expense
General and administrative expense consists primarily of personnel expenses, including salaries, benefits, severance, insurance, and stock-based compensation expense, for employees in executive, accounting, and other administrative functions. General and administrative expense also includes corporate facility costs, including rent and utilities, insurance premiums, legal fees related to corporate matters, and fees for auditing, accounting, and other consulting services.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in 2021 as compared to 2020 as a result of higher corporate infrastructure costs including, but not limited to accounting, legal, human resources, consulting, and investor relations fees. Additionally, if and when we believe a regulatory approval of a product candidate appears likely, we anticipate an increase in payroll and expense as a result of our preparation for commercial operations, especially as it relates to the sales and marketing of our product candidates.
Severance-related expense
In June 2020, we communicated notice to five employees of termination of their employment. This reduction represented one-third of our workforce at the time of communication. All terminations were “without cause” and each employee received termination benefits upon departure. The termination dates varied for each employee and ranged from June 30, 2020 to December 31, 2020.
As a result of the workforce reduction, we recognized severance-related charges of $1.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $0.2 million of severance-related charges within general and administrative expense and $0.9 million of severance-related charges within research and development expense. We expect to pay severance benefits of $0.7 million in 2021.
Change in fair value of derivative liabilities
Change in fair value of derivative liabilities includes the change in fair value each reporting period of (a) the conversion and change in control features embedded in certain convertible notes, which were required to be bifurcated and recognized at fair value, and (b) the change in the fair value of the Series B Warrants that were issued in connection with a Securities Purchase Agreement entered into with certain accredited investors in June 2019. The change in fair value of derivative liabilities was $3.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. There were no derivative instruments fair valued on a recurring basis during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest expense
Interest expense primarily includes debt coupon interest, the amortization of debt issuance costs, and the accretion of debt discounts.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of expenses during the reported period. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable
under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to the consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this report, we believe that the following accounting policies and estimates are those most critical to the preparation of our consolidated financial statements:
Stock-based compensation
We account for our stock-based compensation awards in accordance with the FASB ASC Topic 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation (“ASC 718”). ASC 718 requires all stock-based payments to employees, including grants of employee stock options and modifications to existing agreements, to be recognized in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss based on their fair values. We use the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to determine the fair value of options granted. We recognize forfeitures as they occur.
Our stock-based awards are subject to service-based vesting conditions. Compensation expense related to awards to employees and directors with service-based vesting conditions is recognized on a straight-line basis based on the grant date fair value over the associated service period of the award, which is generally the vesting term. Stock-based awards generally vest over a one to three year requisite service period and have a contractual term of 10 years.
Estimating the fair value of options requires the input of subjective assumptions, including expected life of the option, stock price volatility, the risk-free interest rate, and expected dividends. The assumptions used in our Black-Scholes option-pricing model represent our best estimates and involve a number of variables, uncertainties, assumptions, and the application of our judgment, as they are inherently subjective. If any assumptions change, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
These assumptions used in our Black-Scholes option-pricing model are as follows:
Expected Term. Due to the historical lack of a public market for the trading of our common stock and the lack of sufficient company-specific historical data, the expected term of employee options is determined using the “simplified” method, as prescribed in SEC’s Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 107, whereby the expected life equals the arithmetic average of the vesting term and the original contractual term of the option.
Expected Volatility. The expected volatility is based on historical volatilities of us and similar entities within our industry for periods commensurate with the expected term assumption.
Risk-Free Interest Rate. The risk-free interest rate is based on the interest rate payable on U.S. Treasury securities in effect at the time of grant for a period that is commensurate with the assumed expected term.
Expected Dividends. The expected dividend yield is 0% because we have not historically paid, and do not expect for the foreseeable future to pay, a dividend on our common stock.
Stock-based compensation expense was $0.7 million and $0.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. At December 31, 2020, we had $1.1 million of unamortized stock-based compensation expense related to unvested service-based stock options, which is expected to be recognized over a remaining weighted-average vesting period of two years.
Change in Fair Value of Derivative Liabilities
We issued convertible notes in 2018 and 2019 that contained embedded conversion and change in control features. The fair values of the embedded conversion and change in control features at the issuance of each convertible note and at the end of each reporting period were estimated using an income approach model. Inputs into this model included the expected time until conversion or change in control and our estimates of probability of conversion or change in control occurring, which were classified as Level 3 fair value inputs. There were no such derivatives valued as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, due to either the payment or conversion of the related convertible note. The change in fair value of the embedded conversion and change in control features was recognized within other income (expense) in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss until the payment or conversion of each convertible note. The change in fair value of derivative liabilities for the convertible notes was $1.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. Due to the conversions and payments of the
convertible notes during 2019, no change in fair value of derivative liabilities was recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020 for the convertible notes.
In 2019, we also issued warrants to purchase our common stock: the Series A Warrants, Series B Warrants, and Series C Warrants (collectively the "Pre-Merger Financing Warrants") and we accounted for these warrants in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 815-40, Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity. The Series A Warrants and Series C Warrants were determined to meet the criteria for equity classification. The Series B Warrants were recognized as a derivative liability at fair value as the Series B Warrants did not meet the criteria related to equity indexation. The fair value of Series B Warrants was estimated using the Monte Carlo simulation model. Key fair value inputs included the starting stock price, expected stock price volatility during the Reset Period (as defined in the Series B Warrants), and additional shares issued from escrow. The methodology for measuring fair value was sensitive to the expected stock volatility assumption input. Upon conclusion of the Reset Period, we estimated the fair value of the Series B Warrants using a Black-Scholes valuation model. Inputs used in the valuation were unobservable and were therefore classified as Level 3 fair value inputs.
The Series B Warrants change in fair value each reporting period for the derivative liability was recognized within the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss until the Series B Warrants were reclassified as equity in November 2019 following a final mark to market upon the completion of a Reset Period (as defined in the Series B Warrants) pursuant to which the number of shares of common stock underlying the Series B Warrants was increased based on the trading price for the common stock. The change in fair value of derivative liability for the Series B Warrants was $1.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. Due to the Series B Warrants reclassification as equity during 2019, no change in fair value of derivative liabilities was recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020 for the Series B Warrants.
Accounting for the Warrant Exchange
On April 22, 2020, we and OpCo entered into Amendment and Exchange Agreements (each an "Exchange Agreement" and collectively, the "Exchange Agreements") with the Series A Warrants holders. Pursuant to the Exchange Agreements, among other things, the number of common stock issuable upon the exercise of the Series A Warrants was adjusted. Concurrently with the Exchange Agreements, the Series A Warrants holders exchanged the Series A Warrants for shares of common stock and promissory notes (the "Warrant Exchange Promissory Notes") (collectively, the "Warrant Exchange").
We accounted for the Warrant Exchange by recognizing the fair value of the consideration transferred in excess of the carrying value of the Series A Warrants as a reduction of additional paid-in capital. The fair value of the consideration transferred was comprised of (i) the fair value of the common stock issued based on the number of shares issued and our stock price on the date of issuance and (ii) the fair value of the Warrant Exchange Promissory Notes at the date of issuance based on Level 2 fair value inputs. The fair value of the consideration transferred was in excess of the fair value of the Series A Warrants immediately prior to the consideration transfer. The excess consideration was accounted for as a deemed dividend to the Series A Warrant holders and is reflected as an additional net loss attributed to common stockholders in the calculation of basic and diluted net loss per common share for the year ended December 31, 2020. The fair value of the Series A Warrants immediately prior to the consideration transfer was estimated using a Black-Scholes valuation model. Inputs used in the valuation were unobservable and were therefore classified as Level 3 fair value inputs. See Note 11 in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this report for additional information.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes the results of our operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Collaboration revenue
Collaboration revenue increased by $42,620 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 as a result of a collaboration agreement with Advaite, Inc. for the development of Advaite's RapCov COVID-19 Testing Kit, which commenced in April 2020. We did not have any collaboration revenue during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Research and development expense
Research and development expense decreased by $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease of $2.5 million related to the discontinuation of OCU310 clinical trial activities in 2019 and a decrease of $0.3 million in employee-related expenses, partially offset by an increase of $0.9 million in severance-related charges related to the employee terminations announced in June 2020 and $0.2 million related to consulting fees.
In-process research and development expense
In-process research and development expense increased by $7.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 as a result of the NeoCart asset, which ceased to meet the criteria to be classified as held for sale during the year ended December 31, 2020. See Note 3 in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this report for additional information.
General and administrative expense
General and administrative expenses increased by $1.9 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $0.9 million in insurance premiums, $0.5 million in employee-related expenses, $0.3 million in Board of Director fees, and $0.2 million in severance-related charges related to the employee terminations announced in June 2020, partially offset by a decrease of $0.2 million in consulting fees.
Change in fair value of derivative liability
The change in fair value of derivative liability was a loss of $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 due to the remeasurements of derivative liabilities related to the Series B Warrants and certain convertible notes. We did not have recurring fair value measurements of derivative liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the reclassification of the Series B Warrants to equity and the conversions of convertible notes.
Loss on debt conversion
The loss on debt conversion was $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 relating to conversions in 2019 of certain convertible notes. We did not have a loss on debt conversion during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest expense
Interest expense was $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in interest expense was primarily due to the conversions and/or payments of all convertible notes during 2019. Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily relates to the Warrant Exchange Promissory Notes.
Other income (expense)
Other income was $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Other expense was $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Other income for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily relates to the recognition of deferred grant proceeds. Other expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily relates to equity issuance costs related to the Series B Warrants which were expensed during the year ended December 31, 2019 since the Series B Warrants were liability classified.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had $24.2 million in cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash. We have not generated significant revenue to date and have primarily funded our operations to date through the sale of common stock, warrants to purchase common stock, the issuance of convertible notes, debt, and grant proceeds. Specifically, since our inception and through December 31, 2020, we have raised an aggregate of $90.3 million to fund our operations, of which $77.7 million was from the sale of our common stock and warrants, $10.3 million was from the issuance of convertible notes, $2.1 million was from debt, and $0.2 million from grant proceeds.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold an aggregate of 108.1 million shares of our common stock in separate at-the-market offerings ("ATMs") commenced in May 2020, June 2020, and August 2020. We sold 34.3 million shares under the May 2020 ATM, 24.8 million shares under the June ATM, and 49.0 million shares under the August 2020 ATM. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received net proceeds of $36.3 million from the ATMs. The offerings were made pursuant to our effective "shelf" registration statement on Form S-3 filed with the SEC on March 27, 2020, the base prospectus contained therein dated May 5, 2020, and the prospectus supplements related to the offerings dated May 8, 2020, June 12, 2020, and August 17, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, we had sold all of the shares of common stock available for issuance under the prospectus supplements filed on May 8, 2020 and June 12, 2020 in connection with the May 2020 and June 2020 ATMs. See Note 9 in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this report for additional information.
In February 2021, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement pursuant to which we sold in a registered direct offering (the "Registered Direct Offering") 3.0 million shares and received net proceeds of $21.2 million, after deducting placement agent fees and related offering expenses of $1.7 million.
Since our inception, we have devoted substantial resources to research and development and have incurred significant net losses and may continue to incur net losses in the future. We incurred net losses of approximately $21.8 million and $20.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $73.3 million. In addition, as of December 31, 2020, we had accounts payable and accrued expenses of $3.3 million and indebtedness of $2.1 million.
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Operating activities
Cash used in operating activities was $14.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with $16.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in cash used in operating activities was primarily driven by a decrease in payments for accounts payable offset by an increase in prepayments, current and other assets during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Investing activities
Cash used in investing activities was $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in cash used by investing activities was primarily driven by the payment of acquisition costs related to the Merger during the year ended December 31, 2019 with no comparable payments made during the year ended December 31, 2020, partially offset by an increase in the purchases of property and equipment made during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Financing activities
Cash provided by financing activities was $31.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $25.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities was primarily driven by gross proceeds of $37.8 million received under May 2020, June 2020, and August 2020 ATMs and $0.9 million in proceeds from the issuance of debt, partially offset by payments of equity issuance costs of $1.5 million and repayments of debt of $5.6 million. During the year ended December 31, 2019, cash provided by financing activities included proceeds from the issuance of common stock and the Pre-Merger Financing Warrants in connection with the Merger of $22.6 million, proceeds from the issuance of convertible debt of $6.8 million, and proceeds from an April 2019 stock subscription agreement of $1.0 million, partially offset by repayments of debt of $5.3 million.
Indebtedness
On April 30, 2020, we were granted a loan from Silicon Valley Bank ("SVB") in the aggregate amount of $0.4 million, pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act of 2020, which was enacted on March 27, 2020. The loan was in the form of a promissory note dated April 30, 2020 in favor of SVB (the "PPP Note"). The PPP Note matures on April 30, 2022 and bears interest at a rate of 1.0% per annum. Principal and interest payments are payable monthly commencing on either (i) the date the Small Business Administration compensates SVB for any forgiven amounts or (ii) 10 months after the end of our loan forgiveness covered period, which ended in October 2020. Certain amounts of the loan may be forgiven if they are used for qualifying expenses as described by the PPP. At December 31, 2020, there was $0.4 million of principal outstanding under the PPP Note.
On April 22, 2020, we issued the Warrant Exchange Promissory Notes with an aggregate principal amount of $5.6 million to existing investors in connection with the Warrant Exchange. The Warrant Exchange Promissory Notes had a maturity date of April 21, 2021 and did not bear interest. The Warrant Exchange Promissory Notes permitted prepayment in whole or in part at any time without penalty or premium. In the event that we consummated a financing transaction that generated cash to us, we were required to use 20% of the net proceeds of such transaction to prepay a portion of the outstanding amount under each Warrant Exchange Promissory Note if the transaction occurred on or prior to August 22, 2020, and 30% of the net proceeds to prepay a portion of the outstanding amount under each Warrant Exchange Promissory Note if the transaction occurred after August 22, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we made payments to the Warrant Exchange Promissory Note holders of $5.6 million, causing the Warrant Exchange Promissory Notes to be repaid in full and no longer outstanding at December 31, 2020.
In September 2016, pursuant to U.S. government’s Immigrant Investor Program, commonly known as the EB-5 program (the "EB-5 Program"), we entered into entered into an arrangement (the “EB-5 Loan Agreement”) to borrow up to $10.0 million from EB5 Life Sciences, L.P. in $0.5 million increments. Borrowings are at a fixed interest rate of 4.0% and are to be utilized in the clinical development, manufacturing, and commercialization of our products and for our general working capital needs. Outstanding borrowings pursuant to the EB-5 Program become due upon the seventh anniversary of the final disbursement. Amounts repaid cannot be re-borrowed. Under the terms and conditions of the EB-5 Loan Agreement, we borrowed $0.5 million on March 26, 2020. At December 31, 2020, there was $1.5 million of principal outstanding under the EB-5 Loan Agreement.
Funding requirements
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we continue research and development, including preclinical and clinical development of our product candidates, contract to manufacture our product candidates, add operational, financial and information systems to execute our business plan, maintain, expand and protect our patent portfolio, and operate as a public company.
Our future funding requirements, both near- and long-term, will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to:
•the initiation, progress, timing, costs, and results of clinical trials for our product candidates;
•the outcome, timing, and cost of the regulatory approval process for our product candidates by the FDA including EUA for COVAXIN;
•future costs of manufacturing and commercialization, including COVAXIN if authorized or approved;
•the cost of filing, prosecuting, defending, and enforcing our patent claims and other intellectual property rights;
•the cost of defending intellectual property disputes, including patent infringement actions brought by third parties against us;
•the costs of expanding infrastructure, as well as the higher corporate infrastructure costs associated with operating as a public company;
•the expenses needed to attract and retain skilled personnel;
•the extent to which we in-license or acquire other products, product candidates, or technologies; and
•the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Our management plans to continue to raise additional capital to support the development and commercialization of our product candidates through public and private placements of equity and/or debt, payments from potential strategic research and development, sale of assets, government grants, licensing and/or collaboration arrangements with pharmaceutical companies or other institutions, and other funding from the government. There can be no assurance that these future funding efforts will be successful. If we cannot obtain the necessary funding, we will need to delay, scale back or eliminate some or all of our research and development programs; consider other various strategic alternatives, including a merger or sale; or cease operations. If we cannot expand our operations or otherwise capitalize on our business opportunities because we lack sufficient capital, our business, financial condition, and results of operations could be materially adversely affected.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash of approximately $24.2 million, and since that date we have received net proceeds of $4.8 million from the sale of our common stock under the August 2020 ATM and net proceeds of $21.2 million from the sale of our common stock under the Registered Direct Offering. As a result of our cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash balance as of December 31, 2020 and the net proceeds received subsequent to December 31, 2020 from the August 2020 ATM and the Registered Direct Offering, we believe that our cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements through at least one year from the date the consolidated financial statements included in this report are issued.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have off-balance sheet arrangements during the periods presented, and we do not currently have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC").
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements, see Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in this report.