ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Dollars in millions, except per share amounts and unless otherwise indicated)
The Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
OVERVIEW
We are a financial services company that services and originates mortgage loans. We are a leading mortgage special servicer, servicing 1,107,582 loans with a total UPB of $188.81 billion on behalf of more than 4,179 investors and 127 subservicing clients as of December 31, 2020 . We service all mortgage loan classes, including conventional, government-insured and non-Agency loans. Our Originations business is part of our balanced business model to generate gains on loan sales and profitable returns, and to support the replenishment and the growth of our servicing portfolio. Through our recapture, retail, correspondent and wholesale channels, we originate and purchase conventional and government-insured forward and reverse mortgage loans that we sell or securitize on a servicing retained basis. In addition, we grow our mortgage servicing volume through MSR flow purchase agreements, GSE Cash Window programs, bulk MSR purchase transactions, and subservicing agreements.
We have built a multi-channel, scalable origination platform that creates sustainable sources of replenishment and growth of our servicing portfolio, as detailed in the table below. We determine our target returns for each channel, however, the channel and delivery selection is generally our clients’ decision.
We selectively sourced our MSR originations and purchases and subservicing in 2020 through diversified channels, as detailed below:
(1)Represents the UPB of loans that have been originated or purchased during the respective periods and for which we recognize a new MSR on our consolidated balance sheets upon sale or securitization.
(2)Represents the UPB of reverse mortgage loans that have been securitized on a servicing retained basis. The loans are recognized on our consolidated balance sheets under GAAP without any separate recognition of MSRs.
(3)Represents the UPB of loans for which the MSR is purchased.
(4)Interim subservicing, excluding the volume UPB associated with short-term interim subservicing for some clients as a support to their originate-to-sell business, where loans are boarded and de-boarded within the same quarter.
COVID-19 Pandemic Impact on our 2020 Financial Performance
In March 2020, the WHO categorized the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) as a pandemic and the COVID-19 outbreak was declared a national emergency in the U.S. The pandemic has adversely affected economic conditions since March 2020, with high levels of unemployment, and has created uncertainties about the duration and magnitude of the economic downturn. Our financial performance in 2020 has been affected by the pandemic, mostly due to large losses on MSRs and lower revenue in our Servicing business, partially offset by the growth and profitability of our Originations business, as discussed further below. Furthermore, the CARES Act allowed us to recognize income tax benefits in 2020 mostly due to the carryback of a portion of our prior net operating losses.
Determining the COVID-19 impact on our financial performance requires management to use judgment, including the estimation of those impacts that are directly attributable to COVID-19 factors. The below discussion includes some comparisons with the financial performance of 2019 and selected noteworthy items to isolate the impact of certain COVID-19 factors and may not be complete.
First, we recorded a $129.1 million fair value loss on our MSR portfolio in our Servicing segment due to rate and assumption updates in 2020 driven by record low interest rates fostering refinancing and voluntary prepayments, partially offset by $44.9 million gains on our MSR macro-hedge strategy.
Second, the financial performance of our Servicing business was negatively affected by the loans placed under forbearance, the moratorium on foreclosures and other market conditions. We recognized $51.7 million lower ancillary income in our Servicing segment in 2020 as compared to 2019, with $37.6 million lower float earnings, lower late and collection fees, and lower deferred servicing fee collections. The CARES Act signed in March 2020 allows borrowers with federally backed mortgage loans who are affected by COVID-19 to request temporary loan forbearance, for up to 180 days if requested by the borrower. Borrowers may request an additional forbearance period of up to 180 days for FHA and VA guaranteed loans. During any period of forbearance, servicers must also provide related protection, including, but not limited to, suspension of late fees. In addition, servicers are restricted from pursuing certain foreclosure and eviction activity on all occupied, federally backed mortgage loans until at least March 31, 2021.
Although PLS loans are not explicitly covered under the CARES Act, these loans are subject to various requirements and expectations from state Governors, regulators, and Attorneys General to assist borrowers enduring financial hardship due to COVID-19 with forbearance, moratoria on foreclosure sales and evictions and other requirements, some of which apply regardless of whether the borrower has requested assistance. Ocwen provides payment relief to such borrowers in accordance with these requirements and expectations, as well as our servicing agreements. For example, we generally grant eligible borrowers an initial three months of forbearance and related protection, including suspension of late fees, as well as suspension of foreclosure and eviction activity.
Generally, borrowers are required to repay their suspended or reduced mortgage payments after the forbearance period ends unless an alternate loss mitigation solution is reached, which we anticipate will include extensions of forbearance, payment deferrals, repayment plans, and loan modifications, depending on the borrower’s situation, account status, and applicable investor guidelines. Before the completion of each period of forbearance, Ocwen attempts to contact the borrowers to assess their ability to resume making payments and discuss other options which may be available if their hardship persists.
As of December 31, 2020, we managed 81,900 loans under forbearance, 23,100 of which related to our owned MSRs (excluding NRZ), or 7.39% of our total portfolio and 4.52% of our owned MSR servicing portfolio (excluding NRZ), respectively. The number of loans under forbearance peaked at the end of the second quarter of 2020 and decreased progressively since, while remaining at an elevated level at year end as illustrated by the below chart of forbearance plans during COVID-19 for our owned MSR portfolio (excluding NRZ) by investor.
Third, offsetting the above negative impact of COVID-19 on our financial performance, our Originations business generated $117.6 million incremental revenues, including $53.8 million incremental gain on loan sale from our Recapture channel. The low interest rate environment discussed above and the continued execution of our originations strategy have led to significantly increased volume in 2020. We continue to recapture, replenish and grow our owned MSR portfolio (excluding NRZ’s MSR portfolio), net of runoff and voluntary prepayments. In addition, we opportunistically purchased MSRs at a discount to fair value in the COVID-19 market conditions and recorded gains on revaluation.
We operate through a secure remote workforce model for approximately 98% of our global workforce and continue to adhere to COVID-19 health and safety-related requirements and best practices across all of our locations. While our operations have not been significantly affected, we incurred an estimated $16.4 million of additional operating expenses in 2020 due to our adjustment to the COVID-19 environment, including additional compensation, technology equipment and legal consulting fees among others, $6.3 million of which is recorded in our Servicing segment.
Looking ahead, the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic may continue. The disruption created by the pandemic and the measures being taken have given rise to elevated unemployment levels. As of today, uncertainties related to the duration and severity of the economic downturn remain, without any indications of a rapid recovery. The business disruption triggered by COVID-19 could ultimately have a material and adverse effect on our business, financial condition, liquidity or results of operations.
Business Initiatives
In 2021, we have established five key operating objectives to drive improved value for shareholders, as our near-term priority remains to return to sustainable profitability. The five objectives are focused on:
•Accelerating growth, by expanding our client base, our product offering and by leveraging our MSR asset vehicle with Oaktree;
•Strengthening recapture performance, by expanding our operating capacity;
•Improving our cost leadership position, by driving productivity and efficiencies, with our technology and continuous improvement initiatives;
•Maintaining high quality operational execution, through our technology and continuous improvement initiatives, and our commitment to employee engagement and customer satisfaction; and
•Expanding servicing and other revenue opportunities.
Historical losses have significantly eroded stockholders’ equity and weakened our financial condition. With the acquisition and integration of PHH in late 2018 and 2019, we established a set of key business initiatives intended to achieve our objective of returning to sustainable profitability within an appropriate risk and compliance environment. We have successfully executed on these initiatives and achievements throughout 2020, and we believe they were the foundation for driving stronger financial performance.
These initiatives and accomplishments included the following:
2018/2019 Initiatives Accomplishments
Expanding our Originations business to replenish and grow our servicing portfolio We have built a multi-channel, scalable originations platform and have replenished and grown our owned servicing portfolio in 2020. We selectively acquired MSRs that meet or exceed our minimum targeted investment returns, with $16.6 billion UPB in bulk transactions and $15.1 billion UPB through our now well established participation to the GSE Cash Window programs. We successfully re-entered the forward lending correspondent channel in the second quarter of 2019 with $5.7 billion UPB in 2020. We have reduced our client concentration risk with NRZ.
Driving continuous cost improvement to maintain an industry cost competitive position With the acquisition and integration of PHH in late 2018 and 2019, we successfully implemented cost reduction and continuous improvement initiatives, resulting in approximately $100 million lower operating expenses in 2020 as compared to 2019, and approximately $200 million as compared to 2018. Our continuous cost improvement efforts were focused on reducing operating and overhead costs through facility rationalization, optimizing strategic sourcing and actions and off-shore utilization, lean process design, simplification, automation and other technology-enabled productivity enhancements.
Effectively managing our balance sheet to ensure adequate liquidity, finance our ongoing business needs and provide a solid platform for executing on our growth initiatives We have managed our liquidity and financing obligations through the most challenging time of the COVID-19 and have enhanced our existing balance sheet and cost of funds. For example, we have extended to May 2022 and prepaid $126.1 million on our senior secured term loan (SSTL) and reduced our OMART cost of funds. We have concluded our strategic review process and announced an expansion of our strategic alliance with Oaktree Capital to support the refinancing of our corporate debt maturing in 2021 and 2022 and to provide capital to accelerate our growth trajectory. In addition, we have established the MSR Asset Vehicle (MAV) to support the future growth of our servicing volume with the most efficient capital allocation for us.
Fulfilling our regulatory commitments and resolving remaining legacy and regulatory matters On October 15, 2020, we resolved our legacy regulatory matter with the State of Florida Office of the Attorney General and Office of Financial Regulation. Ocwen has now resolved all state regulatory actions from April 2017. The legacy CFPB litigation matter remains pending. We have participated in mediation and settlement discussions with the CFPB, however, the parties were unable to reach a resolution of the litigation on satisfactory terms.
Operations Summary
Year Ended December 31, 2020 versus 2019
Revenue
Total revenue was $960.9 million in 2020, $162.5 million or 14% lower than 2019, mostly due to declines in servicing fee revenue and reverse mortgage revenue, offset in part by an increase in gain on loans held for sale. Servicing and subservicing fee revenue decreased $238.2 million or 24%, as compared to 2019, including a $193.3 million decline in servicing fees collected on behalf of NRZ, primarily due to a lower serviced UPB as a result of run-off and an increase in non-paying forbearance loans as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The decline in servicing fees collected on behalf of NRZ is partially offset by a decline in servicing fees remitted to NRZ that are separately reported as Pledged MSR liability expense (Other expense), with a $34.5 million net decline in the NRZ servicing fee retained in 2020 as compared to 2019. The $98.9 million increase in gain on loans held for sale is mostly due to the increase in forward loan production, from both our correspondent channel that we re-started in the second quarter of 2019 and our recapture channel, fueled by industry-wide refinance activity. Reverse mortgage revenue, net decreased $25.6 million, or 30%, as compared to 2019, largely due to the change in our accounting policy related to tails. Tails include accrued interest and insurance premiums on loans together with the commitments to fund borrower draws that we regularly securitize. We recorded a $31.2 million gain on tails upon their funding and securitization in 2019 and nil in 2020 due to our fair value election. We recorded $24.7 million lower fair value gains on our securitized reverse mortgage portfolio and HMBS related borrowings and $28.5 million higher origination gain in 2020.
MSR Valuation Adjustments, Net
We reported a $251.9 million loss in MSR valuation adjustments, net in 2020, driven by a $173.3 million portfolio runoff and a $106.2 million loss due to the decline in interest rates, partially offset by $27.5 million favorable fair value gain from our MSR hedging strategy. The $131.0 million additional loss in 2020 as compared to 2019 is primarily due to a $116.3 million additional loss on the NRZ pledged MSR and $14.7 million additional loss on our owned MSRs. The $116.3 million additional loss on the NRZ pledged MSR is offset by an additional gain recorded as MSR pledged liability expense, and was mostly due to a $147.1 million favorable assumption update recorded in 2019, partially offset by a lower runoff on the NRZ MSR. The lower runoff is driven by the derecognition of MSRs in February 2020 with the termination of the PMC agreement by NRZ. The $14.7 million additional loss on our owned MSR is driven by lower interest rates in 2020 with increased runoff and fair value losses due to rates, partially offset by the effects of our MSR hedging strategy implemented in September 2019, and the revaluation gains of MSR opportunistically purchased at a discount to fair value due to the COVID-19 distressed environment.
Compensation and Benefits
Compensation and benefits expense decreased $48.2 million, or 15%, as compared to 2019, largely due to cost re-engineering initiatives and the scaling of our workforce to our volumes. Servicing compensation and benefits decreased by $30.4 million, mostly due to a 16% decline in average total Ocwen headcount and an increase in our offshore-to-total headcount ratio from 67% to 72%, driving down our average compensation cost. Originations compensation and benefits increased by $18.4 million, mostly due to additional commissions and incentive compensation and additional headcount to accompany our record production levels in 2020. We reduced our average Corporate headcount by 19% globally, driving down base compensation by $14.3 million in 2020 as compared to 2019. We also recognized $35.7 million of compensation and benefits costs during 2019 in connection with our 2019 cost re-engineering plan, as compared to $9.7 million in 2020 related to our 2020 re-engineering initiatives. We recorded $6.7 million additional compensation expenses related to COVID-19 in 2020.
Servicing and Origination Expense
Servicing and origination expense decreased $31.7 million, or 29%, as compared to 2019 primarily due to a $32.8 million decrease in servicing expenses. This decline was largely the result of a reduction in government-insured claim loss provisions and a general decline in servicer-related expenses that was primarily driven by a reduction in our servicing portfolio. The reduction in government-insured claim loss provisions is due to the combined effect of a decline in claim volumes, partially due to COVID-19, and lower loss severity, mostly driven by a reduction in the foreclosure and liquidation timeline of loans. The government-insured claim loss provisions recorded in 2019 included claims of a legacy portfolio with higher severity loans. Government-insured claim loss provisions are generally offset by changes in the fair value of the corresponding MSRs, which are recorded in MSR valuation adjustments, net. The decrease is also attributable to $9.1 million improved advance recoveries, which decreased loss severity rates used in the computation of advance reserves, and the recovery of $3.1 million of expenses in connection with a settlement from a mortgage insurer as well as a $6.8 million release of indemnification reserves related to such settlement.
Other Operating Expenses
Professional services expense increased $4.2 million, or 4%, as compared to 2019 primarily due to the $34.7 million recovery in 2019 of prior expenses from service providers and a mortgage insurer, offset by a $21.4 million decline in legal fees for settlements and defense, and a $6.4 million decline in other professional fees. The decline in legal fees was largely the result of the recovery of $8.0 million prior expenses in connection with a settlement from a mortgage insurer, and a general decline in accruals for expenses related to litigation matters in 2020. Other professional services expense decreased in 2020 as a
result of the expenses incurred in 2019 relating to the PHH integration and legal entity reorganization, partially offset by $5.1 million of COVID-19 related expenses in 2020.
Technology and communication expense decreased $19.6 million, or 25%, as compared to 2019 primarily because we no longer license the REALServicing servicing system from Altisource following our transition to Black Knight MSP in June 2019. Our expenses decreased as a result of other factors, including a decline in capitalized technology investments, our closure of U.S. facilities in 2019 and the effects of our other cost reduction efforts, which include bringing technology services in-house and re-engineering initiatives. Depreciation expense decreased $5.0 million as compared to 2019. Technology and communication expenses in 2020 included $3.1 million of COVID-19 related expenses.
Occupancy and equipment expense decreased $20.6 million, or 30%, as compared to 2019, primarily due to the results of our cost reduction efforts, which include consolidating vendors and closing and consolidating certain facilities, and the effect of the decline in the size of the servicing portfolio on various expenses such as postage and mailing services. We partially abandoned two of our leased properties and decided to vacate other leased properties prior to the contractual maturity date of the lease agreements resulting in the recognition of facility-related costs totaling $6.0 million, as compared to $6.6 million of similar costs recognized in 2019 in connection with our decision to vacate other leased properties. Depreciation expense, postage and mailing costs, rent expense and interest on lease liabilities declined $7.8 million, $3.9 million, $3.8 million and $1.9 million, respectively, as compared to 2019. Occupancy and equipment expense in 2020 included $1.4 million of COVID-19 related expenses.
Other expenses increased $17.7 million as compared to 2019 primarily due to a $14.4 million provision release in 2019 for indemnification obligations that was largely the result of favorable updates to default, defect and severity assumptions relative to historical performance, and a $7.2 million expense recovery recorded in 2019 in connection with a settlement with a mortgage insurer, partially offset by $2.8 million lower travel expenses in 2020 due to COVID-19.
In February 2020, we announced our intention to implement certain cost re-engineering initiatives in 2020 to generate further cost savings. Our continuous cost improvement efforts were focused on reducing operating and overhead costs through facility rationalization, strategic sourcing and actions, off-shore utilization, lean process design, simplification, automation and other technology-enabled productivity enhancement. We have incurred a total of $27.6 million re-engineering costs in 2020, including $6.2 million facility-related expenses reported as Occupancy and equipment, $9.7 million Compensation and benefits costs and $6.7 million Professional services costs. In 2019, we incurred a total of $65.0 million PHH integration and re-engineering costs, including $10.1 million facility-related expenses, $35.7 million severance, retention and other employee-related costs and $19.1 million Professional services costs.
Other Income (Loss)
Pledged MSR liability expense decreased $219.8 million as compared to 2019, mostly due to a $116.3 million favorable fair value change and a $158.8 million decline in servicing fee remittance. The decline in net servicing fee remittance to NRZ was driven by the runoff of the portfolio and the termination of the PMC agreement by NRZ in February 2020, which also reduced the servicing fees collected on behalf of NRZ. Partially offsetting the decrease in Pledged MSR liability expense was $60.9 million lower amortization gain of the lump sum payment received from NRZ in 2017 and 2018, as the amortization ended in April 2020.
Income Tax Benefit (Expense)
Although we incurred a pre-tax loss for 2020 of $105.7 million, we recorded an income tax benefit of $65.5 million primarily due to $64.0 million of estimated income tax benefit to be recognized under the CARES Act as a result of modification of the tax rules to allow the carryback of NOLs arising in 2018, 2019 and 2020 tax years to the five prior tax years and the increase to the business interest expense limitation under IRC Section 163(j). We collected $51.4 million in 2020, which represents the tax refund associated with the NOLs generated in 2018 carried back to prior tax years.
Our overall effective tax rates for 2020 and 2019 were 62.0% and (12.4)%, respectively. Under our transfer pricing agreements, our operations in India and Philippines are compensated on a cost-plus basis for the services they provide, such that even when we have a consolidated pre-tax loss from operations these foreign operations have taxable income, which is subject to statutory tax rates in these jurisdictions that are significantly higher than the U.S. statutory rate of 21%.
Financial Condition Summary
(1)The Common shares outstanding were retroactively adjusted for the effect of the 1-for-15 reverse stock split completed in August 2020.
Total assets increased by $244.9 million, or 2%, between December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2020 with multiple offsetting changes within our asset categories. First, our total assets increased with an additional $714.0 million loans held for investment, or 11%, mostly due to the continued growth of our reverse mortgage business. Second, the $112.5 million increase in our loans held for sale portfolio is mostly due to higher production volumes. Third, our cash balance decreased by $126.1 million to prepay a portion of the outstanding SSTL balance on January 27, 2020. Fourth, the MSR portfolio decreased by $191.6 million or 13%, due to the $263.7 million derecognition of MSRs in February 2020 upon termination by NRZ of the PMC subservicing agreement, a $251.9 million MSR valuation loss due to the decline in interest rates, mostly recognized in the first quarter of 2020 due to the distressed COVID-19 market conditions, partially offset by our MSR replenishment. Fifth, servicing advances declined $228.3 million due to significant payoff activity and a decline in the non-performing loans in our servicing portfolio by $2.2 billion in UPB, replaced by newer-production performing loans for which our advances are lower.
Total liabilities increased $241.6 million, or 2%, with similar effects as described above. First, our HMBS-related borrowings increased by $709.3 million due to the continued growth of our reverse mortgage business and its securitization. Second, borrowings under our mortgage warehouse facilities and MSR financing facilities increased $186.0 million, offset in part by our $126.1 million prepayment of the SSTL on January 27, 2020. Third, the $395.9 million decline in Other financing liabilities is mostly due to the $263.7 million derecognition of NRZ pledged MSR liability in February 2020 upon termination of the PMC subservicing agreement, and MSR valuation adjustments due to interest rates. Fourth, advance match funded liabilities decreased $97.8 million consistent with the decline in servicing advances.
Total equity increased $3.4 million during 2020 mostly due to a $47.0 million adjustment to stockholders’ equity on January 1, 2020 as a result of our election to measure future reverse mortgage draw commitments at fair value in conjunction with the application of the new credit loss accounting standard, offset by the $40.2 million net loss for 2020, and our repurchase of shares of our common stock during the first quarter.
SEGMENT RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
We report our activities in three segments, Servicing, Originations (previously Lending) and Corporate Items and Other that reflect other business activities that are currently individually insignificant. Our business segments reflect the internal reporting that we use to evaluate operating performance and to assess the allocation of our resources.
Effective with the fourth quarter of 2020, we report the results of Reverse Servicing in the Servicing segment. Historically, the Reverse Servicing business was included in the reported results of the Originations segment. This realignment of our business segments is consistent with a change in our internal management reporting to the chief operating decision maker and the management of the business and risks. Segment results for 2019 and 2018 have been recast to conform to the current segment structure. Reverse Servicing generated Revenue and Income before income taxes of $63.4 million and $53.0 million, respectively, in 2019. For 2018, Revenue and Income before income taxes were $41.7 million and $33.8 million, respectively. Reverse Servicing assets consist primarily of securitized Loans held for investment - Reverse Mortgages, at fair value.
Servicing
We earn contractual monthly servicing fees pursuant to servicing agreements, which are typically payable as a percentage of UPB, as well as ancillary fees, including late fees, modification incentive fees, REO referral commissions, float earnings and Speedpay/collection fees. We also earn fees under both subservicing and special servicing arrangements with banks and other institutions that own the MSRs. Subservicing and special servicing fees are earned either as a percentage of UPB or on a per-loan basis. Per-loan fees typically vary based on type of investor and on delinquency status. As of December 31, 2020, we serviced 1.1 million mortgage loans with an aggregate UPB of $188.8 billion. The average UPB of loans serviced during 2020 declined by 15% or $33.8 billion compared to 2019, mostly due to termination of the PMC agreement by NRZ and deboarding of the loans by October 1, 2020, and portfolio runoff, net of newly originated and purchased MSRs.
We are actively pursuing actions to manage the size of our servicing portfolio through expanding our originations business and selectively purchasing MSRs based on our capital availability that are prudent and well-executed with appropriate financial return targets. We closed MSR purchases with $31.7 billion UPB during 2020. We expect to continue to focus on acquiring Agency and government-insured MSR portfolios that meet or exceed our minimum targeted investment returns. We re-entered the forward lending correspondent channel in the second quarter of 2019 to support the growth of our MSR portfolio and we continue to pursue a number of other MSR purchase options, including driving improved recapture rates within our existing servicing portfolio. We acquired new subservicing in the fourth quarter of 2020 through our enterprise sales. We entered into a subservicing agreement with a new subservicing client that we expect to amount to $13 billion of UPB. In addition, we entered into an agreement with Oaktree to launch an MSR joint-venture, or MAV, where PMC would subservice the loans. Both agreements are expected to generate new subservicing volume in 2021.
NRZ is our largest subservicing client, accounting for 36% and 45% of the UPB and loan count in our servicing portfolio as of December 31, 2020, respectively, and approximately 62% of all delinquent loans that Ocwen serviced. NRZ servicing fees retained by Ocwen represented approximately 30% and 36% of the total servicing and subservicing fees earned by Ocwen, net of servicing fees remitted to NRZ, for 2020 and 2019, respectively (excluding ancillary income). Consistent with a subservicing relationship, NRZ is responsible for funding the advances we service for NRZ. On February 20, 2020, we received a notice of termination from NRZ with respect to the PMC MSR Agreements, and all loans were deboarded by October 1, 2020. This termination was for convenience and not for cause.
In 2017 and early 2018, we renegotiated the Ocwen agreements with NRZ to more closely align with a typical subservicing arrangement whereby we receive a base servicing fee and certain ancillary fees, primarily late fees, loan modification fees and Speedpay fees. We may also receive certain incentive fees or pay penalties tied to various contractual performance metrics. We received upfront cash payments in 2018 and 2017 of $279.6 million and $54.6 million, respectively, from NRZ in connection with the resulting 2017 and New RMSR Agreements. These upfront payments generally represented the net present value of the difference between the future revenue stream Ocwen would have received under the original agreements and the future revenue
Ocwen would receive under the renegotiated agreements. These upfront payments received from NRZ were deferred and recorded within Other income (expense) as they amortized through the remaining term of the original agreements (April 30, 2020).
Our MSR portfolio is carried at fair value, with changes in fair value recorded in MSR valuation adjustments, net. The value of our MSRs is typically correlated to changes in interest rates; as interest rates decrease, the value of the servicing portfolio typically decreases as a result of higher anticipated prepayment speeds. The sensitivity of MSR fair value to interest rates is typically higher for higher credit quality loans, such as our Agency loans. Our Non-Agency portfolio is significantly seasoned, with an average loan age of approximately 15 years, exhibiting little response to movements in market interest rates. Valuation is also impacted by loan delinquency rates whereby as delinquency rates rise, the value of the servicing portfolio declines.
For those MSR sale transactions with NRZ that do not achieve sale accounting treatment, we present on a gross basis the pledged MSR as an asset and the corresponding liability amount pledged MSR liability on our balance sheet. Similarly, we present the total servicing fees and the fair value changes related to the MSR sale transactions with NRZ within Servicing and subservicing fees, net and MSR valuation adjustment, net. Net servicing fee remittance to NRZ and the fair value changes of the pledged MSR liability are separately presented within Pledged MSR liability expense and are offset by the two corresponding amounts presented in other statement of operations line items. We record both our pledged MSRs and the associated MSR liability at fair value, the changes in fair value of the pledged MSR liability were offset by the changes in fair value of the associated MSRs pledged, presented in MSR valuation adjustments, net.
Loan Resolutions
We have a strong track record of success as a leader in the servicing industry in foreclosure prevention and loss mitigation that helps homeowners stay in their homes and improves financial outcomes for mortgage loan investors. Reducing delinquencies also enables us to recover advances and recognize additional ancillary income, such as late fees, which we do not recognize on delinquent loans until they are brought current. Loan resolution activities address the pipeline of delinquent loans and generally lead to (i) modification of the loan terms, (ii) repayment plan alternatives, (iii) a discounted payoff of the loan (e.g., a “short sale”), or (iv) foreclosure or deed-in-lieu-of-foreclosure and sale of the resulting REO. Loan modifications must be made in accordance with the applicable servicing agreement as such agreements may require approvals or impose restrictions upon, or even forbid, loan modifications. To select an appropriate loan modification option for a borrower, we perform a structured analysis, using a proprietary model, of all options using information provided by the borrower as well as external data, including recent broker price opinions to value the mortgaged property. Our proprietary model includes, among other things, an assessment of re-default risk.
Our future financial performance will be less impacted by loan resolutions because, under our NRZ agreements, NRZ receives all deferred servicing fees. Deferred servicing fees related to delinquent borrower payments were $169.2 million at December 31, 2020, of which $131.8 million were attributable to NRZ agreements.
Advance Obligation
As a servicer, we are generally obligated to advance funds in the event borrowers are delinquent on their monthly mortgage related payments. We advance principal and interest (P&I Advances), taxes and insurance (T&I Advances) and legal fees, property valuation fees, property inspection fees, maintenance costs and preservation costs on properties that have been foreclosed (Corporate Advances). For certain loans in non-Agency securitization trusts, we have the ability to cease making P&I advances and immediately recover advances previously made from the general collections of the respective trust if we determine that our P&I advances cannot be recovered from the projected future cash flows. With T&I and Corporate advances, we continue to advance if net future cash flows exceed projected future advances without regard to advances already made.
Most of our advances have the highest reimbursement priority (i.e., they are “top of the waterfall”) so that we are entitled to repayment from respective loan or REO liquidation proceeds before any interest or principal is paid on the bonds that were issued by the trust. In the majority of cases, advances in excess of respective loan or REO liquidation proceeds may be recovered from pool-level proceeds. The costs incurred in meeting these obligations consist principally of the interest expense incurred in financing the servicing advances. Most subservicing agreements, including our agreements with NRZ, provide for prompt reimbursement of any advances from the owner of the servicing rights. Refer to Note 25 - Commitments to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further description of servicer advance obligations.
Significant Variables
Aggregate UPB and Loan Count. Servicing fees are generally expressed as a percentage of UPB and subservicing fees are earned on a per-loan basis or expressed as a percentage of UPB. Aggregate UPB and loan count decline as a result of portfolio run-off and increase to the extent we retain MSRs from new originations or engage in MSR acquisitions, to the extent permitted.
Operating Efficiency. Our operating results are heavily dependent on our ability to scale our operations to cost-effectively and efficiently perform servicing activities in accordance with our servicing agreements. To the extent we are unable to process a high volume of transactions consistently and systematically, the cost of our servicing activities increases and has a negative impact on our operating results. To the extent we are unable to complete servicing activities in accordance with the requirements of our servicing agreements, we may incur additional costs or fail to recover otherwise reimbursable costs and advances.
Delinquencies. Delinquencies impact our results of operations and operating cash flows. Non-performing loans are more expensive to service because the loss mitigation activities that we must undertake to keep borrowers in their homes or to foreclose, if necessary, are costlier than the activities required to service a performing loan. These loss mitigation activities include increased contact with the borrower for collection and the development of forbearance plans or loan modifications by highly skilled associates who command higher compensation as well as the higher compliance costs associated with these, and similar, activities. While the higher cost is somewhat offset by ancillary fees, for severely delinquent loans or loans that enter the foreclosure process the incremental revenue opportunities are generally not sufficient to cover our increased costs.
In addition, when borrowers are delinquent, the amount of funds that we are required to advance to the investors increases. We incur significant costs to finance those advances. We utilize servicing advance financing facilities, which are asset-backed (i.e., match funded liabilities) securitization facilities, to finance a portion of our advances. As a result, increased delinquencies result in increased interest expense.
Prepayment Speed. The rate at which portfolio UPB declines can have a significant impact on our business. Items reducing UPB include normal principal payments (runoff), refinancing, loan modifications involving forgiveness of principal, voluntary property sales and involuntary property sales such as foreclosures. Prepayment speed impacts future servicing fees, amortization and valuation of MSRs, float earnings on float balances and interest expense on advances. Increases in anticipated lifetime prepayment speeds generally cause MSR valuation adjustments to increase because MSRs are valued based on total expected servicing income over the life of a portfolio. The converse is true when expectations for prepayment speeds decrease.
Reverse Mortgage Revenue
The activities and financial performance related to reverse mortgage loans that are securitized and classified as held for investment, at fair value, together with the HMBS-related borrowings, at fair value (internally identified as our Reverse Servicing business) are reflected in the Servicing segment, consistent with how the activities are managed and internally reported beginning in 2020. Segment results for 2019 and 2018 have been recast to conform to the current segment presentation. Once a reverse mortgage loan is securitized, our activities are generally consistent with other loan servicing as described above, with the following variations.
Under the terms of ARM-based HECM loan agreements, the borrowers have additional borrowing capacity of $2.0 billion at December 31, 2020. These draws or tails are funded by the servicer and can be subsequently securitized. We do not incur any substantive underwriting, marketing or compensation costs in connection with any future draws, although we must maintain sufficient capital resources and available borrowing capacity to ensure that we are able to fund these future draws.
As an HMBS issuer, we assume certain obligations related to each security issued. In addition to our obligation to fund tails, the most significant obligation is the requirement to purchase loans out of the Ginnie Mae securitization pools once they reach 98% of the maximum claim amount (MCA repurchases or active buyouts). Active repurchased loans are assigned to HUD and payment is received from HUD through a claims process. HUD reimburses us for the outstanding principal balance on the loan up to the maximum claim amount; we bear the risk of exposure if the outstanding balance on a loan exceeds the maximum claim amount. Inactive repurchased loans or buyouts (loans that are in default for one of the following reasons - title conveyances or the borrower is deceased, no longer occupies the property or is delinquent on tax and insurance payments) are generally liquidated through foreclosure and subsequent sale of REO. State specific foreclosure and REO liquidation timelines have a significant impact on the timing and amount of our recovery. If we are unable to sell the property securing the inactive reverse loan for an acceptable price within the timeframe established by HUD (six months), we are required to make an appraisal-based claim to HUD. In such cases, HUD reimburses us for the loan balance, eligible expenses and interest, less the appraised value of the underlying property. Thereafter, all the risks and costs associated with maintaining and liquidating the property remains with us; we may incur additional losses on REO properties as they progress through the liquidation processes related to delayed timelines due to market conditions, sales commissions, property preservation costs or property tax and insurance advances. The significance of future losses associated with appraisal-based claims is dependent upon the volume of inactive loans, condition of foreclosed properties and the general real estate market.
The reverse mortgage revenue reported within the Servicing segment includes the net fair value changes of securitized reverse mortgage loans held for investment and HMBS-related borrowings. We elected the fair value accounting election for both our reverse mortgage loans held for investment and the HMBS-related borrowings. The fair value changes include the contractual interest income earned on securitized reverse mortgage loans, net of interest expense on HMBS-related borrowings, and the change in fair value of these assets and liabilities. The fair value of reverse mortgage loans held for investment includes
gains on future tails as a result of our fair value elections. Tails are participations in previously securitized HECMs and are created by additions to principal for borrower draws on lines-of-credit (scheduled and unscheduled), interest, servicing fees, and mortgage insurance premiums.
The fair value of our HECM loan portfolio generally decreases as market interest rates rise and increases as market rates fall. As our HECM loan portfolio is predominantly comprised of ARMs, higher interest rates cause the loan balance to accrue and reach a 98% maximum claim amount liquidation event more quickly, with lower interest rates extending the timeline to liquidation. HECM loans have a longer duration than HMBS-related borrowings as a result of the future draw commitments, and our obligations as issuer of HMBS to purchase loans out of the Ginnie Mae securitization pools once the outstanding principal balance of the related HECM loan is equal to 98% of the maximum claim amount.
The following table presents selected results of operations of our Servicing segment. The amounts presented are before the elimination of balances and transactions with our other segments:
The following table provides selected operating statistics for our Servicing segment:
(1)Performing loans include those loans that are less than 90 days past due and those loans for which borrowers are making scheduled payments under loan modification, forbearance or bankruptcy plans. We consider all other loans to be non-performing.
(2)Conventional loans at December 31, 2020 include 89,458 prime loans with a UPB of $16.1 billion which we service or subservice. This compares to 111,246 prime loans with a UPB of $20.4 billion at December 31, 2019. Prime loans are generally good credit quality loans that meet GSE underwriting standards.
(3)Loans serviced or subserviced pursuant to our agreements with NRZ.
(4)Average CPR includes voluntary and involuntary prepayments and scheduled principal amortization (not reflected in the above table).
(5)Includes $6.7 billion UPB of reverse mortgage loans that are recognized in our consolidated balance sheet at December 31, 2020.
(6)Includes $3.1 billion UPB of subserviced loans at December 31, 2020.
The following table provides selected operating statistics related to our reverse mortgage loans reported within our Servicing segment:
(1)Securitized loans only; excludes unsecuritized loans as reported within the Originations segment.
(2)Buyouts are reported as Loans held for sale, Accounts Receivable or REO depending on the loan and foreclosure status.
(3)Future Value represented the unrecognized net present value of estimated future cash flows from customer draws of the reverse mortgage loans (tails) and projected performance assumptions based on historical experience and industry benchmarks discounted at 12% related to HECM loans originated prior to January 1, 2019. On January 1, 2020, we made an irrevocable election to account for tails at fair value and recognized the $47.0 million Future Value through stockholders’ equity. Excludes the fair value of future draw commitments related to HECM loans purchased or originated after December 31, 2018 that we elected to carry at fair value.
The following table provides selected operating statistics related to advances for our Servicing segment:
The following table provides the rollforward of activity of our portfolio of residential assets serviced for the years ended December 31, that includes MSR and subserviced loans:
(1)Additions include purchased MSRs on portfolios consisting of 46,794 loans with a UPB of $15.8 billion that have not yet transferred to the Black Knight MSP servicing system as of December 31, 2020. These loans are scheduled to transfer onto Black Knight MSP by April 1, 2021. Because we have legal title to the MSRs, the UPB and count of the loans are included in our reported servicing portfolio. The seller continues to subservice the loans on an interim basis between the transaction closing date and the servicing transfer date.
(2)Excludes the volume UPB associated with short-term interim subservicing for some clients as a support to their originate-to-sell business, where loans are boarded and deboarded within the same quarter.
(3)Includes 270,218 deboarded loans with a UPB of $34.3 billion related to the termination of the subservicing agreement between NRZ and PMC on February 20, 2020. Refer to Note 10 - Rights to MSRs.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 versus 2019
Servicing and Subservicing Fees
The 25% decline in total servicing and subservicing fees in 2020 as compared to 2019 is driven by two main factors: the reduction in fees collected on behalf of NRZ, as further discussed below, and the reduction in ancillary and float income which was mostly due to the COVID-19 environment and lower interest rates.
Servicing fees declined $11.3 million or 5% as compared to 2019. As our average volume serviced (MSRs owned) increased by 3% year-over-year, the decline in revenue is mostly due to the shortfall of servicing fee collections on loans under forbearance, and lower collection of deferred servicing fees. We do not recognize any servicing fees on GSE loans under forbearance that were not paying during the period, and have a shortfall of one month of servicing fees for PLS loans under forbearance. We typically collect deferred servicing fees upon loan liquidation and the moratorium and restrictions on foreclosures reduced our collection in 2020 as compared to 2019. The deferral of servicing fee collections due to forbearance is not expected to significantly impact our total cumulative revenue over the life of the loan but will reduce near-term revenue and cash flow. The delay in servicing fee collection is expected to be partially offset by lower runoff in our MSR portfolio, as the deferred servicing fees generally remain projected as future cash flows in the MSR valuation model.
Subservicing fees increased by $13.4 million as compared to 2019, mostly explained by the PMC subservicing agreement with NRZ. Upon notice of termination by NRZ on February 20, 2020, the servicing fees collected on behalf of NRZ net of the remittance to NRZ has been reported as subservicing fees instead of NRZ MSR servicing fees in prior periods, with $15.9 million recognized in 2020. Ocwen performed subservicing of these loans subject to termination and earned subservicing fee until loan deboarding, which occurred on September 1 and October 1, 2020.
The following table below presents the respective drivers of residential and commercial loan servicing and subservicing fees.
(1)Subservicing fees for the year ended December 31, 2020 includes $15.9 million of fees earned on the NRZ PMC MSR Agreements upon receiving the notice of cancellation in February 2020.
The NRZ servicing fee includes the servicing fee collected on behalf of NRZ relating to the MSRs sold but not derecognized from our balance sheet. Under GAAP, we present servicing fees collected and remitted on a gross basis, with the servicing fees remitted to NRZ reported as Pledged MSR liability expense. The NRZ collected fees declined by $193.3 million as compared to 2019.
The decline in the NRZ fee collection is driven by the decline in the average UPB of 20% as compared to 2019. The volume decline is mostly explained by the NRZ portfolio runoff and the derecognition of the MSRs in connection with the termination of the PMC agreement by NRZ on February 20, 2020. As the NRZ relationship is effectively a subservicing agreement, the COVID-19 environment, loans under forbearance and the fee collection do not impact our financial results to the same extent as for serviced loans with our owned MSRs.
The following table presents both servicing fees collected and subservicing fees retained by Ocwen under the NRZ agreements, together with the previously recognized amortization gain of the lump-sum payments received in connection with the 2017 Agreements and New RMSR Agreements. See Note 10 - Rights to MSRs for further information.
(1)Reported within Pledged MSR liability expense.
(2)Excludes the servicing fees of loans under the PMC Servicing Agreement after February 20, 2020 due to the notice of termination by NRZ, and subservicing fees earned under subservicing agreements.
(3)In 2017 and early 2018, we renegotiated the Ocwen agreements with NRZ to more closely align with a typical subservicing arrangement whereby we receive a base servicing fee and certain ancillary fees, primarily late fees, loan modification fees and Speedpay fees. We may also receive certain incentive fees or pay penalties tied to various contractual performance metrics. We received upfront cash payments in 2018 and 2017 of $279.6 million and $54.6 million, respectively, from NRZ in connection with the resulting 2017 and New RMSR Agreements. These upfront payments generally represented the net present value of the difference between the future revenue stream Ocwen would have received under the original agreements and the future revenue Ocwen received under the renegotiated agreements. These upfront payments received from NRZ were deferred and recorded within Other income (expense), Pledged MSR liability expense, as they amortized through the term of the original agreements (April 2020). See Note 10 - Rights to MSRs for further information.
(4)Excludes the UPB of loans subserviced under the PMC Servicing Agreement after February 20, 2020 due to the notice of termination by NRZ, and excludes the UPB of loans under subservicing agreements.
The following table presents the detail of our ancillary income:
Ancillary income declined by $51.7 million, as compared to 2019 primarily due to a $37.6 million, or 79% decline in float income that was mainly due to lower interest rates. The average 1-month LIBOR rate dropped over 120 basis points as compared to 2019. The combined effect of lower servicing volume, the COVID-19 environment restricting late fees or collection fees on loans under forbearance, and lower modification fees also contributed to the decline in ancillary income. Revenue recognized in connection with loan modifications, including HAMP fees and other fees, decreased $8.3 million due to the expiration of the program.
Reverse Mortgage Revenue, Net
Reverse mortgage revenue, net is comprised of the net change in fair value of securitized loans held for investment and HMBS-related borrowings. The decline of $55.9 million, or 88%, as compared to 2019 is primarily attributable to the fair value election for future draw commitments and the unfavorable assumption updates due to the COVID-19 environment and increased prepayments.
We recorded a $31.2 million gain on tail draws upon their funding and securitization in 2019 and nil in 2020 due to our fair value election. On January 1, 2020, we elected fair value accounting for future draw commitments on HECM reverse mortgage loans purchased or originated before December 31, 2018. The fair value election resulted in the one-time recognition of $47.0 million gain through stockholders’ equity on January 1, 2020. Under this accounting treatment, the fair value of tail draws is recorded together with the loan at the time of lock within the Originations segment, while any subsequent change in fair value is recorded within the Servicing segment. As such, during 2020 we did not recognize any gain on tail draws in the Servicing segment.
We recorded an additional $21.1 million fair value loss in 2020 as compared to 2019 due to unfavorable assumption updates and higher actual prepayments. The unfavorable assumption updates in 2020 were primarily related to elevated levels of projected prepayments in the market, lower tail gains and other COVID-specific updates, including higher mortality and inactive status or delinquency. We did not record any significant change in fair value of securitized loans held for investment net of HMBS-related borrowings relating to interest rates and spreads between 2019 and 2020.
MSR Valuation Adjustments, Net
The following table summarizes the MSR valuation adjustments, net reported in our Servicing segment, with the breakdown of the total MSRs recorded on our balance sheet between our owned MSR and the pledged MSRs transferred to NRZ that did not achieve sale accounting treatment:
(1)Excludes gains of $41.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (nil in 2019) on the revaluation of MSRs purchased in disorderly markets, that is reported in the Originations segment.
(2)For those MSR sale transactions with NRZ that do not achieve sale accounting treatment, we present gross the pledged MSR as an asset and the corresponding liability amount pledged MSR liability on our balance sheet. Because we record both our pledged MSRs with NRZ and the associated MSR liability at fair value, the changes in fair value of the pledged MSR liability are offset by the changes in fair value of the associated pledged MSR asset, presented in MSR valuation adjustments, net. Although fair value changes are separately presented in our statement of operations, we are not exposed to any fair value changes of the MSR pledged to NRZ. See Note 10 - Rights to MSRs for further information.
We reported a $276.3 million loss in MSR valuation adjustments, net in 2020, with a $193.7 million loss on our owned MSRs and an $82.6 million loss on the MSRs transferred and pledged to NRZ.
The $193.7 million loss on our owned MSRs in 2020 is comprised of $109.5 million portfolio runoff and a $129.1 million loss due to changes in interest rates and assumptions, partially offset by a $44.9 million hedging gain. The elevated portfolio runoff is driven by high prepayments of our GSE portfolio due to historically low interest rates, with a 98 basis point decline in the 10-year swap rate during 2020, and an 81 basis-point decline in 2019. We implemented a MSR macro-hedge strategy in the fourth quarter of 2019 to partially protect us against interest rate volatility. Refer to the Market Risk sections for further detail on our hedging strategy and its effectiveness.
Ocwen replenished and grew its GSE portfolio in 2020 with total originations and purchases of $36.2 billion UPB of MSR or 66% of the GSE owned portfolio at December 31, 2020, resulting in a weighted average coupon of 3.40% as compared to 4.26% as of December 31, 2019. MSR runoff due to prepayment is generally lower with lower mortgage loan portfolio coupons. Comparatively, most of the non-Agency MSR portfolio relates to loans originated pre-2008 financial crisis and are
less sensitive to interest rates. The following table provides information regarding the changes in the fair value and the UPB of our portfolio of owned MSRs during 2020, with the breakdown by investor type.
(1)Includes $15.0 billion UPB of GSE MSRs purchased in bulk transactions in December 2020.
(2)Includes gains of $41.7 million on the revaluation of MSRs purchased in COVID-19 market conditions, that is reported in the Originations segment.
The $82.6 million loss on the MSRs transferred to NRZ does not affect our net income as it is offset by a corresponding $82.6 million gain on the pledged MSR liability, reported as Pledged MSR liability expense. The factors underlying the fair value loss of the NRZ Pledged MSR and its variance between 2019 and 2020 are similar to our owned MSR, discussed above, with the exception of the fair value gain due to assumptions on non-Agency MSR (NRZ pledged) reported in 2019, and the lower UPB due to the termination of the PMC servicing agreement by NRZ in February 2020.
Compensation and Benefits
Compensation and benefits expense declined $30.4 million, or 21% as compared to 2019 due to our efforts to re-engineer our cost structure and align headcount in our servicing operations with the size of our servicing portfolio. Salaries and benefit expenses declined $28.6 million and $6.1 million, respectively, due to a 20% lower average servicing headcount, as compared to 2019, and the change in the composition of our headcount with relatively more offshore, and less U.S. resources. Offshore headcount, whose average compensation cost is relatively lower, increased from 74% to 80% of total headcount, compared to 2019. A $3.6 million decline in commissions also contributed to the decline in expense. Partially offsetting these declines are $1.5 million of costs related to our 2020 re-engineering initiatives, $3.0 million incremental incentive compensation and $4.2 million of compensation expenses related to COVID-19.
Servicing Expense
Servicing expense primarily includes claim losses and interest curtailments on government-insured loans and provision expense for advances and servicing representation and warranties. Servicing expense declined $32.8 million, or 32%, as compared to 2019 primarily due to a $13.0 million decrease in government-insured claim loss provisions on reinstated or modified loans and a general decline in other servicer-related expenses that was primarily driven by a 13% reduction in the average number of loans in our servicing portfolio. The reduction in government-insured claim loss provisions is due to the combined effect of a decline in claims, mostly due to the COVID-19 moratorium, and lower loss severity, mostly driven by a reduction in the foreclosure and liquidation timeline of loans. The government-insured claim loss provisions recorded in 2019
included claims of a legacy portfolio with higher severity loans. Government-insured claim loss provisions are generally offset by changes in the fair value of the corresponding MSRs, which are recorded in MSR valuation adjustments, net. The decrease is also attributable to $9.1 million improved advance recoveries, which decreased loss severity rates used in the computation of advance reserves, and the recovery of $3.1 million previously recognized as Servicing and origination expense in connection with a settlement from a mortgage insurer as well as a $6.8 million release of indemnification reserves related to such settlement.
Other Operating Expenses
Occupancy and equipment expense decreased $13.3 million, or 30% in 2020, as compared to 2019. The decrease is largely due to the effect of the decline in the size of the servicing portfolio on various direct and allocated expenses, including postage and mailing services, which declined by $4.6 million, and the decline in our overall occupancy and equipment expenses due to certain facility closures as part of the integration of PHH.
Professional services expense declined $14.0 million, or 33%, as compared to 2019 due to a $14.5 million decline in legal fees largely due to declines in legal expenses relating to the PHH integration and litigation and a decline in fees incurred in connection with the conversion of NRZ’s Rights to MSRs to fully-owned MSRs. Professional services expenses in 2020 included $1.6 million of COVID-19 related expenses
Technology and communication expense declined $7.4 million, or 23%, as compared to 2019. The costs savings were driven by our servicing platform integration as we no longer license the REALServicing servicing system from Altisource following our transition to Black Knight MSP beginning in June 2019.
Corporate overhead allocations declined $136.9 million, as compared to 2019, primarily due to lower compensation and benefits, technology expenses, legal fees, and occupancy and equipment costs. The relative weight of average headcount to the consolidated organization declined as compared to 2019. Furthermore, the allocation methodology of corporate overhead was updated in the first quarter 2020 and resulted in lower expenses being allocated to the Servicing segment. Refer to the Corporate Items and Other segment discussion.
Other expenses increased $18.8 million as compared to 2019 primarily due to a lower provision for indemnification obligations in 2019 that was largely a result of the reversal of a portion of the liability for representation and warranty obligations related to favorable updates to default, defect and severity assumptions relative to historical performance. In addition, Other expenses for 2019 also includes a $7.2 million expense recovery in connection with a settlement with a mortgage insurer.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) includes primarily net interest expense and the pledged MSR liability expense.
Interest expense declined by $11.9 million, or 12%, compared to 2019. The decline in interest expense is primarily due to the decline in the amount of debt used to fund servicing advances and other servicing assets, as reflected in the decline in the interest expense allocation from the Corporate segment. This decline was offset in part by an increase in interest expense on new MSR financing facilities entered into during the third and fourth quarters of 2019.
Pledged MSR liability expense relates to the MSR sale agreements with NRZ that do not achieve sale accounting and are presented on a gross basis in our financial statements. See Note 10 - Rights to MSRs to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Pledged MSR liability expense includes the servicing fee remittance to NRZ and the fair value changes of the pledged MSR liability.
The following table provides information regarding the Pledged MSR liability expense:
(1)Offset by corresponding amount recorded in Servicing and subservicing fee. See table below.
(2)Offset by corresponding amount recorded in MSR valuation adjustments, net. See table below.
Pledged MSR liability expense decreased $219.7 million as compared to 2019, largely due to a $116.3 million favorable fair value change and a $158.8 million decline in servicing fee remittance. Pledged MSR liability expense for 2019 included an unfavorable fair value adjustment resulting from, among other factors, an update to our MSR fair value assumptions associated with improved collateral performance and market trade activity. The decline in net servicing fee remittance to NRZ was driven by the runoff of the portfolio and the termination of the PMC agreement by NRZ in February 2020, which also reduced the servicing fees collected on behalf of NRZ. Refer to the above discussions of MSR valuation adjustments, net (Pledged MSR to NRZ) and Servicing and subservicing fee (NRZ).
Partially offsetting the decrease in Pledged MSR liability expense was $60.9 million lower amortization gain related to the lump-sum cash payments received from NRZ in 2017 and 2018. This decrease is due to the lump-sum payments being fully amortized at the end of the second quarter of 2020. Refer to the above discussion of NRZ servicing fees.
The table below reflects the condensed consolidated statement of operations together with the amounts related to the NRZ pledged MSRs that offset each other (nil impact on net income/loss). The table provides information related to the impact of the accounting for the NRZ relationship that did not achieve sale accounting treatment, and is not intended to reflect the profitability of the NRZ relationship. Net servicing fee remittance and pledged MSR fair value changes are presented on a gross basis and are offset by corresponding amounts presented in other statement of operations line items. In addition, because we record both our pledged MSRs and the associated pledged MSR liability at fair value, the changes in fair value of the pledged MSR liability were offset by the changes in fair value of the MSRs pledged, presented in MSR valuation adjustments, net. Accordingly, only the lump sum amortization gain and the amount reported in “Other” in the table above affect our net earnings.
Originations
We originate and purchase loans and MSRs through multiple channels, including recapture, retail, wholesale, correspondent, flow MSR purchase agreements, the GSE Cash Window programs and bulk MSR purchases.
We originate or purchase conventional loans (conforming to the underwriting standards of Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac; collectively referred to as Agency) and government-insured (FHA or VA) forward mortgage loans. We generally sell and securitize loans on a servicing-retained basis. The GSEs and Ginnie Mae guarantee these mortgage securitizations. We originate HECM loans, or reverse mortgages, that are mostly insured by the FHA and we are an approved issuer of HECM mortgage-backed securities (HMBS) that are guaranteed by Ginnie Mae.
Our recapture channel focuses on targeting existing Ocwen customers by offering them competitive mortgage refinance opportunities (i.e., portfolio recapture), where permitted by the governing servicing and pooling agreement. In doing so, we generate revenues for our forward lending business and protect the servicing portfolio by retaining these customers. A portion of our servicing portfolio is susceptible to refinance activity during periods of declining interest rates. Our recapture lending activity partially mitigates this risk. Origination volume and related gains are a natural economic hedge, to a certain degree, to the impact of declining MSR values as interest rates decline. Effective June 1, 2019, we no longer perform any portfolio recapture on behalf of NRZ. Previously under the terms of our agreements with NRZ, to the extent we refinanced a loan underlying the MSRs subject to these agreements, we were obligated to transfer such recaptured MSR to NRZ under the terms of a separate subservicing agreement.
We re-entered the forward lending correspondent channel in the second quarter of 2019 to drive higher servicing portfolio replenishment. We purchase closed loans from our network of correspondent sellers and sell and securitize them. As of December 31, 2020, we have client relationships with 131 approved correspondent sellers, or 85 new sellers since December 31, 2019.
We originate and purchase reverse mortgage loans through our retail, wholesale and correspondent lending channels, under the guidelines of the HECM reverse mortgage insurance program of HUD. Loans originated under this program are generally insured by the FHA, which provides investors with protection against risk of borrower default. In the second half of 2019, we started originating proprietary reverse mortgage loans that are not FHA-insured and are sold servicing-released to third parties. The financial statement impact of these non-HECM loans was negligible in 2019 and 2020. We retain the servicing rights to reverse HECM loans securitized through the Ginnie Mae HMBS program; however, the securitization program fails sale accounting such that the underlying HECM loans are not de-recognized upon securitization. The activities and financial performance related to reverse mortgage loans that are securitized (internally referred to as Reverse Servicing business) are reflected in the Servicing segment, consistent with how the activities are managed and internally reported beginning in 2020. Segment results for 2019 and 2018 have been recast to conform to the current segment presentation. See Note 23 - Business Segment Reporting for further information.
After origination, we package and sell the loans in the secondary mortgage market, through GSE and Ginnie Mae securitizations on a servicing retained basis and through whole loan transactions on a servicing released basis. Lending revenues mostly include interest income earned for the period the loans are held by us, gain on sale revenue, which represents the difference between the origination value and the sale value of the loan including its MSR value, and fee income earned at origination. As the securitizations of reverse mortgage loans do not achieve sale accounting treatment and the reverse mortgage loans are classified as loans held for investment, at fair value, reverse mortgage revenues include the fair value changes of the loan from lock date to securitization date. No gain or loss is recognized upon securitization. Securitized loans are reflected within the Servicing segment.
We provide customary origination representations and warranties to investors in connection with our loan sales and securitization activities. We receive customary origination representations and warranties from our network of approved correspondent lenders. We recognize the fair value of the liability for our representations and warranties at the time of sale. In the event we cannot remedy a breach of a representation or warranty, we may be required to repurchase the loan or provide an indemnification payment to the mortgage loan investor. To the extent that we have recourse against a third-party originator, we may recover part or all of any loss we incur. We actively monitor our counterparty risk associated with our network of correspondent lenders-sellers.
We purchase MSRs through flow purchase agreements, the GSE Cash Window programs and bulk MSR purchases. The GSE Cash Window programs we participate in, and purchase MSR from, allow mortgage companies and financial institutions to sell whole loans to the respective agency and sell the MSR to the winning bidder servicing released. In addition, we partner with other originators to replenish our MSR through flow purchase agreements. We do not provide any origination representations and warranties in connection with our MSR purchases through MSR flow purchase agreements or GSE Cash Window programs. As of December 31, 2020, we have client relationships with 322 sellers, including 191 MSR co-issue and flow sellers and 131 correspondent sellers.
We initially recognize our MSR origination with the associated economics in our Originations business, and subsequently transfer the MSR to our Servicing segment at fair value. Our Servicing segment reflects all subsequent performance associated with the MSR, including funding cost, run-off and other fair value changes.
We source additional servicing volume through our subservicing and interim servicing agreements and we intend to grow our subservicing business through our enterprise sales. We do not report any revenue or gain associated with subservicing, as it is reported within the Servicing segment. However, sales efforts and certain costs - marginal compensation and benefits - are managed and reported within the Originations segment.
Significant Variables
Economic Conditions. General economic conditions impact the capacity for consumer credit and the supply of capital. More specifically, employment and home prices are variables that can each have a material impact on mortgage volume. Employment levels, the level of wages and the stability of employment are underlying factors that impact credit qualification. The effect of home prices on lending volumes is significant and complex. As home prices go up, home equity increases and this improves the position of existing homeowners either to refinance or to sell their home, which often leads to a new home purchase and a new forward mortgage loan, or in the case of a reverse mortgage, increase the size of the mortgage loan available and the number of potential borrowers. However, if home prices increase rapidly, the effect on affordability for first-time and move-up buyers can dampen the demand for mortgage loans. The more restrictive standards for loan to value (LTV) ratios, debt to income (DTI) ratios and employment that characterize the current market amplify the significance and sensitivity of the housing market and related mortgage lending volumes to employment levels and home prices.
Market Size and Composition. Changes in mortgage rates directly impact the demand for both purchase and refinance forward mortgages. Small changes in mortgage rates directly impact housing affordability for both first-time and move-up home buyers and affect their ability to purchase a home. For refinance loans, current market mortgage rates must be considered relative to the rates on the current mortgage debt outstanding. As the time and cost to refinance has decreased, relatively small reductions in mortgage rates can trigger higher refinancing activity. Given the large size of U.S. residential forward mortgage debt outstanding, the impact of mortgage rate changes can drive significant swings in mortgage refinance volume.
Market size is likewise impacted by changes to existing, or development of new, GSE or other government sponsored programs. Changes in GSE or HUD guidelines and costs and the availability of alternative financing sources, such as non-Agency proprietary loans and traditional home equity loans, impact borrower demand for forward and reverse mortgages.
Investor Demand. The liquidity of the secondary market impacts the size of the market by defining loan attributes and credit guidelines for loans that investors are willing to buy and at what price. In recent years, the GSEs have been the dominant providers of secondary market liquidity for forward mortgages, keeping the product and credit spectrum relatively homogeneous and risk averse (higher credit standards).
Margins. Changes in pricing margin are closely correlated with changes in market size. As loan demand and market capacity move out of alignment, pricing adjusts. In a growing market, margins expand and in a contracting market, margins tighten as lenders seek to keep their production at or close to full capacity. Managing capacity and cost is critical as volumes change. Among our channels, our margins per loan are highest in the retail channel and lowest in the correspondent channel. We work directly with the borrower to process, underwrite and close loans in our retail and reverse wholesale channels. In our retail channel, we also identify the customer and take loan applications. As a result, our retail channel is the most people- and cost-intensive and experiences the greatest volume volatility.
The following table presents the results of operations of our Originations segment. The amounts presented are before the elimination of balances and transactions with our other segments:
The following table provides selected operating statistics for our Origination segment:
(1)Loan production excludes reverse mortgage loan draws by borrowers disbursed subsequent to origination.
(2)Excludes interim subservicing.
Gain on Loans Held for Sale
The following table provides information regarding Gain on loans held for sale by channel and the related origination volume and margin:
(1)Includes realized gains on loan sales and related new MSR capitalization, changes in fair value of IRLCs, changes in fair value of loans held for sale and economic hedging gains and losses.
(2)Ratio of gain on Loans held for sale to volume UPB -see (3) below. Note that the ratio differs from the day-one gain on sale margin upon lock.
(3)Defined as the UPB of loans funded in the period plus the change in the period in the pull-through adjusted UPB of IRLCs.
Gain on loans held for sale, net, increased $72.3 million, or 220%, as compared to 2019, mostly due to the significant increase (approximately 500%) in our loan production volume. The $5.8 billion new production volume increase in 2020 is driven by both our correspondent channel that we re-started in the second quarter of 2019 and our recapture channel. Our pipeline, or lock commitments, significantly increased in 2020 benefit from the refinance opportunities in the market driven by mortgage rate decrease to historical low levels. Both margins in the correspondent and recapture channels were higher in 2020, as compared to 2019, due to significant volatility attributed to the rate rally and COVID-19 related market disruption. The lower average gain on sale margin is mainly due to our channel mix, with an increased relative weight of our lower-margin correspondent production.
Reverse Mortgage Revenue, Net
The following table provides information regarding the Reverse mortgage revenue, net of the Originations segment that comprises fair value changes of the pipeline and unsecuritized reverse mortgage loans held for investment, at fair value, together with volume and margin:
(1)Defined as the UPB of loans funded in the period plus the change in the period in the pull-through adjusted UPB of IRLCs.
(2)Ratio of Originations gain to origination UPB - see (1) above.
(3)Includes gain on new origination, and loan fees and other.
We reported $53.1 million Reverse mortgage revenue, net in 2020, a $30.3 million or 132% increase as compared to 2019. As detailed in the above table, the increase is driven by both a volume increase and a higher average margin. The higher average margin increase is mostly driven by a change to the channel mix, in addition to market related dynamics driving
margins upward in 2020 that we anticipate to abate in 2020 as margins normalize and originations mix wherein the lower margin, higher volume channels weigh down the average margin.
Other revenue, net
Other revenue, net increased $15.0 million as compared to 2019 primarily due to higher fees earned on increased loan origination volume and setup fees earned for loans boarded on our servicing platform, mostly driven by the increased volume of our correspondent channel and flow MSR purchases.
MSR Valuation Adjustments, Net
MSR valuation adjustments, net includes a gain of $41.7 million in 2020 (nil in 2019) due to the revaluation gains on certain MSRs opportunistically purchased through bulk MSR purchases, the GSE Cash Window programs, and flow purchases. Due to the market dislocation created by the COVID-19 environment, we seized the opportunity to purchase certain MSRs with a purchase price at a discount to fair value. Opportunities for fair value discount or margins were larger in the early period of the pandemic and have reduced as markets start to normalize. In addition, as an aggregator of MSRs, we recognized valuation adjustments for differences in the exit markets in accordance with the accounting fair value guidance. We report such initial margin gains, including due to the revaluation to mid-point of the bid-ask spread, within the Originations segment since the segment’s business objective is the sourcing of new MSRs at targeted returns. We transfer the MSR from the Originations segment to the Servicing segment at fair value upon closing.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses increased $41.9 million, or 58%, as compared to 2019, primarily due to increases in our direct expenses, including an $18.4 million increase in Compensation and benefits, a $12.2 million increase in corporate overhead allocations and an $8.0 million increase in Professional services. Certain expenses are variable, and as a result, as origination volume increased so did the related expenses. Examples include commissions, recorded in Compensation and benefits expense, certain outsourced services to support the surge in our Originations business recorded in Professional services, and advertising expense recorded in Other expenses. Total average headcount increased 32% as compared to 2019, reflecting increases in staffing levels as part of our initiative to increase volume, including our re-entry into the forward lending correspondent channel in the second quarter of 2019, offset in part by our PHH integration and cost re-engineering initiatives. The $18.4 million, or 42% increase in Compensation and benefits expense as compared to 2019 is largely due to increased headcount and higher origination volume. Salaries and benefits expenses increased by $6.2 million, and commissions were $6.1 million higher. In addition, Compensation and benefit expense for 2020 includes $2.4 million related to our 2020 re-engineering initiatives and $1.6 million incremental incentive compensation. The $12.2 million increase in corporate overhead allocations is mostly attributed to the increase in our origination volume and the increase in the relative weight of average headcount to the consolidated organization, as compared to 2019. The increase in corporate overhead allocations due to the allocation drivers is partially offset by the effects of our cost re-engineering initiatives.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest income consists primarily of interest earned on newly-originated and purchased loans prior to sale to investors. Interest expense is incurred to finance the mortgage loans. We finance originated and purchased forward and reverse mortgage loans with repurchase and participation agreements, commonly referred to as warehouse lines. The increases in interest income and interest expense as compared to 2019 is primarily the result of the increase in the average held-for-sale loan and warehouse debt balances, due to increased loan production volumes.
Corporate Items and Other
Corporate Items and Other includes revenues and expenses of corporate support services, our reinsurance business CRL, discontinued operations and inactive entities, and our other business activities that are currently individually insignificant, revenues and expenses that are not directly related to other reportable segments, interest income on short-term investments of cash, gain on repurchases of debt, interest expense on corporate debt and foreign currency exchange gains or losses. Interest expense on direct asset-backed financings are recorded in the respective Servicing and Originations segments, while interest expense on the SSTL and the Senior Notes is recorded in Corporate Items and Other and was not allocated. Beginning in the third quarter of 2020, we began allocating interest expense, excluding amortization of debt issuance costs and discount, on such corporate debt used to fund servicing advances and other servicing assets from Corporate Items and Other to Servicing. The interest expense related to the corporate debt has been allocated to the Servicing segment for prior periods to conform to the current period presentation. Our cash balances are included in Corporate Items and Other.
Corporate support services include finance, facilities, human resources, internal audit, legal, risk and compliance and technology functions. Corporate support services costs, specifically compensation and benefits and professional services expense, have been, and continue to be, significantly impacted by regulatory actions against us and by significant litigation matters. We anticipate that our ability to return to sustainable profitability will be significantly impacted by the degree to which
we can reduce these costs going forward. Corporate Items and Other also includes severance, retention, facility-related and other expenses incurred related to our re-engineering initiatives and have not been allocated to other segments.
CRL, our wholly-owned captive reinsurance subsidiary, provides re-insurance related to coverage on REO properties owned or serviced by us. CRL assumes a quota share of REO insurance coverage written by a third-party insurer under a blanket policy issued to PMC. The underlying REO policy provides coverage for direct physical loss on commercial and residential properties, subject to certain limitations. Under the terms of the reinsurance agreement, CRL assumes a 50% quote share of premiums and all related losses incurred by the third-party insurer, effective June 2020, and 40% through May 2020. The initial term of the reinsurance agreement expired December 31, 2020 and was automatically renewed for an additional one-year term.
Certain expenses incurred by corporate support services that are not directly attributable to a segment are allocated to the Servicing and Originations segments. Beginning in the first quarter of 2020, we updated our methodology to allocate overhead costs incurred by corporate support services to the Servicing and Originations segments which now incorporates the utilization of various measurements primarily based on time studies, personnel volumes and service consumption levels. In 2019, corporate support services costs were primarily allocated based on relative segment size. Support service costs not allocated to the Servicing and Originations segments are retained in the Corporate Items and Other segment along with certain other costs including certain litigation and settlement related expenses or recoveries, costs related to our re-engineering initiatives, and other costs related to operating as a public company.
The following table presents selected results of operations of Corporate Items and Other. The amounts presented are before the elimination of balances and transactions with our other segments:
Revenue
CRL premium revenue decreased $6.7 million, or 52%, as compared to 2019 primarily due to the 54% decline in the number of covered REO properties in our servicing portfolio, consistent with the 53% decline in the total number of REO properties in our Servicing portfolio. Factors contributing to the decline in covered properties include the current moratoria and restrictions on foreclosure procedures due to COVID-19, and the GSE removal of REO coverage requirements.
Compensation and Benefits
Compensation and benefits expense decreased $36.2 million, or 29%, as compared to 2019 mostly due to $35.7 million of severance and retention costs recognized in 2019 in connection with the PHH integration and cost re-engineering plan. The effects of other factors impacting Compensation and benefits expense were largely offsetting. Salaries and benefit expenses declined $14.3 million and $4.3 million, respectively, due to the effects of a 19% decrease in average corporate headcount, including a 40% decrease in average onshore headcount from 511 to 308. These cost savings were largely offset by $5.9 million compensation and benefit costs related to our 2020 re-engineering initiatives, $8.7 million incremental incentive compensation and $1.6 million additional compensation expenses related to COVID-19.
Professional Services
Professional services expense increased $10.3 million, or 17%, as compared to 2019, primarily due to the $34.7 million recovery in 2019 of prior expenses from a service provider and mortgage insurer, offset in part by $19.5 million other professional services expenses incurred in 2019 related to our cost reengineering plan, and a $6.9 million decrease in legal expenses. The net decline in legal expenses is largely due to an $8.0 million recovery in 2020 of prior expenses from a mortgage insurer and a reduction in litigation expenses, partially offset by an additional accrual for the CFPB and Florida matters in 2020. Professional services expense for 2020 includes $3.5 million of COVID-19 related expenses.
Other Operating Expenses
Technology and communications expense decreased $14.5 million, or 34%, as compared to 2019, primarily due to $4.4 million termination fees recorded in 2019 relating to PHH integration, a $4.0 million decline in depreciation expense, and a $3.4 million decline in telephone expense. Technology and communications expense for 2020 includes $3.1 million of COVID-19 related expenses. The expense reductions are primarily due to a decline in capitalized technology investments, the closure of U.S. facilities and our other cost reduction efforts which included bringing technology services in-house and re-engineering initiatives.
Occupancy and equipment expense decreased $6.3 million or 36%, as compared to 2019. The expense reduction is primarily due to the results of our cost reduction efforts, which include consolidating vendors and closing and consolidating certain facilities. The expense reduction is mostly related to depreciation expense, rent expense and interest on lease liabilities, net of the allocation of occupancy costs to other segments. In 2019, occupancy and equipment expense included PHH expenses and accelerated amortization of ROU assets in connection with our decision to vacate leased properties prior to the contractual maturity date of the lease agreements. In 2020, we partially abandoned two of our leased properties and decided to vacate other leased properties prior to contractual maturity, resulting in the recognition of facility-related costs totaling $6.0 million, versus $6.6 million of similar costs recognized in 2019. Occupancy and equipment expense for 2020 includes $0.9 million of COVID-19 related expenses.
Total operating expenses, after corporate overhead allocation, increased by $76.0 million, or 142%, as compared to 2019, primarily due to the $34.7 million recovery in 2019 of amounts previously recognized as expense from a service provider, which was not allocated, $19.2 million costs related to our 2020 re-engineering initiatives, and the effect of our updated methodology to allocate overhead costs which we implemented in 2020. Operating expenses for 2020 include $9.3 million of COVID-19 related expenses. These increases in expenses were partially offset by the effects of a decline in average headcount and our other cost reduction efforts, as well as $65.0 million of costs recognized in 2019 in connection with the PHH integration and cost re-engineering plan.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest expense increased $4.8 million, or 121%, as compared to 2019. A $16.6 million decrease in interest expense allocated to the Servicing segment and an $11.8 million decline in interest expense before allocation resulted in a $4.8 million increase in interest expense retained in the Corporate Items and Other segment. Interest expense allocated to the Servicing segment amounted to $38.2 million and $54.9 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The interest allocation represents a charge for the financing of MSRs and servicing advances which are funded by corporate debt. The $11.8 million decline in interest expense before allocation was primarily due to the $126.1 million prepayment of the outstanding SSTL balance in January 2020, the maturity of $97.5 million of our 7.375% senior unsecured notes in September 2019, and the repurchase of $39.4 million of our 8.375% senior secured notes in July and August 2019.
We recognized a bargain purchase gain of $64.0 million in 2018 in connection with the acquisition of PHH representing the excess of the net assets acquired over the consideration paid. The purchase price we negotiated contemplated that PHH would incur losses after the acquisition date. See Note 2 - Business Acquisition to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
In 2019, we repurchased a total of $39.4 million of our 8.375% Senior secured notes in the open market for a price of $34.3 million and recognized a gain of $5.1 million.
FOURTH QUARTER RESULTS
(Unaudited consolidated statements of operations)
We reported a net loss of $7.2 million for the fourth quarter of 2020 as compared to $34.8 million net income for the fourth quarter of 2019. On a pre-tax basis, our results were near breakeven for the fourth quarter of 2020 ($0.8 million loss).
Total revenue was $30.6 million, or 12% lower in the fourth quarter of 2020 as compared to the fourth quarter of 2019 primarily due to a decline in servicing fee revenue, offset in part by an increase in gain on loans held for sale. The decline in Servicing and subservicing fees was mostly driven by a decline in servicing fees collected on behalf of NRZ, primarily due to a lower serviced UPB as a result of the NRZ portfolio runoff and the derecognition of the MSRs in connection with the termination of the PMC agreement by NRZ on February 20, 2020. Also, ancillary income declined largely due to lower interest rates. While the average UPB of our total servicing portfolio increased 11% as compared to the fourth quarter of 2019, a significant amount of portfolio additions occurred at or near the end of the quarter and generated minimal or no servicing fee revenue. Gain on loans held for sale, net, increased $32.5 million largely due to the $2.4 billion increase in total forward loan production, primarily the correspondent channel.
We reported a net $20.6 million loss on MSR valuation adjustments, net in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to a $0.8 million net gain for the fourth quarter of 2019. The net loss reported in the fourth quarter of 2020 includes a $41.3 million loss due to runoff, a favorable $32.5 million gain mostly due to rates, partially offset by a $11.7 million hedging loss. The $21.4 million decline is primarily due to $43.6 million lower gains in the fourth quarter of 2020 related to interest rates and assumptions, net of hedging loss, and a $22.2 million favorable impact from lower portfolio runoff. The 10-year swap rate increased 21 basis points in the fourth quarter of 2020 as compared to a 33 basis-point increase in the fourth quarter of 2019. Fair value adjustments to our MSRs are offset, in part, by fair value adjustments related to the NRZ financing liabilities, which are recorded in Pledged MSR liability expense. The lower runoff in the fourth quarter of 2020 is mostly driven by the termination of the NRZ PHH servicing agreement in February 2020 and elevated voluntary prepayments.
Operating expenses increased $4.8 million, or 4%,as compared with the fourth quarter of 2019. Operating expenses for the fourth quarter of 2020 includes $13.1 million of accruals for losses recorded in Professional services expense related to the CFPB matter, and $3.3 million of COVID-19 related expenses. Severance, retention, facility-related and other expenses related to our cost re-engineering plans of $5.9 million and $14.4 million were recognized in the fourth quarter of 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our cost reduction efforts include eliminating redundant costs through the integration process including headcount reductions, facility closures and legal entity reorganization as well as bringing technology services in-house. The effects of a 5% reduction in total average headcount on Compensation and benefits expense was more than offset by higher commissions on higher loan origination volume, as well as higher retention and incentive compensation costs. Operating expenses for the fourth quarter of 2020 and 2019 are net of recoveries of $11.9 million and $15.0 million, respectively of amounts recognized as expenses in prior periods.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Overview
We are actively engaged with our lenders and as a result, have successfully completed at market terms the following with respect to our current and anticipated financing needs:
•On January 22, 2020, we did not renew and let terminate a $50.0 million uncommitted warehouse facility used to fund reverse mortgage loan draws.
•On January 27, 2020, we executed an amendment to the SSTL agreement which provided for a net prepayment of $126.1 million to reduce the maximum borrowing capacity to $200.0 million, extended the maturity date to May 15, 2022, reduced the contractual quarterly principal payment from $6.4 million to $5.0 million and modified the interest rate.
•On March 12, 2020, we entered into a mortgage loan warehouse agreement to fund reverse mortgage loan draws by borrowers subsequent to origination. Under this agreement, the lender provides financing for up to $100.0 million to PMC on an uncommitted basis. In October 2020, the maturity date was extended to October 29, 2021 and the capacity was temporarily increased to $150.0 million until November 15, 2020 when it was reduced to $100.0 million. Concurrently, we reduced the maximum borrowing capacity of another reverse mortgage loan warehouse agreement from $100.0 million to $1.0 million in connection with Liberty’s transfer of substantially all of its assets, liabilities, contracts and employees to PMC effective March 15, 2020. On August 10, 2020, the maturity date of this agreement was extended to August 13, 2021.
•On May 7, 2020, we renewed the OMART variable funding advance financing facility through June 30, 2021 and increased the borrowing capacity from $200.0 million to $500.0 million. On August 17, 2020, we reduced the total borrowing capacity of the OMART variable-rate notes from $500.0 million to $250.0 million in conjunction with the issuance of new fixed-rate term notes disclosed above.
•On May 7, 2020, we renewed the OFAF advance financing facility through June 30, 2021 and increased the borrowing capacity from $60.0 million to $70.0 million.
•On May 7, 2020, we renewed a mortgage loan warehouse agreement with a maximum borrowing capacity of $175.0 million ($110.0 million of which is committed) through June 30, 2021. On November 25, 2020, we upsized this facility by $100.0 million, which increased the total committed borrowing capacity to $160.0 million.
•On May 7, 2020 we renewed the Agency MSR financing facility through June 30, 2021 and reduced the borrowing capacity from $300.0 million to $250.0 million.
•On June 25, 2020, we renewed and amended a mortgage loan warehouse agreement with an original maximum borrowing capacity of $300.0 million through June 24, 2021 and reduced the borrowing capacity to $210.0 million (a $90 million committed repurchase agreement and a $120.0 million uncommitted participation agreement).
•On June 30, 2020, we amended the Ginnie Mae MSR facility to include servicing advances as eligible collateral, upsized the borrowing capacity to $127.5 million from $100 million, and accelerated the maturity to December 20, 2020. On December 23, 2020, the maturity date was extended to December 27, 2021 and the borrowing capacity was reduced to $125.0 million.
•On August 12, 2020, we issued new OMART fixed-rate term notes with a total borrowing capacity of $475.0 million and an amortization date of August 15, 2022. The existing fixed-rate term notes with a total borrowing capacity of $470.0 million were redeemed on August 17, 2020.
•On September 30, 2020, we entered into a $100.0 million uncommitted repurchase agreement to finance the purchase of EBO loans from Ginnie Mae. This agreement does not have any stated maturity date, however, each transaction has a maximum duration of four years. The cost of this line is set at each transaction date and is based on the interest rate on the collateral.
•On November 19, 2020, we renewed a mortgage loan warehouse agreement with a total borrowing capacity of $250.0 million to November 18, 2021. The interest rate for this facility was increased to one-month LIBOR plus 3.25% for borrowings secured by forward mortgage loans and one-month LIBOR plus 350% for reverse mortgage loan borrowings.
•On December 24, 2020, we extended the maturity date of the $50.0 million warehouse facility used to fund reverse tails to January 15, 2021, when it was extended for an additional year.
•On February 1, 2021, the borrowing capacity was temporarily increased on our $100.0 million reverse mortgage loan facility to $150.0 million until February 28, 2021 when it will be reduced to $100.0 million.
See Note 14 - Borrowings to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
A summary of borrowing capacity under our advance facilities, mortgage warehouse facilities and MSR financing facilities is as follows at the dates indicated:
(1)Total Borrowing Capacity represents the maximum amount which can be borrowed, subject to eligible collateral. Available Borrowing Capacity represents Total Borrowing Capacity less outstanding borrowings.
The available borrowing capacity under our advance financing facilities increased by $162.8 million as compared to December 31, 2019 due to the $65.0 million net increase in total borrowing capacity and the $97.8 million decline in outstanding borrowings. At December 31, 2020, none could be funded under the available borrowing capacity based on the amount of eligible collateral that had been pledged to our advance financing facilities.
We may utilize committed borrowing capacity under our mortgage warehouse facilities and MSR financing facilities to the extent we have sufficient eligible collateral to borrow against and otherwise satisfy the applicable conditions to funding. At December 31, 2020, we had no committed borrowing capacity, based on the amount of eligible collateral, and no uncommitted borrowing capacity. Uncommitted amounts can be advanced at the discretion of the lender, and there can be no assurance that any uncommitted amounts will be available to us at any particular time.
At December 31, 2020, our unrestricted cash position was $284.8 million compared to $428.3 million at December 31, 2019. Throughout 2020, we voluntarily paid down or foregone borrowings on our facilities to reduce interest costs. We typically invest cash in excess of our immediate operating needs in deposit accounts and other liquid assets.
We closely monitor our liquidity position and ongoing funding requirements, and we regularly monitor and project cash flows over various time horizons as a way to anticipate and mitigate liquidity risk. As uncertainties in market conditions decline, we will continue to seek to optimize our cash management and may reduce our unrestricted cash position to further fund our growth.
In assessing our liquidity outlook, our primary focus is on available cash on hand, unused available funding and the following six forecast measures:
•Financial projections for ongoing net income, excluding the impact of non-cash items, and working capital needs including loan repurchases;
•Requirements for amortizing and maturing liabilities compared to sources of cash;
•The projected change in advances compared to the projected borrowing capacity to fund such advances under our facilities, including capacity for monthly peak needs;
•Projected funding requirements for acquisitions of MSRs and other investment opportunities;
•Potential payments or recoveries related to legal and regulatory matters, insurance, taxes and MSR transactions; and
•Funding capacity for whole loans and tail draws under our reverse mortgage commitments subject to warehouse eligibility requirements.
COVID-19 Update
The COVID-19 environment created unprecedented changes in the economy, volatility in the capital markets, and uncertainties in the mortgage industry. As of today, while market conditions have stabilized and our prior scenario planning has proven somewhat conservative, uncertainties related to the duration, severity and impact of the economic downturn remain. Two critical factors affect our liquidity management in the current COVID-19 environment: our increased advancing requirements as servicer during each investor remittance period, and the uncertainties of daily margin calls on our collateralized debt facilities and derivative instruments.
First, as servicer, we are required to advance to investors the loan P&I installments not collected from borrowers for those delinquent loans, including those on forbearance. We also advance T&I and Corporate advances on properties that are in default or have been foreclosed. Our obligations to make these advances are governed by servicing agreements or guides, depending on investors or guarantor. As subservicer, we are also required to make P&I, T&I and Corporate advances on behalf of servicers following the servicing agreements or guides. However, servicers are generally required to reimburse us within 30 days of our advancing under the terms of the subservicing agreements, and we are generally reimbursed by NRZ the same day we fund P&I advances, or within no more than three days for servicing advances and certain P&I advances under the Ocwen agreements. Refer to Note 25 - Commitments to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further description of servicer advance obligations.
Second, we are generally subject to daily margining requirements under the terms of our MSR financing facilities and daily cash calls for our TBAs and interest rate swap futures. Declines in fair value of our MSRs due to declines in market interest rates, assumption updates or other factors require that we provide additional collateral to our lenders under MSR financing facilities. Similarly, declines in fair value of our derivative instruments require that we provide additional collateral to the clearing counterparties.
We are focused on ensuring that we have sufficient liquidity sources to continue to operate through the pandemic as well as after. As such, in 2020 we increased the total borrowing capacity of our OMART and OFAF advance financing facilities from $730.0 million to $795.0 million and extended the amortization dates to June 2021 and August 2022. We also amended our Ginnie Mae MSR facility to include servicing advances as eligible collateral and increased the total borrowing capacity from $100.0 million to $125.0 million. We continuously evaluate alternative financings to diversify our sources of funds, optimize maturities and reduce our funding cost.
Regarding the current maturities of our borrowings, as of December 31, 2020, we have approximately $949.0 million of debt outstanding that would either come due, begin amortizing or require partial repayment in the next 12 months. This amount is comprised of $21.5 million 6.375% senior unsecured notes, $20.0 million in contractual repayments of our SSTL, $451.7 million of borrowings under forward and reverse mortgage warehouse facilities, $106.3 million of variable funding and term notes under advance financing facilities that will enter their respective amortization periods, $322.8 million outstanding under our Agency and Ginnie Mae MSR financing facilities and $26.7 million of scheduled principal amortization on the PLS Notes secured by PLS MSRs.
We have considered the impact of financial projections on our liquidity analysis and have evaluated the appropriateness of the key assumptions in our financial forecasts. As part of this analysis, we have also assessed the cash requirements to operate our business and service our financial obligations coming due. We have assessed the range of potential impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our financial projections and projected liquidity under base case, adverse and severely adverse scenarios. We believe the recent issuances, renewals and amendments we have executed will provide sufficient liquidity in all
of these scenarios. We expect to renew, replace or extend our borrowings to the extent necessary to finance our business on or prior to their respective maturities consistent with our historical experience.
Use of Funds
Our primary uses of funds in normal course include:
•Payment of operating costs and corporate expenses;
•Payments for advances in excess of collections;
•Investing in our servicing and originations businesses, including MSR and other asset acquisitions;
•Originated and repurchased loans, including scheduled and unscheduled equity draws on reverse mortgage loans;
•Payment of margin calls under our MSR financing facilities and derivative instruments;
•Repayments of borrowings, including under our MSR financing, advance financing and warehouse facilities, and payment of interest expense; and
•Net negative working capital and other general corporate cash outflows.
Under the terms of our SSTL facility agreement, subject to certain exceptions, we are required to prepay the SSTL with certain percentage amounts of excess cash flow as defined and 100% of the net cash proceeds from certain permitted asset sales, subject to our ability to reinvest such proceeds in our business within 270 days of receipt.
Sources of Funds
Our primary sources of funds for near-term liquidity in normal course include:
•Collections of servicing fees and ancillary revenues;
•Collections of advances in excess of new advances;
•Proceeds from match funded advance financing facilities;
•Proceeds from other borrowings, including warehouse facilities and MSR financing facilities;
•Proceeds from sales and securitizations of originated loans and repurchased loans; and
•Net positive working capital from changes in other assets and liabilities.
Servicing advances are an important component of our business and represent amounts that we, as servicer, are required to advance to, or on behalf of, our servicing clients if we do not receive such amounts from borrowers. Our use of advance financing facilities is integral to our cash and liquidity management strategy. Revolving variable funding notes issued by our advance financing facilities to financial institutions typically have a revolving period of 12 months. Term notes are generally issued to institutional investors with one-, two- or three-year revolving periods. Additionally, certain of our financing and subservicing agreements permit us to retain advance collections for a period ranging from one to two business days before remittance, thus providing a source of short-term liquidity.
We use mortgage loan repurchase and participation facilities (commonly called warehouse lines) to fund newly-originated loans on a short-term basis until they are sold to secondary market investors, including GSEs or other third-party investors, and to fund repurchases of certain Ginnie Mae forward loans, HECM loans, second-lien loans and other types of loans. Warehouse facilities are structured as repurchase or participation agreements under which ownership of the loans is temporarily transferred to the lender. These facilities contain eligibility criteria that include aging and concentration limits by loan type among other provisions. Currently, our master repurchase and participation agreements generally have maximum terms of 364-days. The funds are typically repaid using the proceeds from the sale of the loans to the secondary market investors, usually within 30 days.
We also rely on the secondary mortgage market as a source of consistent liquidity to support our lending operations. Substantially all of the mortgage loans that we originate or purchase are sold or securitized in the secondary mortgage market in the form of residential mortgage backed securities guaranteed by Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac and, in the case of mortgage backed securities guaranteed by Ginnie Mae, are mortgage loans insured or guaranteed by the FHA, VA or United States Department of Agriculture (USDA).
We regularly evaluate financing structure options that we believe will most effectively provide the necessary capacity to support our investment plans, address upcoming debt maturities and accommodate our business needs. We have entered into an agreement with Oaktree Capital Management L.P. (Oaktree) to launch an MSR funding vehicle, MAV, in the first half of 2021 to accelerate the growth of our servicing volume. We also recently entered into an agreement with Oaktree in connection with an additional investment in Ocwen. See Capital Resources Outlook below, Note 25 - Commitments and Note 28 - Subsequent Events for additional information regarding this agreement. Our financing structure actions are targeted at optimizing access to capital and debt financing, improving our cost of funds, enhancing financial flexibility, bolstering liquidity and reducing funding risk while maintaining leverage within our risk tolerances. Historical losses have significantly eroded our stockholders’ equity and weakened our financial condition. To the extent we are not successful in achieving our objective of returning to profitability, funding continuing losses will limit our opportunities to grow our business through capital investment.
Capital Resources Outlook
On February 9, 2021 we announced the conclusion of the strategic process we began in May 2020. As a result of this process, we have reached an agreement with Oaktree for a $250.0 million cash investment into Ocwen. This investment is in addition to the previously announced strategic alliance to launch MSR Asset Vehicle, LLC (MAV). These combined investments from Oaktree are expected to contribute approximately $460.0 million into Ocwen and the MSR joint venture to fund growth and strengthen the corporate capital structure.
The debt investment by Oaktree will be structured as senior secured notes. The investment with be an aggregate of $285.0 million principal, with $250.0 million proceeds and $35.0 million of original issue discount (OID) and is subject to certain conditions, including, but not limited to, the contemporaneous consummation by Ocwen or one of its subsidiaries of an additional debt financing not to exceed $450.0 million. The Oaktree notes will bear interest at 12% cash or 13.25% payment-in-kind (PIK), with some limitations on PIK. The investment will be made in two tranches with the first investment of $199.5 million on a date mutually agreed and subject to certain conditions, including the refinancing of our corporate debt. In preparation for this refinancing and investment by Oaktree, on February 2, 2021, we submitted notices of redemption to the trustees of the 6.375% PHH notes and the 8.375% senior secured second lien notes, according to the indentures governing the notes, subject to a “financing condition”. We intend to use $100.0 million of the proceeds from the first tranche of the Oaktree notes to repay a portion of our corporate debt. The second investment of $85.5 million is subject to the launching of MAV and a minimum total net worth of $360.0 million at Ocwen Financial Corporation. We expect to use proceeds from the second tranche of the Oaktree notes to fund our investment in the MAV joint venture and for general corporate purposes, including to accelerate growth of our Originations and Servicing businesses.
If we are successful in the corporate debt refinancing, we expect we will reduce corporate indebtedness at the PHH and PMC level by approximately $100 million, extend overall corporate debt maturities by over three years, and provide greater financial flexibility than we currently have. As part of the MAV transaction and Oaktree financing, we have agreed to issue warrants to Oaktree to purchase shares of our common stock equal to 12.0% of our then outstanding common stock at an exercise price of $26.82 per share, subject to anti-dilution adjustments. In addition, Oaktree will have the option to purchase up to 4.9% of our fully diluted outstanding common stock at the closing of the MAV transaction at a purchase price of $23.15 per share and Oaktree will be issued warrants to purchase additional common stock equal to 3% of our then outstanding common stock at a purchase price of $24.31 per share, subject to anti-dilution adjustments.
There can be no assurance that the issuance and sale of the senior secured notes to Oaktree, or the additional debt refinancing, will be consummated. Similarly, there can be no assurance regarding the timing of the execution of such transactions, or that the anticipated benefits of such transactions will be realized. See Note 28 - Subsequent Events.
Collateral
Our assets held as collateral related to secured borrowings, committed under sale or other contractual obligations and which may be subject to a secured lien under the SSTL are as follows at December 31, 2020:
(1)Certain MSR cohorts with a net negative fair value of $0.6 million that would be presented as Other are excluded from the eligible collateral of the facilities and are comprised of $16.3 million of positive fair value related to RMBS and $16.9 million of negative fair value related to private EBO and PLS MSRs.
See Note 14 - Borrowings for information on assets held as collateral related to secured borrowings, committed under sale or other contractual obligations and which may be subject to a secured lien under the SSTL.
Covenants
Our debt agreements contain various qualitative and quantitative covenants including financial covenants, covenants to operate in material compliance with applicable laws and regulations, monitoring and reporting obligations and restrictions on our ability to engage in various activities, including but not limited to incurring additional debt, paying dividends, repurchasing or redeeming capital stock, transferring assets or making loans, investments or acquisitions. Because of the covenants to which we are subject, we may be limited in the manner in which we conduct our business and may be limited in our ability to engage in favorable business activities or raise additional capital to finance future operations or satisfy future liquidity needs. In addition, breaches or events that may result in a default under our debt agreements include, among other things, nonpayment of principal or interest, noncompliance with our covenants, breach of representations, the occurrence of a material adverse change, insolvency, bankruptcy, certain material judgments and litigation and changes of control. See Note 14 - Borrowings to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding our covenants.
Covenants and default provisions of this type are commonly found in debt agreements such as ours. Certain of these covenants and default provisions are open to subjective interpretation and, if our interpretation were contested by a lender, a
court may ultimately be required to determine compliance or lack thereof. In addition, our debt agreements generally include cross default provisions such that a default under one agreement could trigger defaults under other agreements. If we fail to comply with our debt agreements and are unable to avoid, remedy or secure a waiver of any resulting default, we may be subject to adverse action by our lenders, including termination of further funding, acceleration of outstanding obligations, enforcement of liens against the assets securing or otherwise supporting our obligations, and other legal remedies, any of which could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, liquidity and results of operations. We believe that we are in compliance with the qualitative and quantitative covenants in our debt agreements as of the date this Annual Report on Form 10-K is filed with the SEC. Given the current market conditions created by the COVID-19 pandemic, there are no assurances we will be able to maintain compliance with our covenants.
Credit Ratings
Credit ratings are intended to be an indicator of the creditworthiness of a company’s debt obligations. Lower ratings generally result in higher borrowing costs and reduced access to capital markets. The following table summarizes our current ratings and outlook by the respective nationally recognized rating agencies. A credit rating is not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold securities and may be subject to revision or withdrawal at any time.
On July 23, 2020, S&P removed the CreditWatch with negative implications that was placed on our ratings on April 3, 2020 as a result of uncertainty around the financial impacts resulting from COVID-19. S&P revised the rating to a Negative Outlook based on our reported preliminary results for the second quarter that showed sufficient liquidity to manage servicing advance requirements from COVID-19-related forbearances, including nearly $314 million of cash and over $750 million of credit availability on our servicing advance, MSR, and mortgage warehouse lines. On August 21, 2020, Moody’s reaffirmed their ratings. In addition, Ocwen has been able to maintain cushion on its tangible net worth debt covenants. It is possible that additional actions by credit rating agencies could have a material adverse impact on our liquidity and funding position, including materially changing the terms on which we may be able to borrow money.
Cash Flows
Our operating cash flow is primarily impacted by operating results, changes in our servicing advance balances, the level of mortgage loan production, the timing of sales and securitizations of mortgage loans, and the margin calls required under our MSR financing facilities or derivative instruments. We classify proceeds from the sale of servicing advances, including advances sold in connection with the sale of MSRs, purchase of MSRs through flow purchase agreements, GSE Cash Window and bulk acquisitions as investing activity. We classify changes in HECM loans held for investment as investing activity and changes in the related HMBS borrowings as financing activity.
Our NRZ agreements have a significant impact on our consolidated statements of cash flows. Because the lump-sum payments we received in connection with our 2017 Agreements and New RMSR Agreements were recorded as secured financings, additions to, and reductions in, the balance of those secured financings were recognized as financing activity in our consolidated statements of cash flows through April 2020. Excluding the impact of changes to the secured financings attributed to changes in fair value, changes in the balance of these secured financings are reflected in cash flows from operating activities despite having no impact on our consolidated cash balance. Net cash provided by operating activities for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 includes $35.1 million, $101.0 million and $134.5 million, respectively, of such cash flows and they were offset by corresponding amounts in net cash used in financing activities in the same periods.
Cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2020
Our operating activities provided $261.0 million of cash largely due to $213.3 million of net collections of servicing advances, mostly P&I advances, partially offset by net cash paid on loans held for sale of $121.5 million.
Our investing activities used $527.9 million of cash. The primary uses of cash in our investing activities include net cash outflows in connection with our HECM reverse mortgages of $258.9 million, and $273.2 million to purchase MSRs.
Our financing activities provided $131.8 million of cash. Cash inflows include $1.2 billion received in connection with our reverse mortgage securitizations, which are accounted for as secured financings, less repayments on the related financing liability of $935.8 million. In addition, we increased borrowings under our mortgage loan warehouse facilities and MSR financing facilities by $119.5 million and $68.5 million, respectively. Cash outflows include repayments of $141.1 million on the SSTL, $97.8 million of net repayments on advance match funded liabilities, and $101.8 million of net payments on the financing liabilities related to MSRs pledged. In addition, we also paid $7.7 million of debt issuance costs related to our SSTL facility amendment and repurchased shares of our common stock for $4.6 million.
Cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2019
Our operating activities provided $151.9 million of cash largely due to $105.1 million of net collections of servicing advances. Net cash paid on loans held for sale during the year was $108.8 million.
Our investing activities used $587.4 million of cash. The primary uses of cash in our investing activities include net cash outflows in connection with our HECM reverse mortgages of $467.4 million. Cash outflows also include $145.7 million to purchase MSRs.
Our financing activities provided $530.8 million of cash. Cash inflows include $962.1 million received in connection with our reverse mortgage securitizations, which are accounted for as secured financings, less repayments on the related financing liability of $549.6 million. We increased borrowings under the SSTL through the issuance of an additional term loan of $120.0 million (before a discount of $0.9 million), less repayments of $25.4 million. In addition, we increased borrowings under our mortgage loan warehouse facilities by $176.5 million and borrowed $314.4 million under new MSR financing facilities. Cash outflows include $99.2 million of net repayments on advance match funded liabilities as a result of advance recoveries, $214.4 million of net payments on the financing liabilities related to MSRs pledged, and $131.8 million to redeem and repurchase Senior notes.
RISK MANAGEMENT
Our risk management framework seeks to mitigate risk and appropriately balance risk and return. We have established policies and procedures intended to identify, assess, monitor and manage the types of risk to which we are subject, including strategic, market, credit, liquidity and operational risks.
Our Chief Risk and Compliance Officer is responsible for the design, implementation and oversight of our global risk management and compliance programs. Risks unique to our businesses are governed through various management processes and governance committees to oversee risk and related control activities across the company and provide a framework for potential issues to be identified, assessed and remediated under the direction of senior executives from our business, finance, risk, compliance, internal audit and law departments, as applicable. Information is aggregated and reports on risk matters are made to the Board of Directors, its Risk and Compliance Committee or its other committees, as applicable, to enable the Board of Directors and its committees to fulfill their governance and oversight responsibilities.
Strategic Risk
We are exposed to risk with respect to the strategic initiatives we need to undertake in order to return to growth and profitability. Strategic risk represents the risk to shareholder or enterprise value, current or future earnings, capital and liquidity from adverse business decisions and/or improper implementation of business strategies. Management is responsible for developing and implementing business strategies that leverage our core competencies and are appropriately structured, resourced and executed. Oversight for our strategic actions is provided by the Board of Directors. Our performance, relative to our business plans and our longer-term strategic plans, is reviewed by management and the Board of Directors.
To achieve our near-term financial objectives, we believe we need to execute on the key business initiatives discussed above under “Overview”. Our ability to achieve our objectives is highly dependent on the success of our business relationships with our critical counterparties like the GSEs, FHFA, Ginnie Mae, our lenders, regulators, significant customers and our ability to attract new customers, all of which are impacted by our capability to adequately address the competitive challenges we face. There can be no assurance that we will be successful in executing on these initiatives. Further, there can be no assurance that even if we execute on these initiatives we will be able to return to profitability. In addition to successful operational execution of our key initiatives, our success will also depend on market conditions and other factors outside of our control. If we continue to experience losses, our share price, business, reputation, financial condition, liquidity and results of operations could be materially and adversely affected.
Market Risk
Interest Rates
Our principal market risk exposure is the impact of interest rate changes on our mortgage-related assets and commitments, including MSRs, loans held for sale, loans held for investment and interest rate lock commitments (IRLCs). In addition, changes in interest rates could materially and adversely affect our volume of mortgage loan originations or result in MSR fair value changes. We also have exposure to the effects of changes in interest rates on our floating-rate borrowings, including advance financing facilities.
Interest rate risk is a function of (i) the timing of re-pricing and (ii) the dollar amount of assets and liabilities that re-price at various times. We are exposed to interest rate risk to the extent that our interest rate-sensitive liabilities mature or re-price at different speeds, or on different bases, than interest-earning assets.
Our management-level Market Risk Committee establishes and maintains policies that govern our hedging program, including such factors as market volatility, duration and interest rate sensitivity measures, targeted hedge ratios, the hedge instruments that we are permitted to use in our hedging activities and the counterparties with whom we are permitted to enter into hedging transactions and our liquidity risk profile. See Note 17 - Derivative Financial Instruments and Hedging Activities to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding our use of derivatives.
Our market risk exposure may also be affected by the phase-out of LIBOR, expected to occur by the end of 2021. However, for U.S dollar LIBOR, it now appears that the relevant date may be deferred to June 30, 2023 for certain tenors (including overnight and one, three, six and 12 months), at which time the LIBOR administrator has indicated that it intends to cease publication of U.S. dollar LIBOR. Despite this potential deferral, the LIBOR administrator has advised that no new contracts using U.S. dollar LIBOR should be entered into after December 31, 2021. Many of our debt facilities incorporate LIBOR. These facilities either mature prior to the end of 2021 (or June 30, 2023) or have terms in place that provide for an alternative to LIBOR upon its phase-out. As we renew or replace these debt facilities, we will need to work with our counterparties to incorporate alternative benchmarks. There is presently substantial uncertainty relating to the process and timeline for developing LIBOR alternatives, how widely any given alternative will be adopted by parties in the financial markets, and the extent to which alternative benchmarks may be subject to volatility or present risks and challenges that LIBOR does not. Consequently, it is difficult to predict what effect, if any, the phase-out of LIBOR and the use of alternative benchmarks may have on our business or on the overall financial markets. If LIBOR alternatives re-allocate risk among parties in a way that is disadvantageous to market participants such as Ocwen, or if uncertainty relating to the LIBOR phase-out disrupts financial markets, it could have a material adverse effect on our financial position, results of operations, and liquidity.
MSR Hedging Strategy
MSRs are carried at fair value with changes in fair value being recorded in earnings in the period in which the changes occur. The fair value of MSRs is subject to changes in market interest rates and prepayment speeds. Beginning in September 2019, management implemented a hedging strategy to partially offset the changes in fair value of our net MSR portfolio attributable to interest rate changes. As a general matter, the impact of interest rates on the fair value of our MSR portfolio is naturally offset by other exposures, including our loan pipeline and our economic MSR value embedded in our reverse mortgage loan portfolio. Our hedging strategy is targeted at mitigating the residual exposure, which we refer to as our net MSR portfolio exposure. We define our net MSR portfolio exposure as follows:
•our more interest rate-sensitive Agency MSR portfolio,
•less the Agency MSRs subject to our agreements with NRZ (See Note 10 - Rights to MSRs),
•less the unsecuritized reverse mortgage loans and tails classified as held-for-investment,
•less the asset value for securitized HECM loans net of the corresponding HMBS-related liability, and
•less the net value of our held for sale loan portfolio and lock commitments (pipeline).
We determine and monitor daily the hedge coverage based on the duration and interest rate sensitivity measures of our net MSR portfolio exposure, considering market and liquidity conditions. During 2020, our hedging strategy was targeted to provide partial coverage of our net MSR portfolio exposure of approximately 50%. The changes in fair value of our hedging instruments may not fully offset the changes in fair value of our net MSR portfolio exposure attributable to interest rate changes due to the partial hedge coverage and other factors.
The following table illustrates the composition of our net MSR portfolio exposure at December 31, 2020 with the associated interest rate sensitivity for a hypothetical, instantaneous decrease in interest rate of 25 basis points assuming a parallel shift in interest rate yield curves (refer to the description below under Sensitivity Analysis). The amounts based on market risk sensitive measures are hypothetical and presented for illustrative purposes only. Changes in fair value cannot be extrapolated because the relationship to the change in fair value may not be linear.
(1)Hypothetical 30% offset is calculated in the above table as a percentage of the net MSR exposure, that is, the Agency MSR less natural hedges, i.e., pipeline and economic MSR of reverse mortgage loans.
(2)Total hedge position is defined as the sum of the fair value changes of hedging derivatives and the fair value changes of natural hedges due to interest rate risks, i.e., pipeline and economic MSR of reverse mortgage loans.
(3)We define our hedge coverage ratio as the total hedge position (derivatives and natural hedges) as a percentage of the Agency MSR exposure, or 45% in the above table.
We use forward trades of MBS or Agency TBAs with different banking counterparties and exchange-traded interest rate swap futures as hedging instruments. These derivative instruments are not designated as accounting hedges. TBAs, or To-Be-Announced securities are actively traded, forward contracts to purchase or sell Agency MBS on a specific future date. We report changes in fair value of these derivative instruments in MSR valuation adjustments, net in our consolidated statements of operations.
The TBAs and interest rate swap futures are subject to margin requirements. Ocwen may be required to post or may be entitled to receive cash collateral with its counterparties, based on daily value changes of the instruments. Changes in market factors, including interest rates, and our credit rating could require us to post additional cash collateral and could have a material adverse impact on our financial condition and liquidity.
MSRs and MSR Financing Liabilities
Our entire portfolio of MSRs is accounted for using the fair value measurement method. MSRs are subject to interest rate risk as the mortgage loans underlying the MSRs permit borrowers to prepay their loans. The fair value of MSRs generally decreases in periods where interest rates are declining, as prepayments increase, and generally increases in periods where interest rates are increasing, as prepayments decrease.
While the majority of our non-Agency MSRs have been sold to NRZ, these transactions did not initially qualify as sales and are accounted for as secured financings until such time as the transactions meet the requirements for sale accounting treatment and are derecognized from our consolidated balance sheet. We have elected fair value accounting for these MSR financing liabilities. Through these transactions, the majority of the risks and rewards of ownership of the MSRs transferred to NRZ, including interest rate risk. Changes in the fair value of the MSRs sold to NRZ are offset by a corresponding change in the fair value of the MSR financing liabilities, which are recognized as a component of interest expense in our consolidated statements of operations.
Loans Held for Sale, Loans Held for Investment and IRLCs
In our Originations business, newly-originated forward mortgage loans held for sale and newly originated reverse mortgage loans held for investment that we have elected to carry at fair value and IRLCs are subject to the effects of changes in mortgage interest rates from the date of the commitment through the sale of the loan into the secondary market. IRLCs represent an agreement to purchase loans from a third-party originator or an agreement to extend credit to a mortgage loan applicant, whereby the interest rate on the loan is set prior to funding. We are exposed to interest rate risk and related price risk
during the period from the date of the lock commitment through (i) the lock commitment cancellation or expiration date or (ii) through the date of sale of the resulting loan into the secondary mortgage market. Loan commitments for forward loans generally range from 5 to 90 days, but the majority of our commitments are for 60 days. Our holding period for forward mortgage loans from funding to sale is typically less than 30 days. Loan commitments for reverse mortgage loans range from 10 to 30 days. The majority of our reverse loans are variable rate loan commitments. This interest rate exposure had historically been economically hedged with freestanding derivatives, including forward sales of agency “to be announced” securities (TBAs) and forward mortgage-backed securities (Forward MBS). Beginning in September 2019, this exposure is not individually hedged, but rather used as an offset to our MSR exposure and managed as part of our MSR hedging strategy described above.
We elected fair value accounting for newly repurchased loans from securitization trusts or investors after January 1, 2020. We may repurchase loans that have been modified, to facilitate loss reduction strategies, or as otherwise obligated as a Ginnie Mae servicer.
Loans Held for Investment and HMBS-related Borrowings
We elected fair value accounting for the entire reverse mortgage HECM loans, which are held for investment, together with the HMBS-related borrowings. We also elected fair value accounting for non-cancellable draw commitments (tails) of our HECM loans. The fair value of our HECM loan portfolio decreases as market interest rates rise and increases as market rates fall. As our HECM loan portfolio is predominantly comprised of ARMs, higher interest rates cause the loan balance to accrue and reach a 98% maximum claim amount liquidation event more quickly, with lower interest rates extending the timeline to liquidation.
The fair value of our HECM loan portfolio net of the fair value of the HMBS-related borrowings comprise the fair value of reverse mortgage loans and tails that are unsecuritized at the balance sheet date (reverse pipeline) and the fair value of securitized HECM loans net of the corresponding HMBS-related borrowings that represent the reverse mortgage economic MSR (HMSR) for risk management purposes. Both reverse assets (reverse pipeline and HMSR) act as a partial hedge for our forward MSR value sensitivity. Due to this characteristic, beginning in September 2019, this exposure is used as an offset to our MSR exposure and managed as part of our MSR hedging strategy described above.
Advance Match Funded Liabilities
We monitor the effect of increases in interest rates on the interest paid on our variable-rate advance financing debt. Earnings on cash and float balances are a partial offset to our exposure to changes in interest expense. We purchase interest rate caps as economic hedges (not designated as a hedge for accounting purposes) when required by our advance financing arrangements.
Sensitivity Analysis
Fair Value MSRs, Loans Held for Sale, Loans Held for Investment and Related Derivatives
The following table summarizes the estimated change in the fair value of our MSRs, HECM loans held for investment and loans held for sale that we have elected to carry at fair value as well as any related derivatives at December 31, 2020, given hypothetical instantaneous parallel shifts in the yield curve. We used December 31, 2020 market rates to perform the sensitivity analysis. The estimates are based on the interest rate risk sensitive portfolios described in the preceding paragraphs and assume instantaneous, parallel shifts in interest rate yield curves. These sensitivities are hypothetical and presented for illustrative purposes only. Changes in fair value based on variations in assumptions generally cannot be extrapolated because the relationship to the change in fair value may not be linear.
(1)Primarily reflects the impact of market interest rate changes on projected prepayments on the Agency MSR portfolio and on advance funding costs on the non-Agency MSR portfolio carried at fair value. Fair value adjustments to our MSRs are offset, in part, by fair value adjustments related to the NRZ financing liabilities, which are recorded in Pledged MSR liability expense.
(2)Forward mortgage loans only.
Borrowings
The majority of the debt used to finance much of our operations is exposed to interest rate fluctuations. We may purchase interest rate swaps and interest rate caps to minimize future interest rate exposure from increases in interest rates, or when required by the financing agreements.
Based on December 31, 2020 balances, if interest rates were to increase by 1% on our variable rate debt and interest earning cash and float balances, we estimate a net positive impact of approximately $12.3 million resulting from an increase of $22.4 million in annual interest income and an increase of $10.1 million in annual interest expense.
Foreign Currency Exchange Rate Risk
Our operations in India and the Philippines expose us to foreign currency exchange rate risk to the extent that our foreign exchange positions remain unhedged. Depending on the magnitude and risk of our positions we may enter into forward exchange contracts to hedge against the effect of changes in the value of the India Rupee or Philippine Peso.
Home Prices
Inactive reverse mortgage loans for which the maximum claim amount has not been met are generally foreclosed upon on behalf of Ginnie Mae with the REO remaining in the related HMBS until liquidation. Inactive MCA repurchased loans are generally foreclosed upon and liquidated by the HMBS issuer. Although active and inactive reverse mortgage loans are insured by FHA, we may incur expenses and losses in the process of repurchasing and liquidating these loans that are not reimbursable by FHA in accordance with program guidelines. In addition, in certain circumstances, we may be subject to real estate price risk to the extent we are unable to liquidate REO within the FHA program guidelines. As our reverse mortgage portfolio seasons, and the volume of MCA repurchases increases, our exposure to this risk will increase.
Interest Rate Sensitive Financial Instruments
The tables below present the notional amounts of our financial instruments that are sensitive to changes in interest rates categorized by expected maturity and the related fair value of these instruments at December 31, 2020 and 2019. We use certain assumptions to estimate the expected maturity and fair value of these instruments. We base expected maturities upon contractual maturity and projected repayments and prepayments of principal based on our historical experience. The actual maturities of these instruments could vary substantially if future prepayments differ from our historical experience. Average interest rates are based on the contractual terms of the instrument and, in the case of variable rate instruments, reflect estimates of applicable forward rates. The averages presented represent weighted averages.
(1)See Note 5 - Fair Value to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional fair value information on financial instruments.
(2)Net of valuation allowances and including non-performing loans.
(3)Excludes financing liabilities that result from sales of assets that do not qualify as sales for accounting purposes and, therefore, are accounted for as secured financings, which have no contractual maturity and are amortized over the life of the related assets.
(4)Amounts are exclusive of any related discount or unamortized debt issuance costs.
(5)Average 1-Month LIBOR for the periods indicated.
Liquidity Risk
We are exposed to liquidity risk through our ongoing needs to originate and finance mortgage loans, sell mortgage loans into secondary markets, retain and finance MSRs, make and finance advances, fund and sell additional future draws by borrowers under variable rate HECM loans, meet our HMBS issuer obligations with respect to MCA repurchases, repay maturing debt, meet our contractual obligations and otherwise fund our operations. Liquidity is an essential component of our ability to operate and grow our business; therefore, it is crucial that we maintain adequate levels of excess liquidity to fund our businesses during normal economic cycles and events of market stress.
We estimate how our liquidity needs may be impacted by a number of factors, including fluctuations in asset and liability levels due to our business strategy, asset valuations, changes in cash flows from operations, levels of interest rates, debt service requirements including contractual amortization and maturities, and unanticipated events, including legal and regulatory expenses. We also assess market conditions and capacity for debt issuance in the various markets that we access to fund our business needs. We have established internal processes to anticipate future cash needs and continuously monitor the availability of funds pursuant to our existing debt arrangements. We monitor MSR asset valuations monthly and communicate closely with our lenders for this asset class to ensure adequate liquidity is maintained for mark-to-market valuation changes within MSR financing facilities. We manage this risk in multiple ways, including but not limited to engaging in MSR hedging activities, and maintaining liquidity earmarks at levels to support potential changes in MSR fair values.
We regularly evaluate capital structure options that we believe will most effectively provide the necessary capacity to support our investment objectives, address upcoming debt maturities and contractual amortization, and accommodate our business needs. Our objective is to maximize the total investment capacity through diversification of our funding sources while optimizing cost, advance rates and terms. Historical losses have significantly eroded our stockholders’ equity and weakened our financial condition. To the extent we are not successful in achieving our near-term objective of returning to profitability, funding continuing losses will limit opportunities to grow our business.
We address liquidity risk by maintaining borrowing capacity in excess of our expected needs and by extending the tenor of our financing arrangements from time to time. For example, to fund additional advance obligations, we have typically “upsized” existing advance facilities or entered into new advance facilities in anticipation of the funding obligation and then pledged additional advances to support the borrowing. In general, we finance our assets and operating requirements through cash on hand, operating cash flow, advance financing facilities and other secured borrowings.
Operational Risk
Operational risk is inherent in each of our business lines and related support activities. This risk can manifest itself in various ways, including process execution errors, clerical or technological failures or errors, business interruptions and frauds, all of which could cause us to incur losses. Operational risk includes the following key risks:
•legal risk, as we can have legal disputes with borrowers or counterparties;
•compliance risk, as we are subject to many federal and state rules and regulations;
•third-party risk, as we have many processes that have been outsourced to third parties;
•information technology risk, as we operate many information systems that depend on proper functioning of hardware and software;
•information security risk, as our information systems and associates handle personal financial data of borrowers.
The Board of Directors provides direction to senior executives by setting our organization’s risk appetite, and delegates to our Chief Executive Officer and senior executives the primary ownership and responsibility for operational risk management and control. Senior executives in our risk department oversee the establishment of policies and control frameworks that are designed, executed and administered to provide a sound and well-controlled operational environment in accordance with our risk appetite framework. We mandate training for our employees in respect to these policies, require business line change management control oversight, and we conduct targeted control assessment/reviews on a regular basis. Risk issues identified are tracked in our Governance, Risk and Compliance (GRC) system, Process Unity. Remediation and assurance testing are also tracked in our GRC system. We also have several channels for employees to report operational and/or technological issues affecting their operations to management, the operational risk or compliance teams or the Board.
We seek to embed a culture of compliance and business line responsibility for managing operational and compliance risks in our enterprise-wide approach toward risk management. Ocwen has adopted a “Three Lines of Defense” model to enable risks and controls to be properly managed on an on-going basis. The model delineates business line management's accountabilities and responsibilities over risk management and the control environment and includes mechanisms to assess the effectiveness of executing these responsibilities.
The first line of defense consists of business line management, dedicated control directors and quality assurance personnel who are accountable and responsible for their day-to-day activities, processes and controls. The first line of defense is responsible for ensuring that key risks within their activities and operations are identified, assessed, mitigated and monitored by an appropriate control environment that is commensurate with the operations risk profile.
The second line of defense is independent from the business and comprises a Risk Management function (including Third-Party Risk and Information Security) and a Compliance function, which are responsible for:
•providing assurance, oversight, and credible challenge over the effectiveness of the risk and control activities conducted by the first line;
•establishing frameworks to identify and measure the risks being taken by different parts of the business;
•monitoring risk levels, through key indicators and oversight/assurance and testing programs; and
•provide periodic reporting to Senior Management and the Board of Directors for transparency.
The third line of defense, Internal Audit, provides independent assurance as to the effectiveness of the design, implementation and embedding of the risk management frameworks, as well as the management of the risks and controls by the first line and control oversight by the second line. The Internal Audit function provides periodic reporting on its activities to Senior Management and the Board of Directors for transparency.
All business units and overhead functions are subject to unrestricted audits by our internal audit department. Internal audit is granted unrestricted access to our records, physical properties, systems, management and employees in order to perform these audits. The internal audit department reports to the Audit Committee of the Board and assists the Audit Committee in fulfilling its governance and oversight responsibility.
Compliance risk is managed through an enterprise-wide compliance risk management program designed to monitor, detect and deter compliance issues. Our compliance and risk management policies assign primary responsibility and accountability for the management of compliance risk in the lines of business to business line management.
Information Security Risk oversight is performed by our Chief Information Security Officer. Ocwen’s information security plans are developed to meet or exceed Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council standards.
Credit Risk
Consumer Credit Risk
The typical obligor credit-related risks inherent in maintaining a mortgage loan portfolio as an investment tend to impact us less than a typical long-term investor because we generally sell the mortgage loans that we originate in the secondary market shortly after origination through GSE and Ginnie Mae guaranteed securitizations and whole loan transactions. We are exposed to early payment defaults from the time that we originate a loan to the time that the loan is sold in the secondary market or shortly thereafter. Early payment defaults are monitored and loans are audited by our quality assurance teams for origination defects. Our exposure to early payment defaults remains very limited and we do not anticipate material losses from this exposure.
Servicing costs are generally higher on higher credit risk loans. In addition, higher credit risk loans are generally affected to a greater extent by an economic downturn or a deterioration of the housing market. An increase in delinquencies and foreclosure rates generally results in increased advances for delinquent principal and interest, taxes and insurance, foreclosure costs and the upkeep of vacant property in foreclosure. Interest expense on advances and higher operating expenses decrease the value of our servicing portfolio. We track the credit risk profile of our servicing portfolio, including the recoverability of advances, with a view to ensuring that changes in portfolio credit risk are identified on a timely basis.
We have loan repurchase and indemnification obligations arising from potential breaches of the representation and warranty provisions in connection with loans we sell in the secondary market. In the event of a breach of these representations and warranties, we may be required to repurchase a mortgage loan or indemnify the purchaser, and we may bear any subsequent loss on the mortgage loan.
We endeavor to minimize our losses from loan repurchases and indemnifications by focusing on originating fully compliant mortgage loans and closely monitoring investor and agency eligibility requirements for loan sales. Our quality assurance teams perform independent testing related to the processing and underwriting of mortgage loans to investor guidelines prior to closing, as well as after the closing but before the sale of loans, to identify potential repurchase exposures due to breach of representations and warranties. In addition, we perform a comprehensive review of the loan files where we receive investor requests for repurchase and indemnification to establish the validity of the claims and determine our obligation. In limited circumstances, we may retain the full risk of loss on loans sold to the extent that the liquidation value of the asset collateralizing the loan is insufficient to cover the loan itself and associated servicing expenses. In instances where we have purchased loans from third parties, we usually have the ability to recover the loss from the third-party originator.
Counterparty Credit Risk
Counterparty credit risk represents the potential loss that may occur because a party to a transaction fails to perform according to the terms of the contract. We regularly evaluate the financial position and creditworthiness of our counterparties and disperse risk among multiple counterparties to the extent possible. We manage derivative counterparty credit risk by entering into financial instrument transactions through national exchanges, primary dealers or approved counterparties and using mutual margining agreements whenever possible to limit potential exposure.
NRZ is contractually obligated, pursuant to our agreements with them related to the Rights to MSRs, to make all advances required in connection with the loans underlying such MSRs. If NRZ’s advance financing facilities do not perform as envisaged or should NRZ otherwise be unable to meets its advance financing obligations, we would be required to meet our advance
financing obligations with respect to the loans underlying these Rights to MSRs, which could materially and adversely affect our liquidity, financial condition and servicing operations.
Counterparty credit risk exists with our third-party originators, including our correspondent lenders, from whom we purchase originated mortgage loans. The third-party originators make certain representations and warranties to us when we acquire the mortgage loan from them, and they agree to reimburse us for losses incurred due to an origination defect. We become exposed to losses for origination defects if the third-party originator is not able to reimburse us for losses incurred for indemnification or repurchase. We mitigate this risk by monitoring purchase levels from our third-party originators (to reduce concentration risk), by performing regular quality control reviews of the third-party originators’ underwriting standards and by regular reviews of the creditworthiness of third-party originators.
Concentration Risk
Our Servicing segment has exposure to concentration risk and client retention risk. As of December 31, 2020, our servicing portfolio included significant client relationships with NRZ which represented 36% and 45% of our servicing portfolio UPB and loan count, respectively. The NRZ servicing portfolio accounts for approximately 62% of all delinquent loans that Ocwen services. During 2020, NRZ-related servicing fees retained by Ocwen represented approximately 30% of the total servicing and subservicing fees earned by Ocwen, net of servicing fees remitted to NRZ (excluding ancillary income). The current terms of our agreements with NRZ extend through July 2022 (legacy Ocwen agreements).
On February 20, 2020, we received a notice of termination from NRZ with respect to the PMC subservicing agreement. This termination was for convenience and not for cause, and provided for loan deboarding fees to be paid by NRZ. As the sale accounting criteria were met upon the notice of termination, the MSRs and the Rights to MSRs were derecognized from our balance sheet on February 20, 2020 without any gain or loss on derecognition. We continued to service these loans until deboarding, accounting for them as a subservicing relationship. Accordingly, we recognized subservicing fees associated with the subservicing agreement subsequent to February 20, 2020 and have not reported any servicing fees collected on behalf of, and remitted to NRZ, any change in fair value, runoff and settlement in financing liability thereafter. On September 1, 2020, 133,718 loans representing $18.2 billion were deboarded and the remaining 136,500 loans representing $16.0 billion of UPB were deboarded on October 1, 2020.
Currently, subject to proper notice (generally180 days) and the payment of termination fees, NRZ has rights to terminate the legacy Ocwen agreements for convenience.
In the ordinary course, we regularly share information with NRZ and discuss various aspects of our relationship. At times, we discuss modifications to our relationship that we believe could be to our mutual benefit as our respective businesses evolve over time. We also discuss alternatives to the outcomes contemplated under our agreements when they were originally executed as facts and circumstances change over time. Examples of these discussions include our discussions with respect to the Rights to MSRs. As part of these discussions, we discussed several potential changes to existing contracts. It is possible that NRZ could exercise its rights to terminate for convenience some or all of the legacy Ocwen servicing agreements. As of December 31, 2020, these agreements accounted for approximately 36% of our servicing portfolio.
Given the NRZ concentration in our servicing segment, senior management has been monitoring two main risks associated with our NRZ relationship, in addition to its strategic component. First, management has been monitoring the profitability of the NRZ servicing agreements. As performing loans in the NRZ servicing portfolio have run-off, delinquencies have remained high, resulting in a relatively elevated average cost per loan. Because the NRZ portfolio contains a high percentage of delinquent accounts, it has an inherently high level of potential operational and compliance risk and requires a disproportionately high level of operating staff, oversight support infrastructure and overhead which drives the elevated average cost per loan. We actively pursue cost re-engineering initiatives to continue to reduce our cost-to-service and our corporate overhead, as well as pursue actions to grow our non-NRZ servicing portfolio.
Second, because NRZ has rights to terminate for convenience subject to certain conditions, senior management has been monitoring our risks associated with a potential early termination or non-renewal of some or all of the Ocwen legacy agreements with NRZ. Management developed stress scenarios to assess the operational and financial impact of such termination scenarios, and the necessary mitigating actions. Management’s responses to the different scenarios are all based on the appropriate right-sizing or restructuring of our operations and include, but are not limited to the adequate reduction of direct servicing resources, the closure of certain facilities in different locations to rationalize property utilization, the appropriate planning of loan deboarding, and the potential reduction in corporate support functions without impairing our ability to effectively operate in a controlled environment.
It is possible that the unwinding of all or a significant portion of our relationship with NRZ may not occur in an orderly or timely manner, which could be disruptive and could result in us incurring additional costs or even in disagreements with NRZ relating to our respective rights and obligations. Furthermore, if NRZ were to take actions to limit or terminate our relationship,
that could impact perceptions of other servicing clients, lenders, GSEs or others, which could cause them to take actions that materially and adversely impact our business, liquidity, results of operations and financial condition.
Market conditions, including interest rates and future economic projections, could impact investor demand to hold MSRs, which may result in our loss of additional subservicing relationships, or significantly decrease the number of loans under such relationships.
The mortgaged properties securing the residential loans that we service are geographically dispersed throughout all 50 states, the District of Columbia and two U.S. territories. The five largest concentrations of properties are located in California, Florida, Texas, New York and Illinois, comprising 42% of the number of loans serviced at December 31, 2020. California has the largest concentration with 15% of the total loans serviced.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS AND OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
Contractual Obligations
We have certain contractual obligations which require us to make cash payments. At December 31, 2020, such contractual obligations were primarily comprised of:
(1)Amounts are exclusive of any related discount, unamortized debt issuance costs or fair value adjustment. Excludes match funded liabilities as these represent debt where the holders only have recourse to the assets that collateralize the debt and such assets are not available to satisfy general claims against Ocwen. Also excludes financing liabilities that result from sales of assets that do not qualify as sales for accounting purposes and, therefore, are accounted for as secured financings. See Note 14 - Borrowings to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information related to these excluded borrowings.
(2)Represents estimated future interest payments on MSR financing facilities, warehouse lines, senior notes and the SSTL, based on applicable interest rates as of December 31, 2020.
(3)Represents additional equity draw obligations in connection with reverse mortgage loans originated or purchased. Because these draws can be made in their entirety, we have classified them as due in less than one year at December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, we had recorded gross unrecognized tax benefits of $20.6 million and an additional $3.4 million for gross interest and penalties. At this time, we are unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of payments in individual years in connection with these tax liabilities, including whether or not these tax liabilities will be paid; therefore, such amounts are not included in the above contractual obligation table.
Our forecasting with respect to our ability to satisfy our contractual obligations, including but not limited to our servicing advance obligations, requires management to use judgment and estimates and includes factors that may be beyond our control, such as the conditions created by the COVID-19 pandemic. Our actual results could differ materially from our estimates, and if this were to occur, it could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, liquidity and results of operations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In the normal course of business, we engage in transactions with a variety of financial institutions and other companies that are not reflected on our balance sheet. We are subject to potential financial loss if the counterparties to our off-balance sheet transactions are unable to complete an agreed upon transaction. We manage counterparty credit risk by entering into financial instrument transactions through national exchanges, primary dealers or approved counterparties and through the use of mutual margining agreements whenever possible to limit potential exposure. We regularly evaluate the financial position and creditworthiness of our counterparties. Our off-balance sheet arrangements include mortgage loan repurchase and
indemnification obligations, unconsolidated special purpose entities (SPEs) (a type of variable interest entity or VIE) and notional amounts of our derivatives.
Mortgage Loan Repurchase and Indemnification Liabilities. We have exposure to representation, warranty and indemnification obligations in our capacity as a loan originator and servicer. We recognize the fair value of representation and warranty obligations in connection with originations upon sale of the loan or upon completion of an acquisition. Thereafter, the estimation of the liability considers probable future obligations based on industry data of loans of similar type segregated by year of origination and estimated loss severity based on current loss rates for similar loans. Our historical loss severity considers the historical loss experience that we incur upon sale or liquidation of a repurchased loan as well as current market conditions. See Note 4 - Securitizations and Variable Interest Entities, Note 15 - Other Liabilities and Note 26 - Contingencies to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Unfunded Lending Commitments. We have originated floating-rate reverse mortgage loans under which the borrowers have additional borrowing capacity of $2.0 billion at December 31, 2020. This additional borrowing capacity is available on a scheduled or unscheduled payment basis. See Note 25 - Commitments to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
HMBS Issuer Obligations. As an HMBS issuer, we assume certain obligations related to each security issued. The most significant obligation is the requirement to purchase loans out of the Ginnie Mae securitization pools once the outstanding principal balance of the related HECM is equal to or greater than 98% of the maximum claim amount (MCA repurchases). Active repurchased loans are assigned to HUD and payment is received from HUD, typically within 60 days of repurchase. HUD reimburses us for the outstanding principal balance on the loan up to the maximum claim amount. We bear the risk of exposure if the amount of the outstanding principal balance on a loan exceeds the maximum claim amount. Inactive repurchased loans (the borrower is deceased, no longer occupies the property or is delinquent on tax and insurance payments) are generally liquidated through foreclosure and subsequent sale of REO, with a claim filed with HUD for recoverable remaining principal and advance balances. See Note 25 - Commitments to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Involvement with VIEs. We use SPEs and VIEs for a variety of purposes but principally in the financing of our servicing advances, in the securitization of mortgage loans and in the financing of our MSRs. We include VIEs in our consolidated financial statements if we determine we are the primary beneficiary. See Note 4 - Securitizations and Variable Interest Entities to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. We generally use match funded securitization facilities to finance our servicing advances. The SPEs to which the receivables for servicing advances are transferred in the securitization transaction are included in our consolidated financial statements either because we have the majority equity interest in the SPE or because we are the primary beneficiary where the SPE is a VIE. Holders of the debt issued by the SPEs have recourse only to the assets of the SPEs for satisfaction of the debt.
Derivatives. We record all derivatives at fair value on our consolidated balance sheets. We use these derivatives primarily to manage our interest rate risk. The notional amounts of our derivative contracts do not reflect our exposure to credit loss. Generally, our derivative instruments require daily margin calls. See Note 17 - Derivative Financial Instruments and Hedging Activities to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Our ability to measure and report our financial position and operating results is influenced by the need to estimate the impact or outcome of future events based on information available at the date of the financial statements. An accounting estimate is considered critical if it requires that management make assumptions about matters that were highly uncertain at the time the accounting estimate was made. If actual results differ from our judgments and assumptions, then it may have an adverse impact on the results of operations and cash flows. We have processes in place to monitor these judgments and assumptions, and management is required to review critical accounting policies and estimates with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors. Our significant accounting policies and critical accounting estimates are described in Note 1 - Organization, Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Fair Value Measurements
We use fair value measurements to record fair value adjustments to certain instruments in our statement of operations and to determine fair value disclosures. Refer to Note 5 - Fair Value to the Consolidated Financial Statements for the fair value hierarchy, descriptions of valuation methodologies used to measure significant assets and liabilities at fair value and details of the valuation models, key inputs to those models, significant assumptions utilized, and sensitivity analyses. We follow the fair value hierarchy to prioritize the inputs utilized to measure fair value and classify instruments as Level 3 when the valuation technique requires significant unobservable inputs or assumptions. We review and modify, as necessary, our fair value hierarchy classifications on a quarterly basis. The determination of the fair value of these Level 3 financial assets and liabilities
and MSRs requires significant management judgment and estimation. The following table summarizes assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring and nonrecurring basis and the amounts measured using Level 3 inputs:
We have various internal controls in place to ensure the appropriateness of fair value measurements. Significant fair value measures are subject to analysis and management review and approval. Additionally, we utilize a number of operational controls to ensure the results are reasonable, including comparison, or “back testing,” of model results against actual performance and monitoring the market for recent trades, including our own price discovery in connection with potential and completed sales, and other market information that can be used to benchmark inputs or outputs. Considerable judgment is used in forming conclusions about Level 3 inputs such as prepayment speeds and discount rates. Changes to these inputs could have a significant effect on fair value measurements.
Valuation of Reverse Mortgage Loans Held for Investment
Reverse mortgage loans are insured by the FHA and transferred into Ginnie Mae guaranteed securities (or HMBS) that we sell into the secondary market. Loan transfers in these Ginnie Mae securitizations do not qualify for sale accounting and are recorded as secured borrowings. We have elected to record both loans held for investment and the corresponding HMBS borrowings at fair value. Our net exposure to reverse mortgages and the HMBS-related borrowings is limited to the residual value we retain, including future draw commitments. Changes in the fair value of the loans held for investment are largely offset by changes in the value of the related secured financing. As of December 31, 2020, we reported $6.87 billion securitized loans held for investment at fair value and $6.77 billion HMBS-related borrowings at fair value, with a residual, net asset value of $99.5 million. In 2020, we recognized a $7.6 million gain as the net change in fair value of securitized loans held for investment and HMBS-related borrowings, and a $46.3 million gain on new originations of reverse mortgage loans (pre-securitization).
The fair value of both reverse mortgage loans held for investment and corresponding HMBS-related borrowings is based primarily on discounted cash flow methodologies. Inputs to the discounted cash flows of these assets include future draws and tail spread gains, voluntary prepayments, defaults and discount rate. The determination of fair value requires management judgment due to the significant unobservable assumptions, including voluntary prepayment speeds, defaults and discount rate.
We engage third-party valuation experts to support our valuation and provide observations and assumptions related to market activities. We evaluate the reasonableness of our fair value estimate and assumptions using historical experience, or cash flow backtesting, adjusted for prevailing market conditions and benchmarks with third-party expert valuations. We believe that our back-testing and benchmarking procedures provide reasonable assurance that the fair value used in our consolidated financial statements comply with the accounting guidance for fair value measurements and disclosures and reflect the assumptions that a market participant would use.
The following table provides the range and weighted average of significant unobservable assumptions used (expressed as a percentage of UPB) by class projected for the five-year period beginning December 31, 2020:
(1)Includes voluntary and involuntary prepayments.
Valuation of MSRs
MSRs are assets that represent the right to service a portfolio of mortgage loans. We originate MSRs from our lending activities and acquire MSRs through flow purchase agreements, GSE Cash Window programs, bulk purchases, asset acquisitions or business combinations. We elected to account for MSRs using the fair value measurement method. As of December 31, 2020, we reported a $1,294.8 million fair value of MSRs. In 2020, we recognized a $106.2 million fair value loss due to changes in valuation inputs and assumptions.
We determine the fair value of MSRs primarily using discounted cash flow methodologies. The significant estimated future cash inflows for MSRs include servicing fees, late fees, float earnings and other ancillary fees and cash outflows include the cost of servicing, the cost of financing servicing advances and compensating interest payments. The determination of the fair value of MSRs requires management judgment relating to the significant unobservable assumptions that underlie the valuation, including prepayment speed, delinquency rates, cost to service and discount rate. Our judgement is informed by the transactions we observe in the market, by our actual portfolio performance and by the advice and information we obtained from our valuation experts, amongst other factors.
To assist us in the determination of fair value, we engage third-party valuation experts who generally utilize: (a) transactions involving instruments with similar collateral and risk profiles, adjusted as necessary based on specific characteristics of the asset or liability being valued; and/or (b) industry-standard modeling, such as a discounted cash flow model and a prepayment model, in arriving at their estimate of fair value. The prices provided by the valuation experts reflect their observations and assumptions related to market activity, incorporating available industry survey results, and including risk premiums and liquidity adjustments. While the models and related assumptions used by the valuation experts are proprietary to them, we understand the methodologies and assumptions used to develop the prices based on our ongoing due diligence, which includes regular discussions with the valuation experts, and we perform additional verification and analytical procedures. We evaluate the reasonableness of our third-party experts’ assumptions using historical experience adjusted for prevailing market conditions and benchmarks with third-party expert valuation and market participant surveys. We believe that our procedures provide reasonable assurance that the fair value used in our consolidated financial statements comply with the accounting guidance for fair value measurements and disclosures and reflect the assumptions that a market participant would use.
The following table provides the range and weighted average of significant unobservable assumptions used (expressed as a percentage of UPB) by class projected for the five-year period beginning December 31, 2020:
Changes in these assumptions are generally expected to affect our results of operations as follows:
•Increases in prepayment speeds generally reduce the value of our MSRs as the underlying loans prepay faster which causes accelerated MSR portfolio runoff, higher compensating interest payments and lower overall servicing fees, partially offset by a lower overall cost of servicing, increased float earnings on higher float balances and lower interest expense on lower servicing advance balances.
•Increases in delinquencies generally reduce the value of our MSRs as the cost of servicing increases during the delinquency period, and the amounts of servicing advances and related interest expense also increase.
•Increases in the discount rate reduce the value of our MSRs due to the lower overall net present value of the net cash flows.
•Increases in interest rate assumptions will increase interest expense for financing servicing advances although this effect is partially offset because rate increases will also increase the amount of float earnings that we recognize.
Allowance for Losses on Servicing Advances and Receivables
Advances are generally fully reimbursed under the terms of servicing agreements. However, servicing advances may include claimable (with investors) but non-recoverable expenses, for example due to servicer error, such as lack of reasonable documentation as to the type and amount of advances. We record an allowance for losses on servicing advances as a charge to earnings to the extent we believe that a portion of advances are uncollectible under the provisions of each servicing contract taking into consideration, among other factors, our historical collection rates, probability of default, cure or modification, length of delinquency and the amount of the advance. We continually assess collectability using proprietary cash flow projection models that incorporate a number of different factors, depending on the characteristics of the mortgage loan or pool, including, for example, the probable loan liquidation path, estimated time to a foreclosure sale, estimated costs of foreclosure action, estimated future property tax payments and the estimated value of the underlying property net of estimated carrying costs, commissions and closing costs. At December 31, 2020, the allowance for losses on servicing advances was $6.3 million, which represents 1% of total servicing advances.
We record an allowance for losses on receivables in our Servicing business, including related to defaulted FHA or VA insured loans repurchased from Ginnie Mae guaranteed securitizations (government-insured loan claims). This allowance represents management’s estimate of expected lifetime credit losses and is maintained at a level that management considers adequate based upon continuing assessments of collectability, current trends, historical loss experience, and reasonable and supportable forecasts. At December 31, 2020, the allowance for losses on receivables related to government-insured claims was $38.3 million, which represents 28% of total government-insured claims receivables.
We adopted ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses: Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, as amended, on January 1, 2020. The ASU requires the measurement and recording of expected lifetime credit losses on loans and other financial instruments measured at amortized cost and replaces the existing incurred loss model for credit losses. The new guidance requires an organization to measure all current expected credit losses (CECL) for financial assets held and certain off-balance sheet credit exposures at the reporting date based on historical experience, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts.
The transition adjustment related to the allowance for losses on servicing advances and receivables did not result in any significant adjustment to our financial statements.
Determining an allowance for losses involves management judgment and assumptions that, given similar information at any given point, may result in a different but reasonable estimate.
Income Taxes
We record a tax provision for the anticipated tax consequences of the reported results of operations. We compute the provision for income taxes using the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. We measure deferred tax assets and liabilities using the currently enacted tax rates in each jurisdiction that applies to taxable income in effect for the years in which those tax assets are expected to be realized or settled. We record a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is believed more likely than not to be realized.
We conduct periodic evaluations of positive and negative evidence to determine whether it is more likely than not that the deferred tax asset can be realized in future periods. In these evaluations, we gave more significant weight to objective evidence, such as our actual financial condition and historical results of operations, as compared to subjective evidence, such as projections of future taxable income or losses.
For the three-year periods ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the USVI filing jurisdiction was in a material cumulative loss position. The U.S. jurisdiction was also in a three-year cumulative loss position as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. We recognize that cumulative losses in recent years is an objective form of negative evidence in assessing the need for a valuation allowance and that such negative evidence is difficult to overcome. Other factors considered in these evaluations are estimates of future taxable income, future reversals of temporary differences, tax character and the impact of tax planning strategies that may be implemented, if warranted.
As a result of these evaluations, we recognized a full valuation allowance of $182.7 million and $199.5 million on our U.S. deferred tax assets at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and a full valuation allowance of $0.4 million and $0.4 million on our USVI deferred tax assets at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The U.S. and USVI jurisdictional deferred tax assets are not considered to be more likely than not realizable based on all available positive and negative evidence. We intend to continue maintaining a full valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets in both the U.S. and USVI until there is sufficient evidence to support the reversal of all or some portion of these allowances. Release of the valuation allowance would result in the recognition of certain deferred tax assets and a decrease to income tax expense for the period in which the release is recorded. However, the exact timing and amount of the valuation allowance release are subject to change based on the profitability that we achieve.
We recognize tax benefits from uncertain tax positions only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such positions are then measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement.
NOL carryforwards may be subject to annual limitations under Internal Revenue Code Section 382 (Section 382) (or comparable provisions of foreign or state law) in the event that certain changes in ownership were to occur. In addition, tax credit carryforwards may be subject to annual limitations under Internal Revenue Code Section 383 (Section 383). We periodically evaluate our NOL and tax credit carryforwards and whether certain changes in ownership have occurred as measured under Section 382 that would limit our ability to utilize a portion of our NOL and tax credit carryforwards. If it is determined that an ownership change(s) has occurred, there may be annual limitations on the use of these NOL and tax credit carryforwards under Sections 382 and 383 (or comparable provisions of foreign or state law).
Ocwen and PHH have both experienced historical ownership changes that have caused the use of certain tax attributes to be limited and have resulted in the write-off of certain of these attributes based on our inability to use them in the carryforward periods defined under the tax laws. Ocwen continues to monitor the ownership in its stock to evaluate whether any additional ownership changes have occurred that would further limit its ability to utilize certain tax attributes. As such, our analysis regarding the amount of tax attributes that may be available to offset taxable income in the future without restrictions imposed by Section 382 may continue to evolve.
Indemnification Obligations
We have exposure to representation, warranty and indemnification obligations because of our lending, sales and securitization activities, our acquisitions to the extent we assume one or more of these obligations, and in connection with our servicing practices. We initially recognize these obligations at fair value. Thereafter, the estimation of the liability considers probable future obligations based on industry data of loans of similar type segregated by year of origination, to the extent applicable, and estimated loss severity based on current loss rates for similar loans, our historical rescission rates and the current pipeline of unresolved demands. Our historical loss severity considers the historical loss experience that we incur upon sale or liquidation of a repurchased loan as well as current market conditions. We monitor the adequacy of the overall liability and
make adjustments, as necessary, after consideration of other qualitative factors including ongoing dialogue and experience with our counterparties. As of December 31, 2020, we have recorded a liability for representation and warranty obligations and similar indemnification obligations of $40.4 million. See Note 26 - Contingencies for additional information.
Litigation
In the ordinary course of business, we are a defendant in, or a party or potential party to, many threatened and pending litigation matters. We monitor our litigation matters, including advice from external legal counsel, and regularly perform assessments of these matters for potential loss accrual and disclosure. We establish liabilities for settlements, judgments on appeal and filed and/or threatened claims for which we believe it is probable that a loss has been or will be incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated based on current information regarding these matters. Where we determine that a loss is not probable but is reasonably possible or where a loss in excess of the amount accrued is reasonably possible, we disclose an estimate of the amount of the loss or range of possible losses for the claim if a reasonable estimate can be made, unless the amount of such reasonably possible loss is not material to our financial position, results of operations or cash flows. Management’s assessment involves the use of estimates, assumptions, and judgments, including progress of the matter, prior experience, available defenses, and the advice of legal counsel and other experts. Accruals are adjusted as more information becomes available or when an event occurs requiring a change. It is possible that we will incur losses relating to threatened and pending litigation that materially exceed the amount accrued. Our accrual for probable and estimable legal and regulatory matters, including accrued legal fees, was $38.9 million at December 31, 2020. We cannot currently estimate the amount, if any, of reasonably possible losses above amounts that have been recorded at December 31, 2020.
Going Concern
In accordance with ASC 205-40, Presentation of Financial Statements - Going Concern, we evaluate whether there are conditions that are known or reasonably knowable that raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date that our financial statements are issued. We perform a detailed review and analysis of relevant quantitative and qualitative information from across our organization in connection with this evaluation. To support this effort, senior management from key business units reviews and assesses the following information:
•our current financial condition, including liquidity sources at the date that the financial statements are issued (e.g., available liquid funds and available access to credit, including covenant compliance);
•our conditional and unconditional obligations due or anticipated within one year after the date that the financial statements are issued (regardless of whether those obligations are recognized in our financial statements);
•funds necessary to maintain operations considering our current financial condition, obligations and other expected cash flows within one year after the date that the financial statements are issued (i.e., financial forecasting); and
•other conditions and events, when considered in conjunction with the above items, that may adversely affect our ability to meet obligations within one year after the date that the financial statements are issued (e.g., negative financial trends, indications of possible financial difficulties, internal matters such as a need to significantly revise operations and external matters such as adverse regulatory or legal proceedings, adverse counterparty actions or rating agency decisions, and our client concentration).
Our evaluation of whether it is probable that we will be unable to meet our obligations as they become due within one year after the date that our financial statements are issued involves a degree of judgment, including about matters that are, to different degrees, uncertain.
If such conditions exist, management evaluates its plans that when implemented would mitigate the condition(s) and alleviate the substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Such plans are considered only if information available as of the date that the financial statements are issued indicates both of the following are true:
•it is probable management’s plans will be implemented within the evaluation period; and
•it is probable management’s plans, when implemented individually or in the aggregate, will mitigate the condition(s) that raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern in the evaluation period.
Our evaluation of whether it is probable that management’s plans will be effectively implemented within the evaluation period is based on the feasibility of implementation of management’s plans in light of our specific facts and circumstances.
Our evaluation of whether it is probable that our plans, individually or in the aggregate, will be implemented in the evaluation period involves a degree of judgment, including about matters that are, to different degrees, uncertain.
Based on our evaluation, we have determined that there are no conditions that are known or reasonably knowable that raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date that our Consolidated Financial Statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 are issued.
RECENT ACCOUNTING DEVELOPMENTS
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
We adopted new credit loss guidance (ASU 2016-13, as amended) on January 1, 2020 by applying the guidance at the adoption date with a cumulative-effect adjustment to the opening balance of Retained earnings in the period of adoption. The transition adjustment resulted in an adjustment to the opening balance of retained earnings of $47.0 million and we increased our loans held for investment by $47.0 million, representing the recognition of certain non-cancellable draw commitments (tails) associated with our reverse mortgage loans. For additional information, see Note 1 - Organization, Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Our adoption of the standards listed below on January 1, 2020 did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements:
•Intangibles - Goodwill and Other - Internal-Use Software: Customer’s Accounting for Implementation Costs Incurred in a Cloud Computing Arrangement That Is a Service Contract (ASU 2018-15)
•Fair Value Measurement: Disclosure Framework - Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement (ASU 2018-13)