ITEM 7 - MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the related notes included elsewhere herein. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause a difference include those discussed under “Forward-Looking Statements” and in Item 1A “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
OVERVIEW
We develop, mine, manufacture and market sorbent products principally produced from clay minerals, primarily consisting of calcium bentonite, attapulgite and diatomaceous shale. Our principal products include agricultural and horticultural chemical carriers, animal health and nutrition products, cat litter, fluid purification and filtration bleaching clays, industrial and automotive floor absorbents and sports field products. Our products are sold to two primary customer groups, including customers who resell our products as originally produced to the end consumer and other customers who use our products as part of their production process or use them as an ingredient in their final finished product. We have two reportable operating segments based on the different characteristics of our two primary customer groups: the Retail and Wholesale Products Group and the Business to Business Products Group. Each operating segment is discussed individually below. Additional detailed descriptions of the operating segments are included in Item 1 “Business” above.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
OVERVIEW
Consolidated net sales increased approximately $21,754,000 or 8% in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020. Consolidated income from operations in fiscal year 2021 decreased compared to fiscal year 2020 by $11,791,000. The decrease was driven primarily by the inclusion in fiscal year 2020 of a one-time receipt of $13,000,000 related to the licensing of one of our patents as further described in Note 1 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Excluding the aforementioned one-time receipt of $13,000,000 in fiscal 2020, operating income for fiscal 2021 was 10% greater than the prior year. Higher costs of sales in fiscal year 2021 due to rising commodity costs also accounted for the decrease in income from operations and was somewhat offset by lower selling, general and administrative expenses.
Consolidated net income was $11,113,000, or $1.57 per diluted common share, for the fiscal year ended July 31, 2021, a 41% decrease from net income of $18,900,000, or $2.65 per diluted common share, for the fiscal year ended July 31, 2020. The decrease relates to the same factors decreasing income from operations noted above, partially offset by a decrease in pension service costs due to the freeze of our pension plan in fiscal year 2020 and lower pension and deferred compensation settlement costs as further described in Notes 8 and 9 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Additionally, fiscal year 2021 experienced lower income tax expense than fiscal year 2020 as further described in Note 5 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Our Consolidated Balance Sheets as of July 31, 2021 and our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for fiscal year 2021 show a decrease in total cash and cash equivalents from fiscal year-end 2020 driven, in part, by certain one-time events. The decrease in cash is further described in Liquidity and Capital Resources.
In late 2019 and early 2020, COVID-19 was first reported and then declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization, and continues to have a worldwide impact. While we saw changes to consumer purchasing patterns for certain products in response to the pandemic and certain increases in our costs arising out of the pandemic, its continued spread and accompanying effects, there has not, to date, been a significant impact to our business as a whole. All of our facilities, with the exception of our subsidiary in China (which experienced certain disruptions in the first half of our fiscal year 2020 but has subsequently resumed operations), have continued to operate as essential businesses as permitted under exceptions in the applicable shelter-in-place mandates due to our inclusion in the Critical Manufacturing Sector as defined by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security and other functions defined as essential by government authorities. Our top priority has been, and continues to be, the safety and health of our employees, contractors, and customers. We have adhered, and continue to adhere, to guidance from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (“CDC”) and local health and governmental authorities with respect to social distancing, physical separation, and enhanced cleaning and sanitation programs at each of our facilities. As a result, we have not experienced any shut downs due to workforce absences or illnesses.
As further discussed below, our net sales increased in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020 and represented an all time high for the Company. Despite the overall increase in net sales during fiscal year 2021, we have not experienced any significant issues collecting amounts due from customers to date. However, parts of our business continue to be negatively impacted by the COVID-19 outbreak. Net sales of our industrial and sports products declined during fiscal year 2020 as many businesses that typically use our products and sports fields shut down. As certain geographic areas are permitting broader re-openings and operations and reducing restrictions, we are starting to see a positive trend in that such businesses are increasingly re-opening, including sports fields. As a result, as discussed below in “Retail and Wholesale Products Group,” net sales of our industrial and sports products were higher in fiscal year 2021 than in fiscal year 2020 with net sales from our industrial products returning to pre-pandemic levels. In the long term, we foresee that our sports product sales will improve back to pre-pandemic volumes aided by the expected continued re-opening of baseball and softball at all levels. As discussed below in “Foreign Operations,” net sales for our industrial floor granules in the United Kingdom as well as our purification products were lower due to restrictions imposed by the United Kingdom government on business operations in response to later waves of outbreaks of COVID-19 as well as reduced travel. In addition, while net sales of our fluids purification products were higher in fiscal year 2021 than fiscal year 2020, COVID-19 has negatively impacted the sales of these products. Reduced travel and, to a lesser extent, our inability due to COVID-19 to participate in our customers' plant tests of our fluids purification products, and the continued closures of schools and restaurants in some parts of the world have continued to impede our sales. In addition, record cases of COVID-19 since the start of the pandemic in Asia and a second wave of COVID-19 starting in June of 2021 in China has somewhat hampered net sales of our animal health products, the extent to which we are monitoring closely.
Consolidated gross profit has not been significantly impacted by COVID-19. We did experience some delays of incoming materials from several suppliers due to COVID-19 during fiscal year 2021. However, it did not impact our ability to fulfill customer orders and we continue to monitor our suppliers. In general, our suppliers have either remained open or we have found new suppliers to meet the increase in consumer demand. While we have experienced a significant increase in transportation costs as discussed further below, including increased costs from truck loading delays, we have continued to meet the increase in customer demand for our products. In addition, we have been able to successfully navigate delays in overseas vessel deliveries of our products by increasing our safety stock as well as finding other providers. We have incurred additional employee compensation costs as a result of increased production to meet increased customer demand as well as additional cleaning and sanitation costs to comply with the CDC guidelines, but these costs did not have a significant impact on our consolidated gross profit. Further, we have adjusted our cleaning and sanitation efforts in response to the evolution of the pandemic and increasing vaccination rates, which has reduced these costs. In addition, we are still experiencing a decrease in travel costs as our employees have continued to travel at reduced levels during the ongoing pandemic.
We are closely monitoring the continuation, resurgence in certain areas, and effects of the outbreak of COVID-19 on all aspects of our business, including how it has, and may, impact our suppliers and customers as well as the effects of the pandemic on economic conditions and the financial markets. In general, we have seen an increase in costs particularly as it relates to commodities as the economy continues to react to, and recover from, the pandemic and demand surpasses supply. However, we have not experienced any significant interruptions, and we will continue to closely monitor our inventory levels to mitigate the risk of any potential supply interruptions or changes in customer demand. It is possible that significant disruptions could occur if the pandemic continues to put pressure on transportation and shipping as a result of an imbalance of supply and demand or if there are continued increases in costs that we are unable to recover. During the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2021, we revised our shipping terms with one of our significant customers to provide that freight charges are the responsibility of, and to be paid directly by, such customer and such costs will no longer be included in the prices we charge such customer. The impacts of COVID-19 and related economic conditions on our future results are uncertain at this time. The scope, duration and magnitude of the direct and indirect effects of COVID-19 continue to evolve (and in many cases, rapidly) and in ways that are difficult or impossible to anticipate. In addition, although COVID-19 did not materially impact our financial results to date, and because it remains uncertain whether and how consumers will modify their purchasing habits in response to COVID-19 or during the period of “reopening” as the pandemic abates in certain areas and continued or reduced government restrictions, these results may not be indicative of the impact that COVID-19 may have on our future results. See “Part I - Item 1A - Risk Factors” for additional discussion regarding the risks COVID-19 presents our business.
The impacts of COVID-19 to our specific operating segments are discussed below.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
FISCAL YEAR 2021 COMPARED TO FISCAL YEAR 2020
CONSOLIDATED RESULTS
Consolidated net sales in fiscal year 2021 reached an all-time high of $304,981,000, an increase of $21,754,000 or 8%, from net sales of $283,227,000 in fiscal year 2020. Net sales in both our Retail and Wholesale Products Group and Business to Business Products Group increased in fiscal year 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year as did net sales for each of our principal products by segment except for products sold by our subsidiary in the United Kingdom. Sales fluctuations by operating segment are further discussed below.
Consolidated gross profit in fiscal year 2021 was $65,241,000, a decrease of $3,465,000 from gross profit of $68,706,000 in the prior fiscal year. Our gross margin (defined as gross profit as a percentage of net sales) in fiscal year 2021 decreased to 21% from 24% in fiscal year 2020. As further described in Note 1 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, we identified an error in our historical consolidated financial statements related to the classification of certain costs as selling, general and administrative costs that relate to the production of our inventory and should be classified as cost of sales. These costs relate primarily to our annual discretionary bonus and 401(k) employer match for our manufacturing teammates, teammate salaries for individuals in our support functions that spend a portion of their time related to our manufacturing operations such as IT, and other costs mostly related to consultants and outside services. Because the error was not material to any prior period interim or our annual financial statements, no amendments to previously filed interim or annual periodic reports were required. We have adjusted for this error by revising the historical consolidated financial statements presented herein. The impact to gross margin in fiscal years 2021 and 2020, on a manufactured ton basis, was $6.79 and $9.42, respectively. Aside from the reclassification of costs from selling, general and administrative expenses to cost of sales, higher domestic freight, packaging, natural gas, materials, and non-fuel costs per manufactured ton drove the decrease in gross profit in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020. Freight costs per manufactured ton increased approximately 13% compared to the prior fiscal year as the result of higher transportation rates due to a national driver shortage and tight trucking capacity in part caused by the continued return of non-essential businesses. Our overall freight costs also vary between periods depending on the mix of products sold and the geographic distribution of our customers. Despite the tight trucking capacity, we have been able to continue to meet the increase in customer demand. Packaging costs per ton were approximately 19% higher compared to the prior fiscal year due, in part, to the mix of products produced driven by higher commodity costs, particularly as it relates to the resin used in our jugs and pails. Many of our contracts for packaging purchases are subject to periodic price adjustments, which trail changes in underlying commodity prices. The cost per manufactured ton of natural gas used to operate kilns that dry our clay was approximately 15% higher in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020 due to the increase in natural gas prices. The increased gas prices in 2021 were driven, in part, by the limited supply created by record-low temperatures across the nation, which drove up demand, and supply was further limited across the country due to natural gas pipelines and wellheads freezing in southern regions in the United States. The limited supply coupled with high demand caused the increase in natural gas prices. In addition, non-fuel manufacturing costs per ton increased approximately 3% compared to fiscal year 2020 driven primarily by higher purchased materials. While we have experienced an increase in costs due to the reasons mentioned above, we anticipate being able to recover some of these rising costs through price increases.
Total selling, general and administrative expenses were 8% lower in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020. The discussion of each segment's operating income below describe the changes in selling, general and administrative expenses that were allocated to that segment, particularly the lower advertising costs in the Retail and Wholesale Products Group. The remaining unallocated corporate expenses in fiscal year 2021 included a lower estimated annual incentive bonus accrual for fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020. The incentive bonus accrual was based on actual financial results achieved for the fiscal year and discretion by our Chief Executive Officer, in accordance with the incentive plan's provisions. Fiscal year 2021 also included lower pension service costs expense as the pension plan is frozen. In addition, as compared to fiscal year 2020, unallocated corporate expenses are lower in fiscal year 2021 because fiscal year 2020 included a legal contingency offset by a curtailment gain related to the termination of our Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan (SERP). See Notes 8, 9 and 11 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a further description of our pension plan freeze, SERP termination, and legal contingencies.
Other income (expense), net in fiscal years 2021 and 2020 included approximately $600,000 and $2,000,000, respectively, of settlement expense under our pension plan as further described in Note 8 to the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. In addition, there were lower pension costs in fiscal year 2021 due to the pension plan freeze.
Tax expense for fiscal year 2021 was $2,388,000 (effective tax rate of 17.7%) compared to $4,280,000 (effective tax rate of 18.6%) in fiscal year 2020. The decrease in tax expense was driven by lower taxable income as well as certain employment related credits we were able to take advantage of and a tax deduction for foreign-derived income which further reduced our effective tax rate. See Note 5 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information about our income taxes.
BUSINESS TO BUSINESS PRODUCTS GROUP
Net sales of the Business to Business Products Group for fiscal year 2021 were $110,120,000, an increase of $5,860,000, or 6%, from net sales of $104,260,000 in fiscal year 2020. Net sales increased in all product categories - agricultural and horticultural products; fluids and purification products; animal health products; and cat litter. The majority of this growth was the result of increased volume and to some degree, price increases that were implemented late in fiscal year 2021 for certain of our products.
Net sales of our agricultural and horticultural chemical carrier products increased approximately 19% or $4,149,000 in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020. The increase in net sales was attributable to increased sales to existing customers, particularly to one of our largest customers using our product in some of its re-formulated goods; the addition of several smaller new customers; an expected shift in timing of sales to one of our largest customers from the last three months of fiscal year 2020 to fiscal year 2021 due to that customer resuming its production schedule after it experienced various supplier delays due to COVID-19; and increased sales due to a new business application of our Agsorb product to an existing customer. Net sales of our fluids purification products increased approximately $1,334,000 or 3% in fiscal year 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year despite the negative impacts of COVID-19. We experienced sales improvement primarily in Latin and North America. A key driver of the net sales growth in Latin America related to timing of sales as one of our customers ordered more than usual to navigate potential delays in ocean freight shipments. Other drivers of the sales growth in Latin America related to new customers and increased sales to existing customers. Net sales in North America increased in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020 due to an increase in air travel and more need for our jet fuel purification products as well as an increase in demand for our clay used for bio-diesel products. However, net sales have still been impacted by the oil quality in North America, which continues to be good and, accordingly, has reduced the need for our clay products. The increases in net sales to Latin and North America were partially offset by lower sales to Asia and to some degree, Europe. Reduced air travel due to COVID-19 has negatively affected the sale of our jet fuel fluids purification products in Asia and Europe. Sales to Asia also decreased in the fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020 due to price competition. Net sales of our animal health and nutrition products were essentially flat during fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020 as the increases in net sales of our animal feed additives in China and Asia were offset by the decreases in net sales in other countries, including Mexico. See “Foreign Operations” below for a discussion of net sales in China and Mexico. The increase in net sales in Asia as well as the decreases in net sales in other countries were primarily related to timing of net sales and the impacts of COVID-19. Net sales of our co-packaged coarse cat litter increased approximately $340,000 or 2% during fiscal year 2021 compared to the same period in the prior fiscal year due to timing of customer purchases.
The Business to Business Products Group’s selling, general and administrative expenses in fiscal year 2021 were approximately 8% or $805,000 higher compared to fiscal year 2020, but remained consistent as a percentage of sales. During fiscal year 2021, we made a concentrated effort to invest in our animal health business through increased sales personnel, leadership hires, and marketing of our animal health products which resulted in an increase in selling general and administrative expenses. This increase was partly offset by lower travel costs and less bad debt expense in fiscal year 2021.
The Business to Business Products Group’s segment operating income for fiscal year 2021 was $25,086,000, a decrease of $3,351,000 or 12%, from operating income of $28,437,000 in fiscal year 2020. While net sales increased, this increase was offset by higher freight, packaging, natural gas, materials, and non-fuel costs per manufactured ton in fiscal year 2021 as discussed in Consolidated Results above as well as higher selling, general and administrative costs. In addition, as previously noted in Note 1 to the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, the allocation of additional costs from selling, general and administrative costs to cost of sales decreased segment operating income in both fiscal years 2021 and 2020.
RETAIL AND WHOLESALE PRODUCTS GROUP
Net sales of the Retail and Wholesale Products Group for fiscal year 2021 were $194,861,000, an increase of $15,894,000, or 9%, from net sales of $178,967,000 in fiscal year 2020 driven by both increases in net sales of our cat litter and our industrial and sports products. Total cat litter net sales increased $13,748,000 or 9% compared to the prior fiscal year with increased sales of both private label and branded scoopable litters as we gained business from new customers and from new items being sold to existing customers. Further, an increase in e-commerce sales, where the customer base differs from brick and mortar customers, continued to increase cat litter sales. In addition, the impact of COVID-19 on increased pet adoption continued to boost sales as well as the overall macro trend of increased spending on pets. Cat litter sales by our subsidiary in Canada further contributed to the sales increase, as discussed in “Foreign Operations” below. Also included in the Retail and Wholesale Products Group's results were increased sales of our industrial and sports products compared to fiscal year 2020. Net sales of our industrial and sports products increased approximately $2,689,000 or 9% in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020, mainly driven by the re-opening of businesses and sports fields in the third and fourth quarters of fiscal year 2021 in most, but not all, of the United States. Industrial floor absorbent sales by our subsidiary in Canada further contributed to the net sales increase in fiscal year 2021, as discussed in “Foreign Operations” below. To some extent, the increase in net sales for our Retail and Wholesale Products Group was also driven by price increases.
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the Retail and Wholesale Products Group were approximately $730,000 or 4% lower compared to fiscal year 2020. The decrease was driven mainly by lower advertising expense and to some extent, lower travel costs. The decrease was partially offset by higher personnel costs and commissions due to the increase in sales volume.
The Retail and Wholesale Products Group’s segment operating income for fiscal year 2021 was $11,916,000, an increase of $393,000 or 3%, from operating income of $11,523,000 in fiscal year 2020. The higher sales and lower selling, general and administrative costs were partially offset by higher freight, packaging, natural gas, materials, and non-fuel costs per manufactured ton, as discussed in “Consolidated Results” above. In addition, as previously noted in Note 1 to the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, the allocation of additional costs from selling, general and administrative costs to cost of sales decreased segment operating income in both fiscal years 2021 and 2020.
FOREIGN SUBSIDIARIES
Foreign operations include our subsidiaries in Canada and the United Kingdom, which are included in the Retail and Wholesale Products Group, and our subsidiaries in China, Mexico and Indonesia, which are included in the Business to Business Products Group. Net sales by our foreign subsidiaries during fiscal year 2021 were $17,406,000, an increase of $2,186,000, or 14%, from net sales of $15,220,000 during fiscal year 2020. The increase relates chiefly to higher sales by our subsidiaries in Canada and China during fiscal year 2021. Cat litter sales for our subsidiary in Canada increased by approximately $1,521,000 or 28% during fiscal year 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year due to new product sales; higher sales to existing customers; in-store promotions; and pantry loading in eastern Canada due to a second wave of COVID-19 infections and lockdown restrictions during the first three months of fiscal year 2021. In addition to increased sales of cat litter, sales of our industrial absorbent granules in Canada increased by approximately $551,000 or 27% during fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020 due to both price increases and the re-opening of distributors in the second half of the fiscal year 2021. Sales of our animal health products by our foreign operations also grew by $658,000 or 13% as higher sales for our subsidiary in China were somewhat offset by lower sales from our subsidiaries in Mexico and Indonesia. Net sales in China increased approximately $1,149,000 or 54% during fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020. Despite the continued impacts of the African Swine Fever to pork consumption, sales of our animal health products in China were higher during fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020 due to a new contract with an existing customer; increased sales to existing customers; winning back several previous distributors; the use of two new distributors; and implementing a concentrated sales and marketing effort. In addition, net sales for our subsidiary in China in fiscal year 2020 were lower due to the outbreak of COVID-19 that impacted the second and third quarters of that fiscal year. Net sales by our subsidiary in Mexico in fiscal year 2020 included a sale of equipment that did not recur in fiscal year 2021 which drove the decrease in net sales in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020. The increase in net sales of our cat litter and animal health products in fiscal year 2021 were somewhat offset by the decrease in our purification products from our subsidiary in the United Kingdom. Sales of industrial floor absorbents by our subsidiary in the United Kingdom increased marginally in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2021 over fiscal year 2020 but were still lower overall in fiscal year 2021 than 2020. The effect of COVID-19 lockdowns and restrictions on the industry in Europe has, to some extent, reduced demand for our products. The discontinuation by a customer of a product that used our clay granules also contributed to the decrease in sales of our subsidiary in the United Kingdom. Net sales by our foreign subsidiaries represented 6% of our consolidated net sales for both the fiscal years 2021 and 2020.
For fiscal year 2021, our foreign subsidiaries reported a net loss of $597,000, compared to a net loss of $1,308,000 in fiscal year 2020. The net loss in fiscal year 2021 was primarily driven by our continued investment in our subsidiary in Indonesia and higher selling, general, and administrative expenses to support increased sales for our animal health business.
Identifiable assets of our foreign subsidiaries as of July 31, 2021 were $12,572,000 compared to $12,586,000 as of July 31, 2020.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our principal capital requirements include: funding working capital needs; purchasing and upgrading equipment, facilities, information systems, and real estate; supporting new product development; investing in infrastructure; repurchasing stock; paying dividends; making pension contributions; and, from time to time, business acquisitions. During fiscal year 2021, we primarily used cash generated from operations to fund these requirements. Cash and cash equivalents totaled $24,591,000 and $40,890,000 as of July 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Contributing to the cash generated in fiscal year 2020 was $10,000,000 of borrowings in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2020 as well as a one-time receipt of $13,000,000 related to licensing of certain of our patents. These receipts have since been used in our operations in fiscal 2021. See Note 1 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for information about the one-time receipt and Note 3 for the borrowings.
To date, COVID-19 has not had a significant impact on our operations as a whole, and we anticipate cash flows from operations and our available sources of liquidity will be sufficient to meet our cash requirements. In addition, we are actively monitoring the timing and collection of our accounts receivable. Given the ongoing and dynamic nature of COVID-19, we will continue to assess our liquidity needs and to actively manage our spending.
The following table sets forth certain elements of our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the fiscal year (in thousands):
Net cash provided by operating activities
In addition to net income, as adjusted for depreciation and amortization and other non-cash operating activities, the primary sources and uses of operating cash flows for fiscal years 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
Non-cash stock compensation was $837,000 lower for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 due to several large awards of restricted stock fully vesting early in fiscal year 2021. See Note 7 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information about stock-based compensation.
We recognized a curtailment gain on our Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan (“SERP”) plan in fiscal year 2020 of $1,296,000, which is further discussed in Note 9 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. No such gain was recognized in fiscal year 2021 as the SERP was terminated in fiscal year 2020.
Accounts receivable, less allowance for doubtful accounts and cash discounts, were $5,808,000 higher at fiscal year-end 2021 compared to fiscal year-end 2020 due primarily to higher sales in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021 than in the same period in fiscal year 2020. The same measure of accounts receivable was $411,000 lower at fiscal year-end 2020 compared to fiscal year-end 2019 due to lower sales in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2020, an increase in our bad debt reserve for certain uninsured foreign receivables, and for two customers that were slow paying Fluctuations in accounts receivable balances were impacted in all periods by the timing of both sales and collections, as well as the payment terms provided to various customers in the ordinary course of business.
Inventories were $518,000 lower at fiscal year-end 2021 compared to fiscal year-end 2020 due primarily to higher sales of finished goods offset by increased packaging costs and a lower obsolescence reserve. Packaging costs increased due to
anticipated sales demand as well as an increase in the underlying cost of packaging. The lower obsolescence reserve is attributable to our focus on inventory management. Inventories were $213,000 lower at fiscal year-end 2020 compared to fiscal year-end 2019 due to a higher obsolescence reserve and lower packaging cost. The higher obsolescence reserve and lower packaging inventories were attributable to our focus on inventory management and enhanced data available from our ERP system. Furthermore, finished goods and purchased materials inventories vary from year to year due to anticipated sales requirements and the mix of products expected to be produced. See Note 1 of the Notes of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Prepaid expenses were $4,067,000 higher at fiscal year-end 2021 compared to fiscal year-end 2020 driven primarily by prepayment of income taxes and insurance offset by lower prepaid advertising costs. Prepaid expenses were $949,000 higher at fiscal year end 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019 due to higher prepaid repairs.
Deferred income taxes, less provision for deferred income taxes, were $5,196,000 lower at fiscal year-end 2021 compared to fiscal year-end 2020 and were $453,000 lower at fiscal year-end 2020 compared to fiscal year-end 2019. Deferred income taxes were lower at fiscal year-end 2021 due to pension and retirement benefits, accrued expenses, and bonus depreciation on fixed assets. Deferred income taxes were lower at fiscal year-end 2020 due to pension and postretirement benefits and accrued expenses. See Note 5 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information about income taxes.
Other assets were $544,000 lower at fiscal year-end 2021 compared to fiscal year-end 2020 due to a reduction in our operating right of use lease asset for expiring leases partially offset by higher pre-production costs at certain of our mines. Other assets were $1,242,000 higher at fiscal year-end 2020 than fiscal year-end 2019 due to pre-production costs at our Georgia mine.
Accounts payable were $2,411,000 lower at fiscal year-end 2021 compared to fiscal year-end 2020. Lower trade payables drove the decrease in accounts payable in fiscal year 2021 as well as income taxes payable being in a prepaid position versus a payable position at the end of the fiscal year 2021. Accounts payable were $4,238,000 higher at fiscal year-end 2020 compared to fiscal year-end 2019. Higher accrued income taxes due to higher net income and a higher effective tax rate drove the increase in fiscal year 2020 as well as higher freight payables due to the increase in sales. Changes in trade accounts payable in all periods are subject to normal fluctuations in the timing of payments, the cost of goods and services we purchased, production volume levels and vendor payment terms.
Accrued expenses were $4,097,000 lower at fiscal year-end 2021 compared to fiscal year-end 2020 due mainly to a lower accrued annual discretionary bonus, as well as lower advertising expenses and real estate taxes somewhat offset by an increase in accrued freight and a reclassification of one of our accruals from long-term to short-term. The payout of the prior fiscal year's discretionary incentive bonus reduced accrued salaries in both fiscal years, but to a greater extent in fiscal year 2021 as the accrual was higher in the prior fiscal year. Accrued advertising expenses decreased in fiscal year 2021 more than fiscal year 2020 due to timing of our advertising programs. Accrued real estate taxes decreased based on lower real estate taxes for one of our facilities. These decreases were partially offset by the reclassification of the current portion of the deferred employer payroll taxes under the CARES Act, which is due by the end of calendar year 2021, as further described in Note 1 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements and an increase in accruals for unvouchered freight. Accrued freight can vary with freight rates, timing of shipments, and production requirements. In addition, accrued plant expenses can also fluctuate due to timing of payments, changes in the cost of goods and services we purchase, production volume levels and vendor payment terms. Accrued expenses were $8,632,000 higher at fiscal year-end 2020 compared to fiscal year-end 2019 due primarily to accrued annual discretionary bonus, 401(k) employer match, advertising costs and an accrual for a legal contingency which is further described in Note 11 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. These increases were partially offset by lower accruals for unvouchered freight.
Deferred compensation balances at fiscal year-end 2021 were $770,000 lower compared to fiscal year-end 2020 and fiscal year-end 2020 was $421,000 higher compared to fiscal year-end 2019. Deferred compensation balances were lower at fiscal year-end 2021 due to the termination and subsequent pay-out of one of our plans, the Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan, as further discussed in Note 9 to the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Deferred compensation increased in fiscal 2020 because of higher deferrals by participants in our other deferred compensation plans.
Pension and other postretirement liabilities, net of the adjustment recorded in stockholders' equity, were $2,652,000 lower at fiscal year-end 2021 compared to fiscal year-end 2020 due to reduced service expense related to the Pension Plan which was frozen in fiscal year 2020 as well as a higher discount rate and change in census data. These liabilities were $5,684,000 lower at fiscal year-end 2020 compared to fiscal year-end 2019 due primarily to the curtailment of our pension plan and a $8,000,000 voluntary contribution to our pension plan in excess of the minimum amount required. See Note 8 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information regarding our postretirement benefit plans.
Other liabilities were $557,000 lower at fiscal year-end 2021 compared to fiscal year-end 2020. The decrease in Other Liabilities relates to a reduction in our operating lease liability, partly offset by an increase in our reclamation liability due to increased mining activity and an increase in deferral of employer taxes under the CARES Act as further described in Note 1 to the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Other liabilities were $1,120,000 higher at fiscal year-end 2020 compared to fiscal year-end 2019. The increase in fiscal year 2020 was due to a reclassification of the deferred lease liability to operating lease liabilities upon adoption of ASC 842, Leases.
Net cash used in investing activities
Cash used in investing activities was $18,830,000 in fiscal year 2021 and cash used in investing activities was $14,677,000 in fiscal year 2020. Cash used in fiscal year 2021 related chiefly to capital expenditures. The increase in our capital expenditures in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020 relates to purchases of equipment to support our increased mining and hauling activity. Cash used in fiscal year 2020 related primarily to the purchases of capital expenditures at levels comparable to fiscal year 2019.
Net cash used in financing activities
Cash used in financing activities was $11,322,000 in fiscal year 2021 and $8,750,000 in fiscal year 2020. The primary uses of cash in all periods were for long-term debt, dividend payments, and stock purchases offset by borrowings as further described in Note 3 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Other
Total cash and investment balances held by our foreign subsidiaries as of July 31, 2021 and 2020 were $3,054,000 and $3,042,000, respectively. See further discussion in the “Foreign Operations” section above.
On January 31, 2019, we signed a fifth amendment to our credit agreement with BMO Harris, which expires on January 31, 2024. The new agreement provides for a $45,000,000 unsecured revolving credit agreement, including a maximum of $10,000,000 for letters of credit. The remaining terms are substantially unchanged from our previous agreement with BMO Harris, including the provision that we may select a variable rate based on either BMO Harris’ prime rate or a LIBOR-based rate, plus a margin which varies depending on our debt to earnings ratio, or a fixed rate as agreed between us and BMO Harris. As of July 31, 2021, the variable rates would have been 3.50% for the BMO Harris’ prime-based rate or 1.38% for the LIBOR-based rate. The credit agreement contains restrictive covenants that, among other things and under various conditions, limit our ability to incur additional indebtedness or to dispose of assets. The agreement also requires us to maintain a minimum fixed coverage ratio and a minimum consolidated net worth. As of July 31, 2021 and 2020, we were in compliance with its covenants. As of July 31, 2021 and 2020, there were no outstanding borrowings under this credit agreement.
See Note 3 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for information about our outstanding notes payable and a discussion of the debt instrument that we entered into on May 15, 2020 pursuant to which, among other things, we issued $10,000,000 in aggregate principal amount of our 3.95% Series B Senior Notes due May 15, 2030 and entered into an amended note agreement that provides the Company with the ability to request, from time to time until May 15, 2023 (or such earlier date as provided for in the agreement), additional senior unsecured notes of the Company in an aggregate principal amount of up to $75,000,000 minus the aggregate principal amount of the notes then outstanding and the additional notes that have been accepted for purchase. The issuance of such additional notes is at the discretion of the noteholders and purchasers and on an uncommitted basis.
As of July 31, 2021, we had remaining authority to repurchase 810,962 shares of Common Stock and 278,250 shares of Class B Stock under a repurchase plan approved by our Board of Directors (the “Board”). Repurchases may be made on the open market (pursuant to Rule 10b5-1 plans or otherwise) or in negotiated transactions. The timing and number of shares repurchased will be determined by our management pursuant to the repurchase plan approved by our Board. In fiscal 2021 we made repurchases of stock as further discussed in Item 5, Market for Registrant's Common Equity, Related Stockholders Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities.
We believe that cash flow from operations, availability under our revolving credit facility, current cash balances and our ability to obtain other financing, if necessary, will provide adequate cash funds for foreseeable working capital needs, capital expenditures at existing facilities, deferred compensation payouts, dividend payments and debt service obligations for at least the next 12 months. We spent approximately $1,023,000 less for advertising in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020 and we expect advertising expense in fiscal year 2022 to be higher than in fiscal year 2021. Our expenditures for capital were higher in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020. The increased capital expenditures did not dramatically impact our cash position; however our cash requirements are subject to change as business conditions warrant and opportunities arise.
We continually evaluate our liquidity position and anticipated cash needs, as well as the financing options available to obtain additional cash reserves. Our ability to fund operations, to make planned capital expenditures, to make scheduled debt payments, to contribute to our pension plan and to remain in compliance with all financial covenants under debt agreements, including, but not limited to, the current credit agreement, depends on our future operating performance, which, in turn, is subject to prevailing economic conditions and to financial, business and other factors. The timing and size of any new business ventures or acquisitions that we complete may also impact our cash requirements.
OFF BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We do not have any unconsolidated special purpose entities. As of July 31, 2021 we do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors. The term “off-balance sheet arrangement” generally means any transaction, agreement or other contractual arrangement to which an entity unconsolidated with us is a party, under which we have: (i) any obligation arising under a guarantee contract, derivative instrument or variable interest; or (ii) a retained or contingent interest in assets transferred to such entity or similar arrangement that serves as credit, liquidity or market risk support for such assets.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Management’s discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations are based upon our Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with the generally accepted accounting principles of the United States (“U.S. GAAP”). We review our financial reporting and disclosure practices and accounting policies annually to ensure that our financial reporting and disclosures provide accurate and transparent information relative to the current economic and business environment. We believe that, of our significant accounting policies stated in Note 1 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, the policies listed below involve a higher degree of judgment and/or complexity. The preparation of the financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, as well as the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Significant estimates include income taxes, promotional programs, pension accounting and allowance for doubtful accounts. Actual results could differ from these estimates.
Income Taxes. Our effective tax rate on earnings was based on income, statutory tax rates and tax planning opportunities available to us in various jurisdictions in which we operate. Significant judgment was required in determining our effective tax rate and in evaluating our tax positions.
We determine our current and deferred taxes in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 740 Income Taxes. The tax effect of the expected reversal of tax differences was recorded at rates currently enacted for each jurisdiction in which we operate. To the extent that temporary differences will result in future tax benefit, we must estimate the timing of their reversal and whether taxable operating income in future periods will be sufficient to fully recognize any deferred tax assets.
We maintain valuation allowances where it is likely that all or a portion of a deferred tax asset will not be realized. Changes in valuation allowances from period to period are included in the income tax provision in the period of change. In determining whether a valuation allowance is warranted, we take into account such factors as prior earnings history, expected future earnings and other factors that could affect the realization of deferred tax assets.
We recorded valuation allowances of $1,362,000 and $1,029,000 for the amount of the deferred tax benefit related to our foreign net operating loss carryforwards as of July 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, because we believe it is unlikely we will realize the benefit of these tax attributes in the future.
In addition to valuation allowances, we may provide for uncertain tax positions when such tax positions do not meet certain recognition thresholds or measurement standards. Amounts for uncertain tax positions are adjusted when new information becomes available or when positions are effectively settled. We did not record a liability for unrecognized tax benefits at either July 31, 2021 or 2020. See Note 5 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.
Trade Promotions. We routinely commit to one-time or ongoing trade promotion programs in our Retail and Wholesale Products Group. Promotional reserves are provided for sales incentives made directly to consumers, such as coupons, and sales incentives made to customers, such as slotting, discounts based on sales volume, cooperative marketing programs and other arrangements. All such trade promotion costs are netted against sales. Promotional reserves are established based on our best estimate of the amounts necessary to settle future and existing claims on products sold as of the balance sheet date. To estimate trade promotion reserves, we rely on our historical experience of trade spending patterns and that of the
industry, current trends and forecasted data. While we believe our promotional reserves are reasonable and that appropriate judgments have been made, estimated amounts could differ from future obligations. We have accrued liabilities at the end of each period for the estimated trade spending programs. We recorded liabilities of approximately $1,260,000 and $1,843,000 for trade promotions as of July 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Pension and Postretirement Benefit Costs. We calculate our pension and postretirement health benefit obligations and the related effects on results of operations using actuarial models. To measure the expense and obligations, we must make a variety of estimates including critical assumptions for the discount rate used to value certain liabilities and the expected return on plan assets set aside to fund these costs. We evaluate these critical assumptions at least annually. Other assumptions involving demographic factors, such as retirement age, mortality and turnover, are evaluated periodically and are updated to reflect actual experience. As these assumptions change from period to period, recorded pension and postretirement health benefit amounts and funding requirements could also change. Actual results in any given year will often differ from actuarial assumptions because of economic and other factors.
The discount rate is the rate assumed to measure the single amount that, if invested at the measurement date in a portfolio of high-quality debt instruments, would provide the necessary future cash flows to pay the pension benefits when due. The discount rate is subject to change each year. We refer to an applicable index and the expected duration of the benefit payments to select a discount rate at which we believe the benefits could be effectively settled. The discount rate was the single equivalent rate that would yield the same present value as the plan’s expected cash flows discounted with spot rates on a yield curve of investment-grade corporate bonds. The yield curve used in both fiscal years 2021 and 2020 was the FTSE Pension Discount Curve (formally called the Citi Pension Discount Curve). Our determination of pension expense or income is based on a market-related valuation of plan assets, which is the fair market value. Our expected rate of return on plan assets is determined based on asset allocations and historical experience. The expected long-term rate of inflation and risk premiums for the various asset categories are based on general historical returns and inflation rates. The target allocation of assets is used to develop a composite rate of return assumption. See Note 8 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
As further described in Note 8 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, we amended and froze participation in our pension plan and supplemental executive retirement plan in the second quarter of fiscal year 2020. The amendment of these plans triggered a curtailment, which required a remeasurement of the plans’ obligations. Both of these remeasurements were based on actuarially determined amounts. In addition, we offered terminated participants with vested benefits who have not yet begun receipt of benefits under the pension plan the opportunity to receive their pension benefits in a single payment (the “Lump Sum Option”). We made payments to those participants in the pension plan who elected the Lump Sum Option by the May 15, 2020 election deadline. This settlement of a portion of the pension plan was recorded as settlement expense based on actuarially determined amounts in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2020. The pension plan was further settled in fiscal year 2021 when we purchased an annuity.
Trade Receivables. We recognize trade receivables when control of finished products are transferred to our customers. We record an allowance for doubtful accounts based on our historical experience and a periodic review of our accounts receivable, including a review of the overall aging of accounts, consideration of customer credit risk and analysis of facts and circumstances about specific accounts. A customer account is determined to be uncollectible when it is probable that a loss will be incurred after we have completed our internal collection procedures, including termination of shipments, direct customer contact and formal demand of payment. We believe our allowance for doubtful accounts is reasonable; however, the unanticipated default by a customer with a material trade receivable could occur. We also record an estimated allowance for cash discounts offered in our payment terms to some customers. We recorded a total allowance for doubtful accounts and cash discounts of $1,174,000 and $1,078,000 as of July 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Revenue Recognition. We recognize revenue when performance obligations under the terms of the contracts with customers are satisfied. Our performance obligation generally consists of the promise to sell finished products to wholesalers, distributors and retailers or consumers and our obligations have an original duration of one year or less. Control of the finished products are transferred upon shipment to, or receipt at, customers' locations, as determined by the specific terms of the contract. We have completed our performance obligation when control is transferred and we recognize revenue accordingly. Taxes collected from customers and remitted to governmental authorities are excluded from net sales. Sales returns are not material nor are warranties and any related obligations.
Inventories. We value inventories at the lower of cost (first-in, first-out) or market. Inventory costs include the cost of raw materials, packaging supplies, labor and other overhead costs. We perform a detailed review of our inventory to determine if a reserve adjustment is necessary, giving consideration to obsolescence, inventory levels, product deterioration and other factors. The review also surveys all of our operating facilities and sales divisions to give consideration to historic and new market trends. The inventory reserve values as of July 31, 2021 and 2020 were $641,000 and $926,000, respectively.
Reclamation. During the normal course of our mining process we remove overburden and perform on-going reclamation activities. As overburden is removed from a mine site, it is hauled to a previously mined site and used to refill older sites. This process allows us to continuously reclaim older mine sites and dispose of overburden simultaneously, therefore minimizing the costs associated with the reclamation process. On an annual basis we evaluate our potential reclamation liability in accordance with ASC 410, Asset Retirement and Environmental Obligations. As of July 31, 2021 and 2020, we have recorded an estimated net reclamation asset of $1,152,000 and $932,000, respectively, and a corresponding estimated reclamation liability of $2,965,000 as of July 31, 2021 and $2,554,000 as of July 31, 2020. These values represent the discounted present value of the estimated future mining reclamation costs at the production plants. The reclamation assets are depreciated over the estimated useful lives of the various mines. The reclamation liabilities are increased based on a yearly accretion charge over the estimated useful lives of the mines.
Accounting for reclamation obligations requires that we make estimates unique to each mining operation of the future costs we will incur to complete the reclamation work required to comply with existing laws and regulations. Actual future costs incurred could significantly differ from estimated amounts. Future changes to environmental laws could increase the extent of reclamation work required. Any such increases in future costs could materially impact the amount incurred for reclamation costs.
Impairment of goodwill, trademarks and other intangible assets. We review carrying values of goodwill, trademarks and other indefinite-lived intangible assets periodically for possible impairment in accordance ASC 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other. Our impairment review requires significant judgment with respect to factors such as volume, revenue and expenses. Impairment occurs when the carrying value exceeds the fair value. Our impairment analysis is performed in the fourth quarter of the fiscal year and may be re-performed during the year when indicators such as unexpected adverse economic factors, unanticipated technological changes, competitive activities and acts by governments and courts indicate that an asset may become impaired. Our impairment analysis performed in the fourth quarters of both fiscal years 2021 and 2020 did not indicate any impairment. We continue to monitor events, circumstances or changes in the business that might imply a reduction in value which could lead to an impairment. In addition, although we have not identified any triggering events relating to goodwill or our intangibles, the ultimate effects of COVID-19 could change this assessment in the future, as outlined under Item 1A, Risk Factors, discussed above.
NEW ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
In March 2020, the FASB issued guidance under ASC 848, Reference Rate Reform. This guidance provides optional expedients and exceptions to account for debt, leases, contracts, hedging relationships and other transactions that reference LIBOR or another reference rate if certain criteria are met. The guidance is effective immediately and may be applied prospectively to contract modifications made and hedging relationships entered into or evaluated on or before December 31, 2022. We have debt agreements that reference LIBOR and to the extent that those agreements are modified to replace LIBOR with another interest rate index, ASC 848 will allow us to account for the modification as a continuation of the existing contract without additional analysis. We are currently evaluating the potential effects of the adoption of this guidance on our Consolidated Financial Statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued guidance under ASC 740, Income Taxes, which simplifies the accounting for income taxes. The guidance removes several specific exceptions to the general principles in ASC 740 and clarifies and makes amendments to improve consistent application of and simplify existing accounting for other areas in ASC 740. This guidance is effective for our first quarter of fiscal year 2022, with early adoption permitted. We have performed an initial analysis of the impacts of adopting this requirement and do not anticipate that it will be material to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
In June 2016, the FASB issued guidance under ASC 326, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses, which requires companies to utilize an impairment model for most financial assets measured at amortized cost and certain other financial instruments, which include trade and other receivables, loans and held-to-maturity debt securities, to record an allowance for credit risk based on expected losses rather than incurred losses. In addition, this new guidance changes the recognition method for credit losses on available-for-sale debt securities, which can occur as a result of market and credit risk, as well as additional disclosures. In general, this guidance will require modified retrospective adoption for all outstanding instruments that fall under this guidance. This guidance is effective for our first quarter of fiscal year 2023. We are currently evaluating the impact of the adoption of this requirement on our Consolidated Financial Statements.
A summary of all recently adopted and issued accounting standards is contained in Note 1 of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.