Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following combined discussion is separately filed by OGE Energy and OG&E. However, OG&E does not make any representations as to information related solely to OGE Energy or the subsidiaries of OGE Energy other than itself.
Introduction
OGE Energy is a holding company with investments in energy and energy services providers offering physical delivery and related services for both electricity and natural gas primarily in the south central U.S. OGE Energy conducts these activities through two business segments: (i) electric utility and (ii) natural gas midstream operations. The accounts of OGE Energy and its wholly-owned subsidiaries, including OG&E, are included in OGE Energy's consolidated financial statements. All intercompany transactions and balances are eliminated in such consolidation. OGE Energy generally uses the equity method of accounting for investments where its ownership interest is between 20 percent and 50 percent and it lacks the power to direct activities that most significantly impact economic performance.
OG&E. OGE Energy's electric utility operations are conducted through OG&E, which generates, transmits, distributes and sells electric energy in Oklahoma and western Arkansas. OG&E's rates are subject to regulation by the OCC, the APSC and the FERC. OG&E was incorporated in 1902 under the laws of the Oklahoma Territory and is a wholly-owned subsidiary of OGE Energy. OG&E is the largest electric utility in Oklahoma, and its franchised service territory includes Fort Smith, Arkansas and the surrounding communities. OG&E sold its retail natural gas business in 1928 and is no longer engaged in the natural gas distribution business.
Enable. OGE Energy's natural gas midstream operations segment represents OGE Energy's investment in Enable. The investment in Enable is held through wholly-owned subsidiaries and ultimately OGE Holdings. Enable is primarily engaged in the business of gathering, processing, transporting and storing natural gas. Enable's natural gas gathering and processing assets are strategically located in four states and serve natural gas production in the Anadarko, Arkoma and Ark-La-Tex Basins. Enable also owns crude oil gathering assets in the Anadarko and Williston Basins. Enable has intrastate natural gas transportation and storage assets that are located in Oklahoma as well as interstate assets that extend from western Oklahoma and the Texas Panhandle to Louisiana, from Louisiana to Illinois and from Louisiana to Alabama. At December 31, 2020, OGE Energy owned 111.0 million common units, or 25.5 percent, of Enable's outstanding units. Enable's general partner is equally controlled by OGE Energy and CenterPoint, who each have 50 percent management ownership. Based on the 50/50 management ownership, with neither company having control, OGE Energy accounts for its interest in Enable using the equity method of accounting. For additional information on OGE Energy's equity investment in Enable and related party transactions, see Notes 5 and 6 within "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
Enable's business is impacted by commodity prices which have declined and otherwise experienced significant volatility in recent years. Commodity prices impact the drilling and production of natural gas and crude oil in the areas served by Enable's systems, and the volumes on Enable's systems can be negatively impacted if producers decrease drilling and production in those areas served. Both Enable's gathering and processing segment and Enable's transportation and storage segment can be affected by drilling and production. Enable's gathering and processing segment primarily serves producers, and many producers utilize the services provided by Enable's transportation and storage segment. A decrease in volumes on Enable's systems due to a decrease in drilling or production by Enable's producer customers could decrease the cash flows from Enable's systems. In addition, Enable's processing arrangements expose them to commodity price fluctuations. A portion of
OGE Energy's earnings and operating cash flows depend on the performance of, and distributions from, Enable. As disclosed in this Form 10-K, Enable is subject to a number of risks, including contract renewal risks, the reliance on the drilling and production decisions of others and the volatility of natural gas, NGLs and crude oil prices. The effects of COVID-19, including negative impacts on demand and commodity prices, could exacerbate these risks. If any of those risks were to occur, OGE Energy's business, financial condition, results of operations or cash flows could be materially adversely affected.
On February 12, 2021, Enable announced a quarterly dividend distribution of $0.16525 per unit on its outstanding common units, which is unchanged from the previous quarter. If cash distributions to Enable's unitholders exceed $0.330625 per unit in any quarter, the general partner will receive increasing percentages, up to 50 percent, of the cash Enable distributes in excess of that amount. OGE Energy is entitled to 60 percent of those "incentive distributions."
On February 16, 2021, Enable entered into a definitive merger agreement with Energy Transfer, pursuant to which, and subject to the conditions of the merger agreement, all outstanding common units of Enable will be acquired by Energy Transfer in an all-equity transaction. Under the terms of the merger agreement, Enable's common unitholders, including OGE Energy, will receive 0.8595 of one common unit representing limited partner interests in Energy Transfer for each common unit of Enable. The transaction is anticipated to close in 2021. The transaction is subject to the receipt of the required approvals from the holders of a majority of Enable's common units, anti-trust approvals and other customary closing conditions. Assuming the transaction closes, OGE Energy will own approximately three percent of Energy Transfer's outstanding limited partner units in lieu of the 25.5 percent interest in Enable that it currently owns.
Overview
Strategy
OGE Energy's purpose is to energize life, providing life-sustaining and life-enhancing products and services, while honoring its commitment to strengthen communities. Its business model is centered around growth and sustainability for employees (internally referred to as "members"), communities and customers and the owners of OGE Energy, its shareholders.
OGE Energy is focused on:
•continuing to deliver top-quartile safety results, while enabling members to deliver improved value to their communities, customers and shareholders;
•transforming the customer experience with the right balance of personalized interaction and technology that allows our customers to self-serve;
•providing safe, reliable energy to the communities and customers it serves, with a particular focus on enhancing the value of the grid by improving reliability and resiliency;
•leading economic development and job growth by attracting new and diverse businesses to improve the infrastructure of the communities in Oklahoma and Arkansas;
•ensuring the necessary mix of generation resources to meet the long-term capacity needs of our customers, with a progressively cleaner generation portfolio;
•continuing focus on innovation, intellectual curiosity and executing with excellence in order to maintain customer rates that are some of the most affordable in the country;
•delivering on earnings commitments to shareholders to enhance access to lower-cost debt and equity capital that is needed to deploy infrastructure for the long-term economic health of its communities;
•having strong regulatory and legislative relationships, built on integrity, for the long-term benefit of our customers, communities, shareholders and members; and
•developing and growing our members to be able to provide a greater contribution to the company's success, while also improving their own lives.
OGE Energy is focused on creating long-term shareholder value by targeting the consistent growth of earnings per share of five percent at the electric utility, underscored by a strategy of investing in lower risk infrastructure projects that improve the economic vitality of the communities it serves in Oklahoma and Arkansas. OGE Energy utilizes cash distributions from its natural gas midstream operations segment to help fund its electric utility capital investments. OGE Energy's financial objectives also include maintaining investment grade credit ratings and providing a strong and reliable dividend for shareholders.
OGE Energy's long-term sustainability is predicated on providing exceptional customer experiences, investing in grid improvements and increasingly cleaner generation resources, environmental stewardship, strong governance practices and caring for and supporting its members and communities.
Recent Developments
COVID-19 Pandemic
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19 as a pandemic, which continues to spread throughout the U.S. and world. In an effort to contain COVID-19 or slow its spread, the U.S. federal, state and local governments enacted various measures, including orders to close or place restrictions on businesses not deemed "essential," enact "shelter in place" restrictions on residents and practice social distancing when engaging in essential activities. The COVID-19 outbreak has adversely impacted global markets and activity, including the energy industry, and it is impossible to predict the ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, as the situation continues to evolve. In Oklahoma City, OG&E's largest service territory, the mayor's "shelter in place" order required residents to stay home except for certain "essential" activities and closed down restaurant dining rooms, personal care services and other businesses that posed a high risk for spreading COVID-19. The order was effective from March 16, 2020 to April 30, 2020. Beginning May 1, 2020, Oklahoma City began its phased "re-opening," and there are currently no city-wide or state-wide "shelter in place" restrictions.
The Registrants' current and potential future responses to the COVID-19 impacts on their employees, customers and shareholders are further discussed below.
•The Registrants' top priority is to protect their employees and their families, as well as their customers. The Registrants are taking all precautionary measures as directed by health authorities and local and national governments. The Registrants continue to monitor the outbreak of COVID-19 and whether any occupancy reductions or closures are necessary to help ensure the health and safety of their employees and customers. The Registrants are also monitoring the status and availability of vaccinations in their service territories. In order to promote the safety of the Registrants' employees and the continuity of utility service, the Registrants implemented health-screening processes and increased sanitation efforts at their facilities and secured additional personal protective equipment, among other additional measures taken. The OCC and the APSC both issued accounting orders allowing the Registrants to defer these incremental costs incurred for recovery.
•As a precautionary measure in order to increase the Registrants' cash positions and preserve financial flexibility in light of current uncertainty resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, in April 2020, OGE Energy entered into a one-year $75.0 million term loan agreement, and OG&E issued $300.0 million in senior notes. The term loan was fully repaid in September 2020.
•In March 2020, President Trump signed into U.S. federal law the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or the "CARES Act," which is aimed at addressing the economic disruption resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and providing certain tax relief to businesses in the U.S. The CARES Act, among other things, includes provisions relating to refundable payroll tax credits, deferment of the employer portion of FICA payroll taxes, net operating loss carryback periods, alternative minimum tax credit refunds, modifications to the net interest deduction limitations and technical corrections to tax depreciation methods for qualified improvement property. The Registrants concluded that the financial impact of the provisions they adopted are immaterial.
•OG&E voluntarily suspended all disconnects for nonpayment, effective March 16, 2020, and on June 25, 2020 announced that it would reinstate disconnects for nonpayment in Oklahoma, effective July 6, 2020. OG&E also announced that it will provide broad payment options to customers who repay their past due balances, including a six-month installment plan and the Average Monthly Billing plan which would spread past due balances over a 12-month period. OG&E adjusted its reserve on accounts receivable as of December 31, 2020 in light of the current expected credit loss model (ASU 2016-13) and the COVID-19 pandemic. The adjustment, which was $1.3 million, incorporated concerns of continued slower customer payment due to unemployment. OG&E deferred this credit reserve amount to a regulatory asset, as both the OCC and the APSC issued accounting orders allowing OG&E to seek recovery of incremental bad debt resulting from COVID-19. OG&E will continue to monitor the reserve as it gains better clarity on the impacts of COVID-19 on its customers and business.
•Beginning in March 2020, oil and natural gas commodity prices have experienced extreme volatility, primarily attributable to decreased demand resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and the actions of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries and other oil exporting nations. On April 1, 2020, Enable announced its plan to reduce its quarterly distributions to its shareholders by 50 percent. This change in distribution, which should help strengthen Enable's balance sheet and increase its annualized cash flows, is supported by OGE Energy. OGE Energy does not foresee the need to access equity markets as a result of this reduction in distributions from Enable.
OGE Energy's Equity Investment in Enable
Effective March 31, 2020, OGE Energy estimated the fair value of its investment in Enable was below the book value and concluded the decline in value was not temporary due to the severity of the decline and recent rapid deterioration, as well as the near term future outlook, of the midstream oil and gas industry. Accordingly, OGE Energy recorded a $780.0 million impairment on its investment in Enable in March 2020. Further discussion can be found in Notes 5 and 7 within "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
During the year ended December 31, 2020, Enable recorded goodwill, long-lived asset and equity method investment impairments and a loss on retirement that impacted OGE Energy's equity in earnings of unconsolidated affiliates, as adjusted for basis differences. Further discussion of these impacts can be found in "Results of Operations - OGE Holdings (Natural Gas Midstream Operations)."
February 2021 Extreme Cold Weather Event
In February 2021, OG&E's service territory experienced an unprecedented, prolonged, cold spell that resulted in record winter peak demand for electricity and extreme natural gas and purchased power prices. Estimates of the total regulatory asset for OG&E's fuel and purchased power costs that will be recorded are still under development but are expected to be in the range of $800.0 million to $1.0 billion. On February 24, 2021, OG&E submitted an application to the OCC requesting an intra-year fuel clause increase to be effective April 1, 2021, as well as requesting regulatory asset treatment at OG&E's weighted average cost of capital for the remaining fuel and purchased power costs associated with the unprecedented weather event. Further discussion of the anticipated financial impact can be found in "2021 Outlook" and "Short-term Debt and Credit Facilities" below and Note 16 within "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
OG&E's Regulatory Matters
Completed regulatory matters affecting current period results are discussed in Note 16 within "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
Summary of OGE Energy 2020 Operating Results Compared to 2019
OGE Energy's net loss was $173.7 million, or $0.87 per diluted share, in 2020 as compared to net income of $433.6 million, or $2.16 per diluted share, in 2019. The decrease in net income of $607.3 million, or $3.03 per diluted share, in 2020 as compared to 2019 is further discussed below.
•A net loss at OGE Holdings of $515.0 million, or $2.58 per diluted share of OGE Energy's common stock, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to net income of $81.4 million, or $0.41 per diluted share of OGE Energy's common stock, during the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to a decrease in equity in earnings of Enable related to the impairment of OGE Energy's investment in Enable recorded in March 2020, partially offset by an income tax benefit related to the impairment charge and lower other expense. The decrease in equity in earnings of Enable was also impacted by OGE Energy's share of Enable's SESH equity method investment impairment recorded in September 2020, as adjusted for basis differences, and decreased net income from Enable's gathering and processing business resulting from lower natural gas gathered and processed volumes and lower average realized NGL and natural gas sales prices.
•A decrease in net income at OG&E of $10.8 million, or $0.04 per diluted share of OGE Energy's common stock, was primarily due to higher depreciation and amortization expense due to additional assets being placed into service, gross margin reductions from milder weather and COVID-19 impacts, higher income tax expense and higher interest expense driven by increased long-term debt outstanding. These decreases to net income were partially offset by increases to gross margin driven by recovery of additional assets placed into service through the expiration of the cogeneration credit rider and lower other operation and maintenance expense.
•A decrease in net income of other operations (holding company) of $0.1 million was primarily due to lower income tax benefit, partially offset by lower interest expense and higher other income.
A more detailed discussion regarding the financial performance for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to December 31, 2019 can be found under "Results of Operations" below. A discussion of the financial performance for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to December 31, 2018 for OGE Energy and OG&E can be found within "Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" of OGE Energy's 2019 Form 10-K and OG&E's 2019 Form 10-K, respectively.
2021 Outlook
Key assumptions for 2021 include:
OG&E
Before consideration of the February 2021 storm event as described below, OG&E is projected to earn approximately $352 million to $373 million, or $1.76 to $1.86 per average diluted share, in 2021 and is based on the following assumptions:
•normal weather patterns are experienced for the year;
•gross margin on revenues of approximately $1.553 billion to $1.569 billion, based on total retail load growth of 2.4 percent;
•operating expenses of approximately $991 million to $997 million, with operation and maintenance expenses comprising approximately 47.5 percent of the total;
•net interest expense of approximately $157 million to $159 million which assumes a $2.2 million allowance for borrowed funds used during construction reduction to interest expense;
•other income of approximately flat including approximately $4.8 million of allowance for equity funds used during construction; and
•an effective tax rate of approximately 11.3 percent.
OG&E has significant seasonality in its earnings. OG&E typically shows minimal earnings in the first and fourth quarters with a majority of its earnings in the third quarter due to the seasonal nature of air conditioning demand.
In February 2021, the OG&E service territory experienced an unprecedented, prolonged, cold spell that resulted in record winter peak demand for electricity and extreme natural gas and purchased power prices. In 2021, OG&E expects increased retail margins of approximately three to four cents per average diluted share related to the increased demand for electricity associated with the February cold spell.
OG&E's natural gas costs for the month of February 2021 exceeded the total cost for all of 2020. Fuel and purchased power costs are recovered through OG&E's Oklahoma and Arkansas fuel adjustment clauses. Estimates of the total regulatory asset for fuel and purchased power costs that will be recorded are still under development but are expected to be in the range of $800.0 million to $1.0 billion. OGE Energy has secured a commitment for $1.0 billion in additional short-term financing to provide additional liquidity to help cover these increased fuel and purchased power costs. In 2021, OG&E expects to incur approximately three to four cents per share related to incremental financing costs.
For approximately 58,000 guaranteed flat bill customers, representing approximately three percent of load, OG&E may be unable to seek recovery for the incremental fuel and purchased power costs that are included in customers' guaranteed flat bill agreements. In 2021, OG&E may incur approximately ten cents per average diluted share of potentially unrecoverable fuel and purchased power costs related to guaranteed flat bill agreements.
The potential impacts associated with the February 2021 cold spell are not reflected in OG&E's 2021 earnings guidance range of $1.76 to $1.86 per average diluted share.
OGE Holdings
Enable did not issue a 2021 earnings outlook due to the announced merger between Enable and Energy Transfer. While OGE Energy is not issuing earnings guidance for its ownership interest in Enable for 2021, it does expect to receive approximately $60 million to $73 million in cash distributions from its midstream investments in 2021.
Consolidated OGE Energy
OGE Energy is not issuing a 2021 consolidated earnings guidance due to Enable not issuing an earnings outlook; other consolidated assumptions include:
•approximately 200 million average diluted shares outstanding; and
•breakeven results projected at the holding company.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
OGE Energy
"Ongoing earnings" and "ongoing earnings per average diluted share" are defined by OGE Energy as GAAP Net Income (Loss) and GAAP Earnings (Loss) per Average Diluted Share adjusted to exclude certain non-cash charges and the associated tax impacts. These financial measures excluded a pre-tax non-cash charge of $780.0 million, or $3.90 per average diluted share, associated with the impairment of OGE Energy's investment in Enable, which OGE Energy's management considers an unusual and infrequent event. Management believes that ongoing earnings and ongoing earnings per average diluted share provide a more meaningful comparison of earnings results and are more representative of OGE Energy's fundamental core earnings power. OGE Energy's management uses ongoing earnings and ongoing earnings per average diluted share internally for financial planning and analysis, for reporting of results to the Board of Directors and when communicating its earnings outlook to analysts and investors.
The following table presents reconciliations of ongoing earnings and ongoing earnings per average diluted share for the year ended December 31, 2020.
(A) Does not include a $16.9 million pre-tax charge recorded during 2020 for OGE Energy's share of Enable's goodwill, long-lived asset and equity method investment impairments and loss on retirements, as adjusted for basis differences.
(B) Tax effect and tax effect per share are calculated utilizing OGE Holdings' statutory tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020.
OG&E
Gross margin is defined by OG&E as operating revenues less cost of sales. Cost of sales, as reflected on the income statement, includes fuel, purchased power and certain transmission expenses. Gross margin is a non-GAAP financial measure because it excludes depreciation and amortization and other operation and maintenance expenses. Expenses for fuel and purchased power are recovered through fuel adjustment clauses, and as a result, changes in these expenses are offset in operating revenues with no impact on net income. OG&E believes gross margin provides a more meaningful basis for evaluating its operations across periods than operating revenues because gross margin excludes the revenue effect of fluctuations in these expenses. Gross margin is used internally to measure performance against budget and in reports for management and the Board of Directors. OG&E's definition of gross margin may be different from similar terms used by other companies. Further, gross margin is not intended to replace operating revenues as determined in accordance with GAAP as an indicator of operating performance. For a reconciliation of gross margin to revenue, which is the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, see "OG&E (Electric Utility) Results of Operations" below.
The following table presents a reconciliation of gross margin to revenue included in the 2021 Outlook.
(A) Based on the midpoint of OG&E earnings guidance for 2021.
Enable
Gross margin is defined by Enable as total revenues minus costs of natural gas and NGLs, excluding depreciation and amortization. Total revenues consist of the fees that Enable charges its customers and the sales price of natural gas and NGLs that Enable sells. The cost of natural gas and NGLs consists of the purchase price of natural gas and NGLs that Enable purchases. Enable deducts the cost of natural gas and NGLs from total revenues to arrive at a measure of the core profitability of their mix of fee-based and commodity-based customer arrangements. Gross margin allows for meaningful comparison of the operating results between Enable's fee-based revenues and Enable's commodity-based contracts which involve the purchase or sale of natural gas, NGLs and/or crude oil. In addition, OGE Energy believes gross margin allows for a meaningful comparison of the results of Enable's commodity-based activities across different commodity price environments because it measures the spread between the product sales price and cost of products sold. Enable's definition of gross margin may be different from similar terms used by other companies. Further, gross margin is not intended to replace operating revenues as determined in accordance with GAAP as an indicator of operating performance. For a reconciliation of gross margin to revenue, which is the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, see "OGE Holdings (Natural Gas Midstream Operations) Results of Operations" below.
Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis presents factors that affected the Registrants' results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 and the Registrants' financial positions at December 31, 2020 and 2019. The following information should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and notes thereto. Known trends and contingencies of a material nature are discussed to the extent considered relevant.
Results by Business Segment
(A)In March 2020, OGE Energy recorded a $780.0 million impairment on its investment in Enable, as further discussed in Notes 5 and 7 within "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
(B)Other operations primarily includes the operations of the holding company and consolidating eliminations.
The following discussion of results of operations by business segment includes intercompany transactions that are eliminated in the OGE Energy consolidated financial statements.
OG&E (Electric Utility)
(A)Degree days are calculated as follows: The high and low degrees of a particular day are added together and then averaged. If the calculated average is above 65 degrees, then the difference between the calculated average and 65 is expressed as cooling degree days, with each degree of difference equaling one cooling degree day. If the calculated average is below 65 degrees, then the difference between the calculated average and 65 is expressed as heating degree days, with each degree of difference equaling one heating degree day. The daily calculations are then totaled for the particular reporting period.
OG&E's net income decreased $10.8 million, or 3.1 percent, in 2020 as compared to 2019. The following section discusses the primary drivers for the decrease in net income in 2020 as compared to 2019.
Operating revenues decreased $109.3 million, or 4.9 percent, in 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily due to reduced cost of sales which are recovered from customers.
Gross margin increased $33.0 million, or 2.3 percent, primarily driven by the below factors.
(A) Increased primarily due to the recovery of additional assets placed into service through the expiration of the cogeneration credit rider in the second half of 2019.
(B) Decreased primarily due to a 10.6 percent decrease in cooling degree days and a 12.4 percent decrease in heating degree days.
(C)Gross margin was impacted by COVID-19, particularly as seen in the negative impacts within industrial and oilfield sales and non-residential demand and related revenues.
Cost of sales for OG&E consists of fuel used in electric generation, purchased power and transmission related charges. The actual cost of fuel used in electric generation and certain purchased power costs are passed through to OG&E's customers through fuel adjustment clauses. The fuel adjustment clauses are subject to periodic review by the OCC and the APSC. OG&E's cost of sales decreased $142.3 million, or 18.1 percent, primarily driven by the below factors.
(A)Decreased primarily due to lower fuel costs related to the generating assets utilized during 2020.
(B)Decreased primarily due to lower market prices as a result of decreased fuel costs for generators along with decreased MWhs purchased of 7.5 percent in 2020.
(C)Decreased due to the expiration of cogeneration contracts in 2019.
Other operation and maintenance expense decreased $28.1 million, or 5.7 percent, primarily driven by the below factors.
(A)Additional other operation and maintenance expenses related to the purchase of the River Valley plant are primarily recovered through a rider mechanism, as approved by the OCC in 2019.
(B)OG&E has been focused on reducing other operation and maintenance activities in light of COVID-19. Further, certain incremental expenses incurred by OG&E related to its COVID-19 response have been deferred and are included in the regulatory assets and liabilities table in Note 1 within "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
Depreciation and amortization expense increased $36.3 million, or 10.2 percent, primarily due to additional assets being placed into service and depreciation expense for the Sooner Dry Scrubbers no longer being deferred to a regulatory asset.
Taxes other than income increased $7.7 million, or 8.6 percent, primarily due to increased ad valorem taxes.
Interest on long-term debt increased $14.5 million, or 10.5 percent, primarily due to increased long-term debt outstanding and interest expense for the Sooner Dry Scrubbers no longer being deferred to a regulatory asset.
Income tax expense increased $14.6 million, or 72.6 percent, primarily due to reduced tax credit generation, reduced amortization of net unfunded deferred taxes and higher pretax income.
OGE Holdings (Natural Gas Midstream Operations)
(A) In March 2020, OGE Energy recorded a $780.0 million impairment on its investment in Enable, as further discussed in Notes 5 and 7 within "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
Reconciliation of Equity in Earnings (Losses) of Unconsolidated Affiliates
See Note 5 within "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" for the reconciliation of Enable's net income to OGE Energy's equity in earnings (losses) of unconsolidated affiliates and the reconciliation of the difference between OGE Energy's investment in Enable and its underlying equity in the net assets of Enable (basis difference).
Enable Results of Operations and Operating Data
The following section presents summarized financial information of Enable for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 and related discussion of the primary drivers for the changes in 2020 as compared to 2019.
(A)Includes volumes under third-party processing arrangements.
(B)Excludes condensate. NGLs sold includes volumes of NGLs withdrawn from inventory or purchased for system balancing purposes.
OGE Holdings' net loss of $515.0 million compared to net income of $81.4 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively, was primarily due to the impairment recorded in March 2020 on OGE Energy's investment in Enable, which is discussed in more detail in Notes 5 and 7 within "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data." OGE Holdings' net loss in 2020 was also impacted by a decrease in Enable's net income of $308.0 million in 2020 as compared to 2019.
The following table presents summarized information regarding Enable's income statement changes for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019, and the corresponding impact those changes had on OGE Energy's equity in earnings of Enable. See Note 5 within "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" for further discussion of OGE Energy's equity investment in Enable. The decrease in Enable's net income was primarily due to the below factors.
(A)Included in Enable's impairments of property, plant and equipment and goodwill is a $12.0 million goodwill impairment and a $16.0 million impairment for certain long-lived assets in their gathering and processing business segment. These certain long-lived assets are jointly-owned by Enable, which reduces the impairment's impact by 50 percent on OGE Energy's equity in earnings. OGE Energy recorded a $4.4 million pre-tax charge for its share of Enable's goodwill and long-lived asset impairments, as adjusted for basis differences.
(B)Included in Enable's operation and maintenance and general and administrative expenses is a $20.0 million loss on retirement of an Ark-La-Tex gathering system in their gathering and processing business segment. OGE Energy recorded a $1.0 million pre-tax charge for its share of Enable's loss on retirement, as adjusted for basis differences.
(C)Included Enable's equity in earnings (losses) of equity method affiliate is a $225.0 million impairment that Enable recorded on its SESH equity method investment. Enable estimated the fair value of this equity method investment was below the
carrying value at September 30, 2020 and concluded the decline in value was other than temporary due to the expiration of a transportation contract and the current status of renewal negotiations. OGE Energy recorded a $11.5 million pre-tax charge for its share of Enable's equity method investment impairment, as adjusted for basis differences.
Enable's gathering and processing business segment reported a decrease of $133.0 million in operating income. The following table presents summarized information regarding Enable's gathering and processing business segment income statement changes for 2020 as compared to 2019, and the corresponding impact those changes had on OGE Energy's equity in earnings of Enable. The decrease in Enable's gathering and processing business segment operating income was primarily due to the below factors.
(A) Included in Enable's impairments of property, plant and equipment and goodwill is a $12.0 million goodwill impairment and a $16.0 million impairment for certain long-lived assets in their gathering and processing business segment. These certain long-lived assets are jointly-owned by Enable, which reduces the impairment's impact by 50 percent on OGE Energy's equity in earnings. OGE Energy recorded a $4.4 million pre-tax charge for its share of Enable's goodwill and long-lived asset impairments, as adjusted for basis differences.
(B) Included in Enable's operation and maintenance and general and administrative expenses is a $20.0 million loss on retirement of an Ark-La-Tex gathering system in their gathering and processing business segment. OGE Energy recorded a $1.0 million pre-tax charge for its share of Enable's loss on retirement, as adjusted for basis differences.
Gathering and processing gross margin decreased primarily due to the following:
•a decrease in natural gas gathering fees due to lower gathered volumes in the Anadarko and Arkoma Basins, inclusive of producer shut-ins in the Anadarko Basin that occurred during a portion of 2020, lower shortfall fees associated with the expiration of certain minimum volume commitments contracts in the Ark-La-Tex and Arkoma Basins and lower revenue associated with a 2019 amendment of certain minimum volume commitment contracts in the Arkoma Basin;
•a decrease in revenues from natural gas sales less the cost of natural gas due to lower average sales prices and lower sales volumes;
•a decrease in revenues from NGL sales less the cost of NGLs due to lower volumes and lower average market prices for NGL products;
•a decrease in processing service fees due to lower processed volumes under fee-based arrangements, partially offset by higher consideration received from percent-of-proceeds, percent-of-liquids and keep-whole processing arrangements due to an increase in retained volumes at lower average market prices as well as an increase in the recognition of certain annual minimum processing fees;
•a decrease in realized gains on natural gas, condensate and NGL derivatives;
•a decrease in changes in the fair value of natural gas, condensate and NGL derivatives;
•a decrease in intercompany management fees; and
•crude oil, condensate and produced water gathering revenues remained flat primarily due to a decrease in gathered crude oil volumes in the Williston Basin, offset by customer project reimbursements.
Enable's transportation and storage business segment reported an increase of $29.0 million in operating income. The following table presents summarized information regarding Enable's transportation and storage business segment income statement changes for 2020 as compared to 2019, and the corresponding impact those changes had on OGE Energy's equity in earnings of Enable. The increase in Enable's transportation and storage business segment operating income was primarily due to the below factors.
Transportation and storage gross margin increased primarily due to the following:
•an increase in system management activities; and
•an increase in firm transportation and storage services due to an increase in recognized rates and the recognition of certain previously reserved revenue upon the settlement of the MRT rate case, partially offset by lower interstate contracted capacity and lower rates on certain contracts for intrastate service with power generators; partially offset by
•a decrease in volume-dependent transportation revenues due to lower off-system intrastate transportation rates and lower transported volumes due to decreased production activity in the Anadarko Basin, partially offset by the recognition of revenue upon the settlement of the MRT rate case;
•a decrease in natural gas storage inventory due to write-downs to lower of cost or net realizable value of natural gas storage inventories;
•a decrease in realized gain on natural gas derivatives; and
•a decrease in revenues from NGL sales less the cost of NGLs due to a decrease in average NGL prices and lower volumes.
OGE Holdings' income tax benefit was $158.0 million for 2020, as compared to income tax expense of $20.7 million in 2019. The change is primarily due to a tax benefit of $190.4 million related to the impairment recorded in March 2020 on OGE Energy's investment in Enable, partially offset by state deferred tax adjustments related to OGE Energy's investment in Enable.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangement
As of December 31, 2020, OG&E has a noncancellable operating lease with a purchase option, covering 780 rotary gondola railcars to transport coal from Wyoming to OG&E's coal-fired generation units. Rental payments are charged to fuel expense and are recovered through OG&E's fuel adjustment clauses. At the end of the lease term, which is February 1, 2024, OG&E has the option to either purchase the railcars at a stipulated fair market value or renew the lease. If OG&E chooses not to purchase the railcars or renew the lease agreement and the actual fair value of the railcars is less than the stipulated fair market value, OG&E would be responsible for the difference in those values up to a maximum of $6.8 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flows
OGE Energy
(A)Increased primarily due to a decrease in payments for purchased power at OG&E.
(B)Increased primarily due to increased reliability projects, partially offset by environmental projects at OG&E that were completed and placed into service in 2019 as well as fewer OG&E plant outages in 2020.
(C)Decreased primarily due to the payment of long-term debt by OG&E in January 2019, partially offset by a decrease in borrowings of short-term debt.
Working Capital
Working capital is defined as the difference in current assets and current liabilities. OGE Energy's working capital requirements are driven generally by changes in accounts receivable, accounts payable, commodity prices, credit extended to
and the timing of collections from OG&E's customers, the level and timing of spending for maintenance and expansion activity, inventory levels and fuel recoveries. The following discussion addresses changes in OGE Energy's working capital balances at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019.
Fuel Inventories decreased $9.8 million, or 21.2 percent, primarily due to decreased coal inventory.
Materials and Supplies increased $25.6 million, or 28.3 percent, primarily due to increased inventory acquired for upcoming projects.
Fuel Clause Under Recoveries decreased $39.5 million and Fuel Clause Over Recoveries increased $23.8 million, primarily due to increased collections from OG&E customers and lower fuel costs.
Other Current Assets increased $16.8 million, or 68.9 percent, primarily due to an increase in under-recovered riders and SPP transmission formula rate.
Short-term Debt decreased $17.0 million, or 15.2 percent, primarily due to funds for operational needs. OGE Energy borrows on a short-term basis, as necessary, by the issuance of commercial paper and borrowings under its revolving credit agreements and term credit agreement.
Accounts Payable increased $56.6 million, or 29.0 percent, primarily due to accruals related to storm restoration activity in the fourth quarter and timing of vendor payments.
Accrued Taxes increased $13.8 million, or 32.9 percent, primarily due to the deferment of the employer portion of FICA payroll taxes as allowed by the CARES Act and an increase in tax accruals related to ad valorem and income taxes.
Accrued Compensation decreased $9.5 million, or 23.4 percent, primarily due to lower accruals for incentive compensation in 2020 and labor accrued but not paid due to timing of pay periods.
Other Current Liabilities decreased $31.5 million, or 48.3 percent, primarily due to changes in amounts owed to OG&E customers which includes an $18.9 million reduction in SPP reserves related to the transmission formula rate and decreased over-recovered riders.
2020 Capital Requirements, Sources of Financing and Financing Activities
OGE Energy's total capital requirements, consisting of capital expenditures and maturities of long-term debt, were $650.6 million, and contractual obligations, net of recoveries through fuel adjustment clauses, were $0.9 million, resulting in total net capital requirements and contractual obligations of $651.5 million in 2020. This compares to net capital requirements of $885.6 million and net contractual obligations of $12.0 million totaling $897.6 million in 2019.
In 2020, OGE Energy's primary sources of capital were cash generated from operations, proceeds from the issuance of long- and short-term debt and distributions from Enable. Changes in working capital reflect the seasonal nature of OGE Energy's business, the revenue lag between billing and collection from customers and fuel inventories. See "Working Capital" for a discussion of significant changes in net working capital requirements as it pertains to operating cash flow and liquidity.
The Dodd-Frank Act
Derivative instruments have been used at times in managing OG&E's commodity price exposure. The Dodd-Frank Act, among other things, provides for regulation by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission of certain commodity-related contracts. Although OG&E qualifies for an end-user exception from mandatory clearing of commodity-related swaps, these regulations could affect the ability of OG&E to participate in these markets and could add additional regulatory oversight over its contracting activities.
Future Capital Requirements
OGE Energy's primary needs for capital are related to acquiring or constructing new facilities and replacing or expanding existing facilities at OG&E. Other working capital requirements are expected to be primarily related to maturing debt, operating lease obligations, fuel clause under and over recoveries and other general corporate purposes. OGE Energy generally meets its cash needs through a combination of cash generated from operations, short-term borrowings (through a combination of bank borrowings and commercial paper) and permanent financings.
Capital Expenditures
The following table presents OGE Energy's estimates of capital expenditures for the years 2021 through 2025. These capital expenditures represent the base maintenance capital expenditures (i.e., capital expenditures to maintain and operate OGE Energy's businesses) plus capital expenditures for known and committed projects. Estimated capital expenditures for Enable are not included.
Additional capital expenditures beyond those identified in the table above, including additional incremental growth opportunities in electric transmission assets, will be evaluated based upon their impact upon achieving OGE Energy's financial objectives. The continued progression of, and global response to, the COVID-19 outbreak increases the risk of delays in construction activities and equipment deliveries related to OGE Energy's capital projects, including potential delays in obtaining permits from government agencies, resulting in potential deferral of capital expenditures.
Contractual Obligations
The following table presents OGE Energy's contractual obligations at December 31, 2020. See the statements of capitalization and Notes 4 and 15 within "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" for additional information.
(A)Includes expected recoveries of costs incurred for OG&E's railcar operating lease obligations, OG&E's minimum fuel purchase commitments and OG&E's expected wind purchase commitments.
The actual cost of fuel used in electric generation (which includes the operating lease obligations for OG&E's railcar leases shown above) and certain purchased power costs are passed on to OG&E's customers through fuel adjustment clauses. Accordingly, while the cost of fuel related to operating leases and the vast majority of minimum fuel purchase commitments of OG&E noted above may increase capital requirements, such costs are recoverable through fuel adjustment clauses and have little, if any, impact on net capital requirements and future contractual obligations. The fuel adjustment clauses are subject to periodic review by the OCC and the APSC.
Pension and Postretirement Benefit Plans
At December 31, 2020, 43.2 percent of the Pension Plan investments were in listed common stocks with the balance primarily invested in corporate fixed income, other securities and U.S. Treasury notes and bonds as presented in Note 13 within "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data." During 2020, actual returns on the Pension Plan were $77.0 million, compared to expected return on plan assets of $37.6 million. During the same time, corporate bond yields, which are used in determining the discount rate for future pension obligations, decreased. Funding levels are dependent on returns on plan assets and future discount rates. OGE Energy made a $20.0 million contribution to its Pension Plan in both 2020 and 2019. In January 2021, OGE Energy made a $40.0 million contribution to its Pension Plan and has not determined whether it will need to make any additional contributions to the Pension Plan in 2021. OGE Energy could be required to make additional contributions if the value of its pension trust and postretirement benefit plan trust assets are adversely impacted by a major market disruption in the future.
The following table presents the status of OGE Energy's Pension Plan, the Restoration of Retirement Income Plan and the postretirement benefit plans at December 31, 2020 and 2019. These amounts have been recorded in Accrued Benefit Obligations with the offset in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss (except OG&E's portion, which is recorded as a regulatory asset as discussed in Note 1 within "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data") in the balance sheets. The amounts in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss and those recorded as a regulatory asset represent a net periodic benefit cost to be recognized in the statements of income in future periods.
Common Stock Dividends
OGE Energy's dividend policy is reviewed by the Board of Directors at least annually and is based on numerous factors, including management's estimation of the long-term earnings power of its businesses. At OGE Energy's September 2020 board meeting, the Board of Directors approved management's recommendation of a four percent increase in the quarterly dividend rate to $0.4025 per share from $0.3875 per share effective in October 2020.
Financing Activities and Future Sources of Financing
Management expects that cash generated from operations, proceeds from the issuance of long- and short-term debt, proceeds from the sales of common stock to the public through OGE Energy's Automatic Dividend Reinvestment and Stock Purchase Plan or other offerings and distributions from Enable will be adequate over the next three years to meet anticipated cash needs and to fund future growth opportunities. OGE Energy utilizes short-term borrowings (through a combination of bank borrowings and commercial paper) to satisfy temporary working capital needs and as an interim source of financing capital expenditures until permanent financing is arranged. As indicated above, as a precautionary measure in order to increase OGE Energy's cash position and preserve financial flexibility in light of uncertainty resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, OGE Energy entered into a one-year $75.0 million term loan agreement in April 2020, which was repaid in September 2020. Further, OG&E issued $300.0 million in senior notes in April 2020. The disruption in the capital markets and the commercial paper markets caused by the COVID-19 outbreak could make additional financing more challenging, and there can be no assurance that OGE Energy will be able to obtain such financing on commercially reasonable terms or at all. In February 2021, OGE Energy entered into a $1.0 billion commitment letter for an unsecured term loan facility to provide additional liquidity to help cover the increased fuel and purchased power costs incurred by OG&E during the unprecedented cold weather event experienced in OG&E's service territory.
Short-Term Debt and Credit Facilities
OGE Energy borrows on a short-term basis, as necessary, by issuance of commercial paper and borrowings under its revolving credit agreements and term credit agreements.
OGE Energy has unsecured five-year revolving credit facilities totaling $900.0 million ($450.0 million for OGE Energy and $450.0 million for OG&E), which can also be used as letter of credit facilities. The following table presents information about OGE Energy's revolving credit agreements as of December 31, 2020.
The following table presents information about OGE Energy's total short-term debt activity for the year ended December 31, 2020.
See Note 12 within "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" for further discussion of the Registrants' short-term debt activity. Such activity includes: (i) during 2020, OGE Energy entered into and subsequently repaid a $75.0 million term loan agreement in response to COVID-19; (ii) in January 2021, the Registrants extended their respective revolving credit facilities' term for an additional year; and (iii) in January 2021, the Registrants entered into amendments for their respective revolving credit facilities which provides the option of extending their respective commitments for up to two additional one-year periods as well as addressed the phase out of LIBOR and the establishment of an alternative rate of interest.
On February 24, 2021, OGE Energy entered into a commitment letter with Wells Fargo and certain of its affiliates whereby Wells Fargo committed to provide an unsecured term loan facility in the aggregate principal amount of $1.0 billion. While borrowing availability still exists within the Registrants' credit facilities, the $1.0 billion commitment in additional short-term financing is expected to provide additional liquidity to help cover the increased fuel and purchased power costs incurred by OG&E during the February 2021 unprecedented cold weather event. For further discussion, see "Item 9B. Other Information." OGE Energy expects to have additional short-term debt outstanding in 2021 which will result in additional interest expense.
OG&E must obtain regulatory approval from the FERC in order to borrow on a short-term basis. OG&E has the necessary regulatory approvals to incur up to $800.0 million in short-term borrowings at any one time for a two-year period beginning January 1, 2021 and ending December 31, 2022.
Issuance of Long-Term Debt
In April 2020, OG&E issued $300.0 million of 3.25 percent senior notes due April 1, 2030. The proceeds from the issuance were added to OG&E's general funds to be used for general corporate purposes, including to fund ongoing capital expenditures and working capital.
Security Ratings
Access to reasonably priced capital is dependent in part on credit and security ratings. Generally, lower ratings lead to higher financing costs. Pricing grids associated with OGE Energy's credit facilities could cause annual fees and borrowing rates to increase if an adverse rating impact occurs. The impact of any future downgrade could include an increase in the costs of OGE Energy's short-term borrowings, but a reduction in OGE Energy's credit ratings would not result in any defaults or
accelerations. Any future downgrade could also lead to higher long-term borrowing costs and, if below investment grade, would require OGE Energy to post collateral or letters of credit.
A security rating is not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold securities. Such rating may be subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the credit rating agency, and each rating should be evaluated independently of any other rating.
Future financing requirements may be dependent, to varying degrees, upon numerous factors such as general economic conditions, abnormal weather, load growth, commodity prices, acquisitions of other businesses and/or development of projects, actions by rating agencies, inflation, changes in environmental laws or regulations, rate increases or decreases allowed by regulatory agencies, new legislation and market entry of competing electric power generators.
Common Stock
OGE Energy does not expect to issue any common stock in 2021 from its Automatic Dividend Reinvestment and Stock Purchase Plan. See Note 10 within "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" for a discussion of OGE Energy's common stock activity.
Distributions by Enable
Pursuant to the Enable Limited Partnership Agreement, Enable made distributions of $91.7 million, $144.0 million and $141.2 million to OGE Energy during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. As required by Enable's Limited Partnership Agreement and General Partner Agreement, respectively, the last permitted distribution date is 60 days after the close of each quarter, and the distribution deadline is five days following distributions by Enable. On April 1, 2020, Enable announced a 50 percent reduction to its quarterly distribution in order to strengthen its balance sheet and increase its annualized retained cash flow. OGE Energy does not expect any changes to its operations or foresee the need to access the equity markets as a result of Enable's action.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The financial statements and notes thereto contain information that is pertinent to Management's Discussion and Analysis. In preparing the financial statements, management is required to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and contingent liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Changes to these assumptions and estimates could have a material effect on the financial statements. The Registrants believe they have taken reasonable positions where assumptions and estimates are used in order to minimize the negative financial impact to the Registrants that could result if actual results vary from the assumptions and estimates.
In management's opinion, the areas where the most significant judgment is exercised for the Registrants include the determination of Pension Plan assumptions, income taxes, contingency reserves, asset retirement obligations, regulatory assets and liabilities, unbilled revenues and the allowance for uncollectible accounts receivable. For OGE Energy, significant judgment is also exercised in the determination of any impairment of equity method investments. The selection, application and disclosure of the following critical accounting estimates have been discussed with the Audit Committee of OGE Energy's Board of Directors. The Registrants discuss their significant accounting policies, including those that do not require management to make difficult, subjective or complex judgments or estimates, in Note 1 within "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
Pension and Postretirement Benefit Plans
OGE Energy has a Pension Plan that covers a significant amount of its employees, including OG&E's employees, hired before December 1, 2009. Effective December 1, 2009, OGE Energy's Pension Plan is no longer being offered to employees hired on or after December 1, 2009. OGE Energy also has defined benefit postretirement plans that cover a significant amount of its employees, including OG&E's employees. Pension and other postretirement plan expenses and liabilities are determined on an actuarial basis and are affected by the market value of plan assets, estimates of the expected return on plan assets, assumed discount rates and the level of funding. Actual changes in the fair market value of plan assets and differences between the actual return on plan assets and the expected return on plan assets could have a material effect on the amount of pension expense ultimately recognized. The Pension Plan rate assumptions are shown in Note 13 within "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data." The assumed return on plan assets is based on management's expectation of the long-term return on the plan assets portfolio. The discount rate used to compute the present value of plan liabilities is based generally on rates of high-grade corporate bonds with maturities similar to the average period over which benefits will be
paid. Funding levels are dependent on returns on plan assets and future discount rates. Higher returns on plan assets and an increase in discount rates will reduce funding requirements to the Pension Plan.
The following table presents the sensitivity of the Pension Plan funded status to these variables.
Income Taxes
The Registrants use the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, a deferred tax asset or liability is recognized for the estimated future tax effects attributable to temporary differences between the financial statement basis and the tax basis of assets and liabilities as well as tax credit carry forwards and net operating loss carry forwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in the period of the change.
The application of income tax law is complex. Laws and regulations in this area are voluminous and often ambiguous. Interpretations and guidance surrounding income tax laws and regulations change over time. Accordingly, it is necessary to make judgments regarding income tax exposure. As a result, changes in these judgments can materially affect amounts the Registrants recognized in their financial statements. Tax positions taken by the Registrants on their income tax returns that are recognized in the financial statements must satisfy a more likely than not recognition threshold, assuming that the position will be examined by taxing authorities with full knowledge of all relevant information.
Commitments and Contingencies
In the normal course of business, the Registrants are confronted with issues or events that may result in a contingent liability. These generally relate to lawsuits or claims made by third parties, including governmental agencies. When appropriate, management consults with legal counsel and other experts to assess the claim. If, in management's opinion, the Registrants have incurred a probable loss as set forth by GAAP, an estimate is made of the loss, and the appropriate accounting entries are reflected in the financial statements.
Asset Retirement Obligations
OG&E has recorded asset retirement obligations that are being accreted over their respective lives ranging from five to 68 years. The inputs used in the valuation of asset retirement obligations include the assumed life of the asset placed into service, the average inflation rate, market risk premium, the credit-adjusted risk free interest rate and the timing of incurring costs related to the retirement of the asset.
Regulatory Assets and Liabilities
OG&E, as a regulated utility, is subject to accounting principles for certain types of rate-regulated activities, which provide that certain incurred costs that would otherwise be charged to expense can be deferred as regulatory assets, based on the expected recovery from customers in future rates. Likewise, certain actual or anticipated credits that would otherwise reduce expense can be deferred as regulatory liabilities, based on the expected flowback to customers in future rates. Management's expected recovery of deferred costs and flowback of deferred credits generally results from specific decisions by regulators granting such ratemaking treatment.
OG&E records certain incurred costs and obligations as regulatory assets or liabilities if, based on regulatory orders or other available evidence, it is probable that the costs or obligations will be included in amounts allowable for recovery or refund in future rates. Management continuously monitors the future recoverability of regulatory assets. When in management's judgement future recovery becomes impaired, the amount of the regulatory asset is adjusted, as appropriate.
Unbilled Revenues
OG&E recognizes revenue from electric sales when power is delivered to customers. OG&E measures its customers' metered usage and sends bills to its customers throughout each month. As a result, there is a significant amount of customers' electricity consumption that has not been billed at the end of each month. OG&E accrues an estimate of the revenues for electric sales delivered since the latest billings. Unbilled revenue is presented in Accrued Unbilled Revenues in the balance sheets and in Operating Revenues in the statements of income based on estimates of usage and prices during the period. At December 31, 2020, if the estimated usage or price used in the unbilled revenue calculation were to increase or decrease by one percent, this would cause a change in the unbilled revenues recognized of $0.5 million. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, Accrued Unbilled Revenues were $68.0 million and $64.7 million, respectively. The estimates that management uses in this calculation could vary from the actual amounts to be paid by customers.
Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts Receivable
Customer balances are generally written off if not collected within six months after the final billing date. The allowance for uncollectible accounts receivable for OG&E is generally calculated by multiplying the last six months of electric revenue by the provision rate, which is based on a 12-month historical average of actual balances written off and is adjusted for current conditions and supportable forecasts as necessary. To the extent the historical collection rates, when incorporating forecasted conditions, are not representative of future collections, there could be an effect on the amount of uncollectible expense recognized. Also, a portion of the uncollectible provision related to fuel within the Oklahoma jurisdiction is being recovered through the fuel adjustment clause. At December 31, 2020, if the provision rate were to increase or decrease by 10 percent, this would cause a change in the uncollectible expense recognized of $0.3 million. The allowance for uncollectible accounts receivable is a reduction to Accounts Receivable in the balance sheets and is included in Other Operation and Maintenance Expense in the statements of income. The allowance for uncollectible accounts receivable was $2.6 million and $1.5 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
OG&E adjusted its reserve on accounts receivable as of December 31, 2020 in light of COVID-19 pandemic impacts and deferred this credit reserve adjustment to a regulatory asset, as both the OCC and the APSC issued accounting orders allowing OG&E to seek recovery of incremental bad debt resulting from COVID-19, as further discussed in Note 16 within "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
Impairment of Equity Method Investments
Investments in unconsolidated affiliates accounted for under the equity method are assessed for impairment when there are indicators of a loss in value, such as a lack of sustained earnings capacity or a current fair value less than the investment's carrying amount. When it is determined that an indicated impairment is other than temporary, an impairment charge is recognized for the difference between the investment's carrying value and its estimated fair value.
When determining whether a decline in value is other than temporary, management considers factors such as the duration and extent of the decline, the investee's financial condition and near-term prospects, and management's ability and intention to retain the investment for a period that allows for recovery. When estimating an investment's fair value, quoted market prices are utilized, as available, and other rights and privileges that are a feature or attribute of the investment security are considered, as appropriate. Different assumptions could affect the timing and the amount of an impairment of an investment in any period.
Effective March 31, 2020, OGE Energy estimated the fair value of its investment in Enable was below the book value and concluded the decline in value was not temporary due to the severity of the decline and the recent rapid deterioration, as well as the near term future outlook, of the midstream oil and gas industry. Accordingly, OGE Energy recorded a $780.0 million impairment on its investment in Enable in March 2020, which is included in Equity in Earnings (Losses) of Unconsolidated Affiliates in OGE Energy's 2020 income statement. Further discussion can be found in Notes 5 and 7 within "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 within "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" for discussion of current accounting pronouncements that are applicable to the Registrants.
Commitments and Contingencies
In the normal course of business, the Registrants are confronted with issues or events that may result in a contingent liability. These generally relate to lawsuits or claims made by third parties, including governmental agencies. When appropriate, management consults with legal counsel and other experts to assess the claim. If, in management's opinion, the Registrants have incurred a probable loss as set forth by GAAP, an estimate is made of the loss, and the appropriate accounting entries are reflected in the financial statements. At the present time, based on available information, the Registrants believe that any reasonably possible losses in excess of accrued amounts arising out of pending or threatened lawsuits or claims would not be quantitatively material to their financial statements and would not have a material adverse effect on their financial position, results of operations or cash flows. See Notes 15 and 16 within "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" and "Item 3. Legal Proceedings" for further discussion of the Registrants' commitments and contingencies.
Environmental Laws and Regulations
The activities of OG&E are subject to numerous stringent and complex federal, state and local laws and regulations governing environmental protection. These laws and regulations can change, restrict or otherwise impact OG&E's business activities in many ways, including the handling or disposal of waste material, planning for future construction activities to avoid or mitigate harm to threatened or endangered species and requiring the installation and operation of emissions or pollution control equipment. Failure to comply with these laws and regulations could result in the assessment of administrative, civil and criminal penalties, the imposition of remedial requirements and the issuance of orders enjoining future operations. Management believes that all of the Registrants' operations are in substantial compliance with current federal, state and local environmental standards.
President Biden has taken a number of actions that affect environmental regulations adopted by the Trump administration, including issuance of an executive order that instructs the EPA and other executive agencies to review certain rules that affect OG&E. OG&E is monitoring these actions which are in the preliminary stages of being implemented. At this point in time, the impacts of these actions on the Registrants' results of operations, if any, cannot be determined with any certainty.
Environmental regulation can increase the cost of planning, design, initial installation and operation of OG&E's facilities. Management continues to evaluate its compliance with existing and proposed environmental legislation and regulations and implement appropriate environmental programs in a competitive market.
Air
Federal Clean Air Act Overview
OG&E's operations are subject to the Federal Clean Air Act as amended and comparable state laws and regulations. These laws and regulations regulate emissions of air pollutants from various industrial sources, including electric generating units and also impose various monitoring and reporting requirements. Such laws and regulations may require that OG&E obtain pre-approval for the construction or modification of certain projects or facilities expected to produce air emissions or result in the increase of existing air emissions, obtain and strictly comply with air permits containing various emissions and operational limitations or install emission control equipment. OG&E likely will be required to incur certain capital expenditures in the future for air pollution control equipment and technology in connection with obtaining and maintaining operating permits and approvals for air emissions.
Cross-State Air Pollution Rule
On September 7, 2016, the EPA finalized an update to the 2011 Cross-State Air Pollution Rule. The new rule applies to ozone-season NOX emissions from power plants in 22 eastern states (including Oklahoma). The rule utilizes a cap and trade program for NOX emissions and went into effect on May 1, 2017 in Oklahoma. The 2016 rule reduces the 2011 Cross-State Air Pollution Rule emissions cap for all of OG&E's coal and gas facilities (except the River Valley and Frontier facilities which were not owned by OG&E until 2019) by 47 percent combined. OG&E and numerous other parties filed petitions for judicial and administrative review of the 2016 rule. On September 13, 2019, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit issued an opinion that partially remanded the Cross-State Air Pollution Rule update and also deferred a decision on our challenges to the rule pending an EPA review and decision on a separate administrative petition that we filed. Subsequently, all of OG&E's judicial challenges were voluntarily dismissed, but the administrative petitions for reconsideration remain pending at the EPA. On October 30, 2020, the EPA published a proposed rule to revise the 2016 update rule and address the 2019 remand. The EPA did not propose any additional reductions in the emissions budget for Oklahoma based on a preliminary
determination that the state does not cause or contribute to nonattainment of the ambient air quality standards in the relevant downwind areas. OG&E subsequently filed comments to the proposal.
OG&E continues to monitor these processes and their possible impact on its operations but, at this time, cannot determine with any certainty whether they will cause a material impact to OG&E's financial results. OG&E is in compliance with the 2016 rule requirements which remain in effect. OG&E does not anticipate, at this time, additional capital expenditures for compliance with the 2016 rule.
Hazardous Air Pollutants Emission Standards
On February 16, 2012, the EPA published the final MATS rule regulating the emissions of certain hazardous air pollutants from electric generating units. OG&E complied with the MATS rule by the April 16, 2016 deadline that applied to OG&E's coal units. On April 16, 2020, the EPA released a final rule which reconsidered certain elements of the 2012 rule in response to litigation in the D.C. Circuit Court. In the final rule, the EPA concluded that it is not "appropriate and necessary" to regulate MATS-related emissions from coal-fired units. Nonetheless, the EPA retained the emissions limits that were established in the 2012 rule, which remains in effect today. Petitions for judicial review of the final May 2020 rule have been filed at the D.C. Circuit Court.
National Ambient Air Quality Standards
The EPA is required to set NAAQS for certain pollutants considered to be harmful to public health or the environment. The Clean Air Act requires the EPA to review each NAAQS every five years. As a result of these reviews, the EPA periodically has taken action to adopt more stringent NAAQS for those pollutants. If any areas of Oklahoma were to be designated as not attaining the NAAQS for a particular pollutant, OG&E could be required to install additional emission controls on its facilities to help the state achieve attainment with the NAAQS. As of December 31, 2020, no areas of Oklahoma had been designated as non-attainment for pollutants that are likely to affect OG&E's operations.
The EPA proposed to designate part of Muskogee County, in which OG&E's Muskogee Power Plant is located, as non-attainment for the 2010 SO2 NAAQS on March 1, 2016, even though nearby monitors indicated compliance with the NAAQS. The proposed designation was based on modeling that did not reflect the conversion of two of the coal units at Muskogee to natural gas. The State of Oklahoma's monitoring from 2017-2019 indicated that ambient SO2 emissions in the area are well within the NAAQS. On December 21, 2020, the EPA published in the Federal Register its final designation of the relevant area in Muskogee County as attainment/unclassifiable.
Climate Change and Greenhouse Gas Emissions
There is continuing discussion and evaluation of possible global climate change in certain regulatory and legislative arenas. The focus is generally on emissions of greenhouse gases, including CO2, sulfur hexafluoride and methane, and whether these emissions are contributing to the warming of the earth's atmosphere. On November 4, 2020, the U.S. officially withdrew from the United Nations' "Paris Agreement" on climate change. Newly elected President Biden announced on January 20, 2021 that the U.S. would rejoin the agreement. In addition, President Biden has recently stated that a goal of his administration is to see the electric power industry fully decarbonized by 2035, although details of the goal are not available. Such decisions may result in future additional greenhouse gas emissions reductions in the U.S.; however, it is not possible to determine what the U.S. standards for greenhouse gas emissions will be in the future or the extent to which these commitments will be implemented through the Clean Air Act or any other existing statutes and new legislation.
If legislation or regulations are passed at the federal or state levels in the future requiring mandatory reductions of CO2 and other greenhouse gases on OG&E's facilities, this could result in significant additional compliance costs that would affect OG&E's future financial position, results of operations and cash flows if such costs are not recovered through regulated rates. Several states outside the area where OG&E operates have passed laws, adopted regulations or undertaken regulatory initiatives to reduce the emission of greenhouse gases, primarily through the planned development of greenhouse gas emission inventories and/or regional greenhouse gas cap and trade programs.
OG&E's current business strategy has resulted in reduced carbon dioxide emissions by over 40 percent compared to 2005 levels, and during the same period, emissions of ozone-forming NOx have been reduced by approximately 75 percent and emissions of SO2 have been reduced by approximately 90 percent. OG&E expects to further reduce carbon dioxide emissions to 50 percent of 2005 levels by 2030. To comply with the EPA's MATS rule and Regional Haze Rule FIP, OG&E converted two coal-fired generating units at the Muskogee Station to natural gas, among other measures. OG&E's deployment of Smart Grid technology helps to reduce the peak load demand. OG&E is also deploying more renewable energy sources that do not emit
greenhouse gases. OG&E's service territory borders one of the nation's best wind resource areas, and OG&E has leveraged its geographic position to develop renewable energy resources and completed transmission investments to deliver the renewable energy. The SPP has authorized the construction of transmission lines capable of bringing renewable energy out of the wind resource areas in western Oklahoma, the Texas Panhandle and western Kansas to load centers by planning for more transmission to be built in the area. In addition to increasing overall system reliability, these new transmission resources should provide greater access to additional wind resources that are currently constrained due to existing transmission delivery limitations.
Regional Haze Regulation - Second Planning Period
In January 2017, the EPA finalized a rule that would revise certain provisions of the Regional Haze Rule. Notably, the EPA extended the SIP deadline for the second Regional Haze implementation period by three years to 2021 and made changes to the provisions for impacts to national parks and other protected wilderness areas. Petitions for Reconsideration to the EPA were filed by industry groups. While not acting on the petitions, the EPA announced on January 17, 2018 that it intends to commence a notice-and-comment rulemaking revisiting certain aspects of the rule. During 2019, the EPA released technical resources to assist states in developing SIPs, including a significant non-binding guidance document and updated atmospheric modeling which will allow states to better account for international emissions affecting regional haze in the U.S. On July 1, 2020, the ODEQ notified OG&E that the Horseshoe Lake generating units are to be included in the state's evaluation of visibility impairment impacts to the Wichita Mountains. OG&E conducted an analysis of all potential control measures for NOx on these units and submitted it to the ODEQ on September 15, 2020. The ODEQ will identify any cost-effective control measures in a Regional Haze SIP, to be submitted to the EPA for approval by July 31, 2021. It is unknown at this time what the outcome, or any potential material impacts, will be from the evaluations by OG&E, the ODEQ and the EPA.
Endangered Species
Certain federal laws, including the Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act, the Migratory Bird Treaty Act and the Endangered Species Act, provide special protection to certain designated species. These laws and any state equivalents provide for significant civil and criminal penalties for unpermitted activities that result in harm to or harassment of certain protected animals and plants, including damage to their habitats. If such species are located in an area in which OG&E conducts operations, or if additional species in those areas become subject to protection, OG&E's operations and development projects, particularly transmission, wind or pipeline projects, could be restricted or delayed, or OG&E could be required to implement expensive mitigation measures.
Vegetation Management
On July 10, 2020, the U.S. Department of Agriculture - Forest Service published a final rule which updates procedures for creating operating plans and agreements for powerline facility maintenance and vegetation management within and abutting the linear boundary of a special use authorization for a powerline facility within Forest Service lands. This rule codifies the memorandum of understanding between utilities such as OG&E and the Forest Service regarding vegetation management best practices. All companies will be required to have an approved operating plan or agreement with the Forest Service. OG&E will be required to submit a draft operating plan to the Forest Service by August 10, 2023 for ongoing maintenance and vegetation management activities located within the Ozark National Forest in Arkansas.
Waste
OG&E's operations generate wastes that are subject to the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 as well as comparable state laws which impose detailed requirements for the handling, storage, treatment and disposal of waste.
In 2015, the EPA finalized a rule under the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act for the handling and disposal of coal combustion residuals or coal ash. The rule regulates coal ash as a solid waste rather than a hazardous waste, which would have made the management of coal ash more costly. In August 2019, the EPA proposed revisions to the 2015 coal ash rule in response to the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals issuing a decision regarding the ongoing Coal Combustion Residuals litigation. The proposed changes do not appear to be material to OG&E at this time. OG&E completed the clean closure of one regulated inactive coal ash impoundment in August 2019.
On June 28, 2018, the EPA approved the State of Oklahoma's application for a state coal ash permitting program that will operate in lieu of the federal coal ash program promulgated under the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. On September 26, 2018, a citizen suit was filed against the EPA in the U.S. District Court in the District of Columbia
concerning the final approval, which was decided upon in the EPA's favor on April 15, 2020 and has subsequently been appealed.
OG&E currently recycles and provides approximately 97 percent of its ash to the concrete and cement industries for use as a component within their products and, in the last five years, has diverted more than 1.3 million tons of ash from landfills. Using fly ash in this way enables aggregate manufacturers to minimize their impact on the environment by avoiding the need to extract and process other natural resources.
OG&E has sought and will continue to seek pollution prevention opportunities and to evaluate the effectiveness of its
waste reduction, reuse and recycling efforts. In 2020, OG&E obtained refunds of $2.6 million from the recycling of scrap metal,
salvaged transformers and used transformer oil. This figure does not include the additional savings gained through the reduction
and/or avoidance of disposal costs and the reduction in material purchases due to the reuse of existing materials. Similar savings
are anticipated in future years.
Water
OG&E's operations are subject to the Federal Clean Water Act and comparable state laws and regulations. These laws and regulations impose detailed requirements and strict controls regarding the discharge of pollutants into state and federal waters.
The EPA issued a final rule on May 19, 2014 to implement Section 316(b) of the Federal Clean Water Act, which requires that power plant cooling water intake structure location, design, construction and capacity reflect the best available technology for minimizing their adverse environmental impact via the impingement and entrainment of aquatic organisms. The ODEQ issued final permits on December 22, 2017 and August 22, 2018 for Muskogee Power Plant and Seminole Power Plant, respectively, in compliance with the final 316(b) rule, and OG&E did not incur any material costs associated with the rule's implementation at either location. OG&E expects to be able to provide a reasonable estimate of any material costs associated with the rule's implementation at other facilities following the future issuance of permits from the State of Oklahoma.
In 2015, the EPA issued a final rule addressing the effluent limitation guidelines for power plants under the Federal Clean Water Act. The final rule establishes technology- and performance-based standards that may apply to discharges of six waste streams including bottom ash transport water. Compliance with this rule will occur by 2023; however, on April 12, 2017, the EPA granted a Petition for Reconsideration of the 2015 Rule. On October 13, 2020, the EPA published a final rule to revise the technology-based effluent limitations for flue gas desulfurization waste water and bottom ash transport water. OG&E is evaluating what, if any, compliance actions are needed but is not able to quantify with any certainty what costs may be incurred. OG&E expects to be able to provide a reasonable estimate of any material costs associated with the rule's implementation following issuance of the permits from the State of Oklahoma.
On April 21, 2020, the EPA and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers published a rule to define the scope of federal jurisdiction over wetlands. This final rule replaces the repealed definition of waters of the U.S. from 2015. The rule became effective on June 22, 2020, and OG&E does not expect any material impacts as a result.
Since the purchase of the Redbud facility in 2008, OG&E's average use of treated municipal effluent for all of the needed cooling water at Redbud and McClain is approximately 2.5 billion gallons per year. This use of treated municipal effluent offsets the need for fresh water as cooling water, making fresh water available for other beneficial uses like drinking water, irrigation and recreation.
Site Remediation
The Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980 and comparable state laws impose liability, without regard to the legality of the original conduct, on certain classes of persons responsible for the release of hazardous substances into the environment. Because OG&E utilizes various products and generates wastes that are considered hazardous substances for purposes of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, OG&E could be subject to liability for the costs of cleaning up and restoring sites where those substances have been released to the environment. At this time, it is not anticipated that any associated liability will cause a significant impact to OG&E.
For further discussion regarding contingencies relating to environmental laws and regulations, see Note 15 within "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."