ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following information should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements, including the notes thereto, included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. This discussion contains certain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results and the timing of certain events could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including, but not limited to, those set forth herein and elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Overview
We are focused on the creation of the Terra CoV-2 immunization product candidate to combat the novel coronavirus pandemic and the further development of novel antibiotics against infectious disease.
Our SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine Product Candidate- Terra CoV-2
As a result of our acquisition of one hundred percent (100%) of the total issued and outstanding common stock of Noachis Terra, Inc. (“Noachis Terra”) we are now focused on the development and commercialization of a vaccine product candidate to provide long lasting immunity from the novel Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome coronavirus (“SARS-CoV-2”), which causes the coronavirus disease 2019 (“COVID-19”). Noachis Terra is a party to a worldwide, nonexclusive intellectual property and biological materials license agreement with the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (“NIAID”), an institute within the National Institutes of Health (“NIH”), relating to certain research, patent applications and biological materials involving pre-fusion stabilized coronavirus spike proteins and their use in the development and commercialization of a vaccine to provide specific, long lasting immunity from SARS-CoV-2.
Coronaviruses are a family of viruses that can lead to upper-respiratory infections in humans. Recent clinical reports also suggest that the SARS-CoV-2 virus can affect other body-systems, including the nervous, cardiovascular, gastrointestinal and renal systems. Among the recent iterations of coronaviruses to move from animal to human carriers is SARS-CoV-2 (often referred to as COVID-19), which, beginning in Wuhan, China, in late 2019, caused a global pandemic due to its rapid spread and the relatively high mortality rate (as compared to the seasonal influenza). In late January of 2021, the World Health Organization’s estimates indicate the number of worldwide COVID-19 infections have exceeded 100,000,000 and the number of deaths directly attributed to COVID-19 have exceeded 2,000,000. Both Pfizer and Moderna have announced preliminary safety and efficacy data from their Phase 3 COVID-19 vaccine studies and recent Emergency Use Authorization by the FDA. We believe given the size of the worldwide pandemic that even with multiple vaccines projected to be available in the coming months, there will be demand for the Terra CoV-2 vaccine, once development is successfully completed. We intend to combine the research, patent applications and biological materials covered by our NIAID license with our existing clinical research and manufacturing capabilities to respond rapidly to this ongoing, global, public health crisis. We believe our Terra CoV-2 vaccine holds the possibility of playing an important role in addressing this crisis.
Coronaviruses, such as SARS -CoV-2, possess signature protein spikes on their outer capsule. The NIAID license covers patents and data on a vaccine candidate that were created based on a stabilized pre-fusion spike trimeric protein. By stabilizing the spike protein in the pre-fusion state, the number of immunogenic centers is increased thereby allowing for a greater likelihood of successful antibody binding, resulting in an improved immunogenic response. The genetic code, acquired from the NIH, for the stabilized pre-fusion spike protein was provided to Aragen Bioscience, Inc. (“Aragen”) for the purpose of insertion of the spike protein gene sequence into a Chinese Hamster Ovary (“CHO”) cell line. Aragen is a leading contract research organization focused on accelerating preclinical biologics product development, has extensive experience building CHO cell lines for recombinant proteins, such as monoclonal antibodies. Aragen has successfully inserted the NIH pre-fusion spike protein gene sequence into a CHO cell line and is currently developing both the analytical tests and identifying preliminary cell line growth conditions to optimize the spike protein titers. Currently, “mini-pool” production and analytical development is underway. The process to transfer to full-scale manufacture has begun.
The NIH’s preclinical study shows that this spike protein, adjuvanted with the mouse specific TLR-4-agonist Sigma Adjuvant System (“SAS”, a TLR-4 agonists) that induces T cell activation), generates neutralizing antibody titers in both a pseudovirus neutralization assay and a plaque reduction neutralization titer (PRNT) assay. Recently released information indicated that pretreatment of mice with the NIH-created COVID-19 spike protein in combination with an adjuvant (TLR-4 agonist Sigma Adjuvant System) completely inhibited viral growth in the nasal cavities and lungs of infected animals compared to unvaccinated control animals. In October 2020, we received feedback to our Type B Pre-IND Meeting Request from the FDA. The response indicated that the FDA broadly supported our planned approach to the pre-clinical program that will support the clinical development of the Terra CoV-2, vaccine. As a result, we anticipate filing the Investigational New Drug (“IND”) application in the fourth quarter of 2021 and immediately upon the receipt of approval from the FDA, commencing the Phase 1 clinical study, the protocol for which is currently under development.
We recently announced we had entered into an agreement with Adjuvance Technologies Inc. for the use of TQL1055, a novel, rationally designed semi-synthetic analogue of the saponin adjuvant QS-21 with potential improved attributes, including stability and manufacturing efficiency. We also anticipate that our Terra CoV-2 vaccine will provide long lasting protection from the SARS-CoV-2 virus with only one or two doses, with a more rapid immune response compared to vaccines developed without the inclusion of an adjuvant.
As presently designed, we believe the Terra CoV-2 vaccine is expected to permit cost effective storage and distribution at refrigerated temperatures, which should facilitate the distribution and thereby avoid challenges facing the two mRNA vaccines currently available under the FDA’s Emergency Use Authorization in the U.S.
We expect to use our currently available cash resources to continue to advance the development of Terra CoV-2 through IND-enabling studies, including immunogenicity, viral challenge studies, toxicology studies, and the Phase 1 trial with further clinical development being contingent upon the receipt of additional funding, including non-dilutive government grant funding which we continue to pursue or partnering or out-licensing opportunities.
Our Antibiotic Product Candidate-OG716
Members of our scientific team discovered that a certain bacterial strain. Streptococcus mutans, produces MU1140, a molecule belonging to the novel class of antibiotics known as lantibiotics. Lantibiotics, such as MU1140, are highly modified peptide antibiotics made by a small group of Gram-positive bacterial species. Approximately 60 lantibiotics have been discovered, to date. We believe lantibiotics are generally recognized by the scientific community to be potent antibiotic agents.
In nonclinical testing, MU1140 has shown activity against all Gram-positive bacteria against which it has been tested, including those responsible for a number of healthcare associated infections, or HAIs. A high percentage of hospital-acquired infections are caused by highly antibiotic-resistant bacteria such as methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) or multidrug-resistant Gram-negative bacteria. We believe the need for novel antibiotics is increasing as a result of the growing resistance of target pathogens to existing FDA approved antibiotics on the market along with the increased use of currently available antibiotics due to secondary infections in SARS-CoV-2 infected patients.
Lantibiotics have been difficult to investigate for their clinical usefulness as therapeutic agents in the treatment of infectious diseases due to a general inability to produce or synthesize sufficient quantities of pure amounts of these molecules. Traditional fermentation methods can only produce minute amounts of the lantibiotic.
In June 2012, we entered into a worldwide exclusive channel collaboration agreement with Precigen (formerly known as Intrexon Corporation) for the development and commercialization of the native strain of MU1140 and related homologs to use its advanced transgene and cell engineering platforms. At that time we also entered into a stock issuance agreement with Precigen. Through our work pursuant to the collaboration agreement, we have been able to produce a significant increase in the fermentation titer of MU1140 compared to standard fermentation methods and have discovered a new purification process for MU1140. Our work generated a substantial number of homologs of MU1140 and the exclusive channel collaboration was thereafter amended to clarify the applicable field and to adjust the milestone payments and provide that they will be paid in cash. In January 2020 Precigen consummated a reorganization of its ongoing active pharmaceutical ingredients (API) fermentation operations and assets which included transfer of the exclusive collaboration agreement and related stock issuance agreement. Following such reorganization, Precigen divested certain of its assets to TS Biotechnology Holdings, LLC which included shares of Oragenics securities and the subsidiary Eleszto Genetika, Inc. (“EGI” formerly known as ILH Holdings, Inc.) that held the collaboration agreement and stock issuance agreements with us, and. On March 1, 2021, due to such prior amendments, assignments and transfers we entered into an amended and restated exclusive channel collaboration agreement with EGI which (i) included the prior amendments, (ii) updated the names of the parties, and (iii) incorporated any remaining applicable terms from the stock issuance agreement and thereafter terminated the stock issuance agreement (the “Lantibiotic ECC”). We expect to continue our research and development and collaboration efforts with EGI to develop potential derivatives of the MU1140 molecule using genetically modified bacteria.
In our pre-clinical studies to support a potential IND filing with the FDA, we tested a total of six homologs of MU1140 for certain compound characteristics, including but not limited to: drug activity (based on minimum inhibitory concentration or “MIC”) equal or better than “standard of care” drugs against certain drug-resistant bacteria, safety, toxicity, stability, and manufacturability. An animal study specifically evaluated homolog efficacy in relation to survival, measurable amounts of Clostridium difficile (“C. diff”) colony forming units, and toxin levels. Three homologs demonstrated promising results with one homolog, OG253 achieving a 100% survival rate throughout the entire study in contrast to an approximately 30% survival rate for the vancomycin positive control.
Based on these early results, we selected a lead candidate, OG253, for which we had a pre-IND meeting with the FDA in November of 2015 regarding the pursuit of an IND for OG253. Following additional research and development on second generation lantibiotics, in August of 2016, we opted to select a second generation lantibiotic, OG716, for treatment of C. diff as our new lead candidate. OG716 is a new, orally-active homolog, that has exhibited positive results in an animal model for potential treatment of C. diff. Generated from our MU1140 platform, this new lantibiotic showed promising efficacy in reducing clinically relevant C. diff infections as measured by increased animal survival and decreased relapse as well as reduced production of toxins A & B and C. diff spores.
The timing of the filing of an IND regarding OG716 is subject to our having sufficient available human, material and financing capital, which includes research subjects, both animal and human, given all of our anticipated needs and expected requirements in connection with our ongoing research and development initiatives. We will continue to advance the OG716 program to the IND filing based on the availability of both human and financial capital. Based upon the current funding available we will continue to conduct some of the requisite studies. While we commenced certain of these studies at the end of 2019, we expect to focus on efficient and cost-effective improvements in the manufacturing process of the product as we move to complete the pre-clinical studies required to support our first in man Phase 1 clinical study.
Product Candidates.
Through our wholly-owned subsidiary, Noachis Terra, we began the research and development stage for our new Terra CoV-2 vaccine product candidate. We hold a nonexclusive, worldwide intellectual property license agreement for certain research, patent applications and biological materials relating to the use of pre-fusion coronavirus spike proteins for the development and commercialization of a vaccine against SARS-CoV-2.
Additionally, we are developing our lead lantibiotic candidate, OG716, to treat Clostridium difficile while also creating semi-synthetic lantibiotic analogs that may be effective against systemic gram (+) multidrug infections, and analogs that may be effective in treating gram (-) infections. We seek to protect our product candidates through patents and patent applications pursuant to the terms of our license agreements.
Product/Candidate
Description
Application
Status
Terra CoV-2
Vaccine candidate (plasmid + adjuvant) to provide long lasting immunity against SARS-CoV-2
Broad, community-based vaccine immunity against SARS-CoV-2
Pre-clinical
OG716
A homolog of MU1140: Member of lantibiotic class of antibiotics
Clostridium difficile associated diarrhea
Pre-clinical
Our Business Development Strategy
Success in the biopharmaceutical and product development industry relies on the continuous development of novel product candidates. The large majority of product candidates do not make it past all clinical trials which forces companies to look externally for innovation. Accordingly, we expect from, time to time, to seek strategic opportunities through various forms of business development, which can include strategic alliances, licensing deals, joint ventures, collaborations, equity-or debt-based investments, dispositions, mergers and acquisitions. We view these business development activities as a necessary component of our strategies, and we seek to enhance shareholder value by evaluating business development opportunities both within and complementary to our current business as well as opportunities that may be new and separate from the development of our existing product candidates.
Recent Developments
ATM Offering-Sales Agreement. On February 1, 2021, the Company entered into a Sales Agreement (the “Sales Agreement”) with A.G.P./Alliance Global Partners, as sales agent (the “Sales Agent”), pursuant to which the Company may offer and sell through or to the Sales Agent (the “Offering”) up to $20.0 million in shares of its common stock (the “Shares”) at-the-market. Through February 12, 2021, the Company sold an aggregate of 15,406,618 shares of its common stock at-the-market pursuant to the Sales Agreement for aggregate net proceeds to the Company of approximately $19.3 million. Shares offered and sold in the Offering were issued pursuant to the Company’s universal shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (the “Shelf Registration Statement”) and the prospectus supplement relating to the Offering filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) on February 1, 2021. The Offering will terminate upon (a) the election of the Agent upon the occurrence of certain adverse events, (b) 10 days’ advance notice from one party to the other, or (c) the sale of the Shares equating to $20 million. Under the terms of the Sales Agreement, the Sales Agent is entitled to a commission at a fixed rate of 3.0% of the gross proceeds from each sale of shares under the Sales Agreement.
Series C Preferred Stock Redemption. On February 11, 2021, we provided a notice of redemption, for approximately $5.6 million, to the holder of our Series C Preferred Stock, with a redemption date of March 13, 2021 (which included the dividend of 26.697 shares paid on January 28, 2021 and any accrued dividends due through the redemption date), after which time the Series C Preferred Stock will be cancelled and no further dividends will accrue. The applicable portion of the net proceeds received from the above referenced ATM Offering are being utilized for the redemption.
Warrant Exercises. Between February 9, 2021 and February 25, 2021 the Company issued an additional 2,472,573 shares of common stock as a result of the exercise of certain outstanding warrants as follows: (i) warrants to acquire 360,000 shares of Common Stock at an exercise price of $1.00 per share issued in connection with its July 2018 public offering were exercised and (ii) warrants to acquire 2,112,573 shares of Common Stock at an exercise price of $0.90 per share issued in connection with its March 2019 public offering were exercised (the “Warrant Exercises”). The Warrant Exercises provided aggregate gross proceeds to the Company of $2,261,315.
Additional Consideration Payment - Noachis Terra Acquisition. As a result of the Warrant Exercises, the Company paid $542,263 of additional consideration to the sole former shareholder of Noachis Terra. The additional consideration payment will be included in operating expenses.
Financial Overview
Net Revenues
We did not generate any revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively from the sales or licensing of our product candidates.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development consist of expenses incurred in connection with the discovery and development of our product candidates. These expenses consist primarily of employee-related expenses, which include salaries and benefits and attending science conferences; expenses incurred under our license agreements with third parties and under other agreements with contract research organizations, investigative sites and consultants that conduct our clinical trials and a substantial portion of our nonclinical studies; the cost of acquiring and manufacturing clinical trial materials; facilities, depreciation and other allocated expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and equipment, and depreciation of fixed assets; license fees, for and milestone payments related to, in-licensed products and technology; stock-based compensation expense; and costs associated with nonclinical activities and regulatory approvals. We expense research and development costs as incurred.
Our research and development expenses can be divided into (i) clinical research, and (ii) nonclinical research and development activities and (iii) manufacturing process development and analytical testing procedure development. Clinical research costs consist of clinical trials, manufacturing services, regulatory activities and related personnel costs, and other costs such as rent, utilities, depreciation and stock-based compensation. Nonclinical research and development costs consist of our research activities, nonclinical studies, related personnel costs and laboratory supplies, and other costs such as rent, utilities, depreciation and stock-based compensation and research expenses we incur associated with the development of our product candidates. While we are currently focused on advancing our product development programs, our future research and development expenses will depend on the clinical success of our product candidates, as well as ongoing assessments of each product candidate’s commercial potential. In addition, we cannot forecast with any degree of certainty which product candidates may be subject to future collaborations, when such arrangements will be secured, if at all, and to what degree such arrangements would affect our development plans, research expenses and capital requirements.
Our research and development expenses were $22,107,563 and $12,120,318 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Our current product development strategy contemplates an expected increase in our research and development expenses in the future as we continue the advancement of our product development programs for our vaccine and lantibiotic product candidates, with greater near-term emphasis on our vaccine product candidate. The lengthy process of completing clinical trials; seeking regulatory approval for our product candidates; and expanding the potential claims we are able to make, requires expenditure of substantial resources. Any failure or delay in completing clinical trials, or in obtaining regulatory approvals, could cause a delay in generating product revenues and cause our research and development expenses to increase and, in turn, have a material adverse effect on our operations. Our current product candidates are not expected to be commercially available until we are able to obtain regulatory approval from the FDA.
Our plan is to budget and manage expenditures in research and development such that they are undertaken in a cost-effective manner yet still advance the research and development efforts. While we have some control under our Lantibiotic ECC and NIH license as to the planning and timing of our research and development and therefore the timing of when expenditures may be incurred for various phases of agreed upon projects, actual expenditures can vary from period to period. Subject to available capital, we expect overall research and development expenses to increase as a result of our vaccine product candidate and as our financial resources permit. Our research and development projects are currently expected to be taken to the point where they can be licensed or partnered with larger pharmaceutical companies.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist principally of salaries and related costs for personnel in executive, finance, business development, marketing, information technology, legal and human resources functions. Other general and administrative expenses include facility costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses, patent filing, and professional fees for legal, consulting, auditing and tax services.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses may remain flat, but be subject to variability for, among others, the following reasons:
● to support our research and development activities, which, subject to available capital, we expect to expand as we continue the development of our product candidates;
● the efforts we undertake from, time to time, to raise additional capital; and
● the increased payroll, and stock-based compensation, expanded infrastructure and consulting, legal, accounting and investor relations costs associated with being a public company.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) includes local business taxes, as well as interest income and expense. Interest income consists of interest earned on our cash and cash equivalents. The primary objective of our investment policy is capital preservation. Interest expense consists primarily of interest and costs associated with our indebtedness.
Income Taxes
As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, we have federal and state net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $142,893,000 and $117,963,000, respectively, to offset future federal and state income taxes. Federal and state of Florida tax net operating loss carryforwards generated prior to December 31, 2017 will expire through 2037. Federal and state of Florida tax net operating loss carryforwards generated subsequent to December 31, 2017, do not expire and are no longer subject to taxable income limitation pursuant to the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, passed on March 27, 2020. State of Pennsylvania tax net operating loss carryforwards will expire through 2036. We also have research and development tax credit carryforwards of approximately $4,043,000 and $2,805,000 as of December 31, 2020, and 2019, respectively, to offset future federal and state income taxes. The federal tax credit carryforward will expire beginning in 2021 and continuing through 2040, unless previously utilized.
Utilization of net operating loss carryforwards and research and development credit carryforwards may be subject to a substantial annual limitation due to ownership change limitations that may have occurred or, could occur in the future in accordance with Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (“IRC Section 382”) and with Section 383 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as well as similar state provisions. These ownership changes may limit the amount of net operating loss carryforwards and research and development credit carryforwards that can be utilized annually to offset future taxable income and taxes, respectively. In general, an ownership change, as defined by IRC Section 382, results from transactions increasing the ownership of certain stockholders or public groups in the stock of a corporation by more than 50 percentage points over a three-year period. The Company has completed several financings since its inception, as well as the recent acquisition of Noachis Terra, which may result in a change in ownership as defined by IRC Section 382, or could result in a change in control in the future. In each period since our inception, we have recorded a 100% valuation allowance for the full amount of our deferred tax asset, as the realization of the deferred tax asset is uncertain. As a result, we have not recorded any federal tax benefit in our statements of operations.
Critical Accounting Estimates and Policies
Our discussion and analysis of our consolidated financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“US GAAP”). The preparation of consolidated financial statements in accordance with US GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect reported amounts and related disclosures. There are certain critical estimates that we believe require significant judgment in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. We consider an accounting estimate to be critical if:
● It requires us to make an assumption because information was not available at the time or it included matters that were highly uncertain at the time, we were making the estimate; and
● Changes in the estimate or different estimates that we could have selected may have had a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations.
The principal areas of estimation reflected in the consolidated financial statements are stock-based compensation and valuation of warrants.
Stock-Based Payment Arrangements
Generally, all forms of stock-based payments, including stock option grants, and warrants are measured at their fair value on the awards’ grant date using a Black-Scholes pricing model. Restricted stock grants are measured at their fair value at the date of the grant. Stock-based compensation awards issued to non-employees for services rendered are recorded at the fair value of the stock-based payment. The expense resulting from stock-based payments are recorded in research and development expense or general and administrative expense in the consolidated statement of operations, depending on the nature of the services provided. Stock-based payment expense is recorded over the requisite service period in which the grantee provides services to us. To the extent the stock option grants, warrants, or restricted stock grants do not vest at the grant date they are subject to forfeiture.
Stock-Based Compensation
U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“US GAAP”) requires all stock-based payments to employees, including grants of employee stock options, to be recognized in the financial statements based on their fair values as of the grant date. Stock-based compensation expense is recorded over the requisite service period in which the grantee provides services to us, to the extent the options do not vest at the grant date and are subject to forfeiture. For performance-based awards that do not include market-based conditions, we record share-based compensation expense only when the performance-based milestone is deemed probable of achievement. We utilize both quantitative and qualitative criteria to judge whether milestones are probable of achievement. For awards with market-based performance conditions, we recognize the grant-date fair value of the award over the derived service period regardless of whether the underlying performance condition is met. We account for forfeitures of stock-based awards as a component of compensation expense as the forfeitures occur.
Warrants
The Company used the Black Scholes Option Pricing Model in calculating the relative fair value of any warrants that have been issued.
New Accounting Pronouncements
There are no additional accounting pronouncements issued or effective during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 that have had or are expected to have an impact on our financial statements.
Income Taxes
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12, “Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes (“ASU 2019-12”), which is intended to simplify various aspects related to accounting for income taxes. ASU 2019-12 removes certain exceptions to the general principles in Topic 740 and also clarifies and amends existing guidance to improve consistent application. This guidance is effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2020, with early adoption permitted. The Company is currently evaluating the impact of this standard on its consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
Results of Operations:
For the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Research and Development. Research and development expenses were $22,107,563 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $12,120,318 for the year ended December 31, 2019; an increase of $9,987,245, or 82.4%. This increase was primarily due to the acquisition of Noachis Terra, Inc. which was accounted for as in-process research and development expenses and an increase in costs associated with the advancement of our Terra CoV-2 vaccine program, employee stock-based compensation, and salaries costs of $11,176,479, $4,122,963, $194,088, and $63,333, respectively. These increases were partially offset by decreases in costs associated with our clinical trial work related to our oral mucositis product candidate under our Lantibiotic ECC and a reduction in costs associated with our Lantibiotic ECC of $4,461,809, and $1,130,103, respectively.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses were $4,533,893 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $3,757,251 for the year ended December 31, 2019; an increase of $776,642, or 20.7%. This increase was primarily due to increases in non-employee stock-based compensation, employee stock-based compensation, insurance, and legal costs of $448,231, $295,851, $116,160, and $61,434, respectively. These increases were partially offset by decreases in travel and entertainment, conferences, and consulting costs of $102,554, $27,474, and $25,393, respectively.
Other Income (Expense). Other income (expense) was $210,757 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $311,566 for the year ended December 31, 2019; a net change of $100,809. The decrease was primarily attributable to a decrease in interest income of $230,717, which was offset by the forgiveness of the Paycheck Protection Program loan and accrued interest of $132,753.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have funded our operations primarily through the sale of equity securities in our initial public offering, the sale of equity securities and warrants in private and public offerings, debt financing, warrant exercises and grants. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $(154,444,983) and we have yet to achieve profitability. We incurred net losses of $(26,430,699) and $(15,566,003) for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We expect to incur significant and increasing operating losses for the foreseeable future as we seek to advance our product candidates through nonclinical testing and clinical trials to ultimately obtain regulatory approval and eventual commercialization. We will need to raise additional capital to fund our operations. We anticipate that our cash resources as of December 31, 2020, together with proceeds from our ATM facility and warrant exercises, and net of the redemption of the Series C Preferred Stock of approximately $5.6 million, will be sufficient to fund our operations as presently structured through the second quarter of 2022. There can be no assurance that additional capital will be available to us on acceptable terms, if at all. Adequate additional funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. We expect that research and development expenses will increase along with general and administrative costs, as we grow and operate our business. The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash for each of the periods indicated:
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, our operating cash flows from operations used cash of $(16,952,864) and $(13,012,843), respectively. The use of cash in all periods primarily resulted from our net losses adjusted for non-cash items and changes in operating assets and liabilities. We had working capital surplus of $16,640,534 and $16,987,690 as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Additional details of our financing activities for the periods reflected in this report are provided below:
Financings
The May 2017 Series A Preferred Stock Financing
On May 10, 2017 we entered into a securities purchase agreement with three accredited investors, to purchase up to $3,000,000 of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock (the “Series A Preferred Stock Financing”). The sale of the Preferred Stock took place in two separate closings and at the first closing which occurred on May 10, 2017, we received gross proceeds of approximately $1,302,000. The second closing occurred on July 25, 2017 and we received gross proceeds of approximately $1,698,000, which was the balance of the Preferred Stock Financing. The full $3,000,000 of Preferred Stock, and after giving effect to the reverse stock split, is convertible into one million two hundred thousand shares of our Common Stock, based on a fixed conversion price of $2.50 per share on an as-converted basis. In addition, and after giving effect to the reverse stock split, we issued warrants to purchase an aggregate of 462,106 shares of Common Stock at the first closing and we issued an aggregate of 602,414 shares of Common Stock at the second closing. The warrants have a term of seven years from the date of issuance are non-exercisable until 6 months after issuance, have an exercise price of $3.10 per share. Proceeds from the Series A Preferred Stock Financing (including the exercise of any warrants for cash) was used for general corporate purposes, including working capital.
On July 27, 2017, we entered into an agreement to amend the warrants issued in connection with the Series A Preferred Stock Financing to provide notification and objection requirements with respect to the change of control provisions. The change of control provisions in the warrants had previously caused the warrants to be treated as a derivative liability as opposed to being treated as equity on our balance sheet. The warrants have been replaced by amended and restated warrants containing such notification and objection requirements (the “Amended and Restated Common Stock Purchase Warrants”) so that the Amended and Restated Common Stock Purchase Warrants are now treated as equity on our balance sheet. All other terms of the original warrants remain unchanged by the Amended and Restated Common Stock Purchase Warrants.
In connection with the Series A Preferred Financing, we filed a Certificate of Designations of Preferences, Rights and Limitations of Series A Preferred Stock with the Secretary of State of the State of Florida, effective May 10, 2017. The number of shares of Preferred Stock designated as Series A Preferred Stock was 12,000,000.
In connection with the issuance and sale of the Series A Preferred Stock and common stock warrants that were issued commensurate with the issuance of the Series A Preferred Stock, we granted certain demand registration rights and piggyback registration rights with respect to the shares of our Common Stock issuable upon conversion of the Preferred Stock and exercise of the Warrants, pursuant to a Registration Rights Agreement.
Except as otherwise required by law, the Series A Preferred Stock have no voting rights. However, as long as any shares of Series A Preferred Stock are outstanding, we shall not, without the affirmative vote of the holders of a majority of the then outstanding shares of the Series A Preferred Stock, (a) alter or change adversely the powers, preferences or rights given to the Series A Preferred Stock or alter or amend the Certificate of Designation, (b) amend its articles of incorporation or other charter documents in any manner that adversely affects any rights of the holders of Series A Preferred Stock, (c) increase the number of authorized shares of Series A Preferred Stock, or (d) enter into any agreement with respect to any of the foregoing. Upon any liquidation, dissolution or winding-up by us, whether voluntary or involuntary that is not a Fundamental Transaction (as defined in the Certificate of Designation), the holders of Series A Preferred Stock shall be entitled to receive out of the assets, the greater of (i) the product of the number of shares of Series A Preferred Stock then held by such holder, multiplied by the Original Issue Price; and (ii) the amount that would be payable to such holder in the Liquidation in respect of Common Stock issuable upon conversion of such shares of Series A Preferred Stock if all outstanding shares of Series A Preferred Stock were converted into Common Stock immediately prior to the Liquidation. The Series A Preferred Stock is classified as permanent equity.
The November 2017 Series B Preferred Stock Financing
On November 8, 2017, we completed a private placement of $3,300,000 of Series B Non-Voting, Convertible Preferred Stock (the “Series B Convertible Preferred Stock”) pursuant to a Securities Purchase Agreement with four existing shareholders who are accredited investors including an entity affiliated with a director of the Company (the “Series B Preferred Stock Financing”).
The full $3,300,000 of Series B Convertible Preferred Stock is convertible, after giving effect to the reverse stock split into one million three hundred and twenty thousand shares of our Common Stock, based on a conversion of one share of Series B Preferred Stock into two shares of Common Stock. The purchase price per share of the Series B Preferred Stock is represented by $2.50 per share of the Common Stock on an as converted basis. In addition, and after giving effect to the reverse stock split, we issued to the investors in the private placement accompanying common stock purchase warrants to purchase an aggregate of 1,064,518 shares of Common Stock. The warrants have a term of seven years from the date of issuance, and are non-exercisable until six (6) months after issuance, and after giving effect to the reverse stock split, have an exercise price of $3.10 per share.
In connection with the Series B Preferred Financing, we filed a Certificate of Designation and Rights of Series B Convertible Preferred Stock with the Secretary of State of the State of Florida, effective November 8, 2017. The number of shares of Preferred Stock designated as Series B Preferred Stock was 6,600,000.
Except as otherwise required by law, the Series B Preferred Stock have no voting rights. However, as long as any shares of Series B Preferred Stock are outstanding, we shall not, without the affirmative vote of the holders of a majority of the then outstanding shares of the Series B Preferred Stock, (a) alter or change adversely the powers, preferences or rights given to the Series B Preferred Stock or alter or amend the Certificate of Designation, (b) amend its articles of incorporation or other charter documents in any manner that adversely affects any rights of the holders of Series B Preferred Stock, (c) increase the number of authorized shares of Series B Preferred Stock, or (d) enter into any agreement with respect to any of the foregoing.
The Series B Preferred Stock shall rank (i) on par with the Common Stock and Series A Preferred Stock and junior to Series C Preferred Stock as to dividend rights and (ii) junior to Series C Preferred Stock, on par with Series A Preferred Stock and senior to the Common Stock as to distribution of assets upon liquidation, dissolution or winding-up by us, whether voluntary or involuntary.
Upon any liquidation, dissolution or winding-up by us, whether voluntary or involuntary, the holders of Series B Preferred Stock shall be entitled to receive out of the assets, after payment to the holders of Series C Preferred Stock but on par with the holders of Series A Preferred Stock and in preference to the holders of the Common Stock, an amount of cash equal to the greater of (i) the product of the number of shares of Series B Preferred Stock then held by such holder, multiplied by the Original Issue Price; and (ii) the amount that would be payable to such holder in the Liquidation in respect of Common Stock issuable upon conversion of such shares of Series B Preferred Stock if all outstanding shares of Series B Preferred Stock were converted into Common Stock immediately prior to the Liquidation. The Series B Preferred Stock is classified as permanent equity.
The Series C Preferred Stock Issuance
Concurrently with the Series B Preferred Stock Financing, we also entered into a Debt Conversion Agreement (the “Precigen Debt Conversion Agreement”) with Precigen, Inc. (formerly Intrexon Corporation (“Intrexon”) pursuant to which we exchanged the amount owed on an unsecured non-convertible promissory note including accrued interest and trade payables owed by us to the noteholder (collectively the “Debt”) in the aggregate amount of approximately $3,400,000 for equity in the form of 100 shares of Series C, Non-Voting, Non-Convertible Preferred Stock (the “Series C Preferred Stock”) with a stated value equal to the amount of the Debt. In connection therewith, we filed a Certificate of Designation and Rights of Series C Non-Convertible Preferred Stock with the Secretary of State of the State of Florida, to be effective November 8, 2017. The number of shares of Preferred Stock designated as Series C Preferred Stock is 1,000.
In connection with the Precigen Debt Conversion Agreement, we filed a Certificate of Designation and Rights of Series C Non-Convertible Preferred Stock with the Secretary of State of the State of Florida, to be effective November 8, 2017. The number of shares of Preferred Stock designated as Series C Preferred Stock is 1,000.
Each issued and outstanding share of Series C Preferred Stock entitles the holder of record to receive dividends at the annual rate of twelve percent (12%) (the “Initial Rate”) of its Stated Value, payable by issuing additional shares of Series C Preferred Stock within thirty days after the end of each calendar year pro-rata for partial years. The Initial Rate increased to twenty percent (20%) automatically after May 10, 2019.
The Series C Preferred Stock ranks senior to the Common Stock, Series A Preferred Stock, Series B Preferred Stock and to any other equity securities issued by us (the “Junior Securities”) as to rights upon liquidation, dissolution or winding-up by us, whether voluntary or involuntary.
Upon any liquidation, dissolution or winding-up by us, whether voluntary or involuntary, the holders of Series C Preferred Stock shall be entitled to receive, in preference to the Junior Securities, an amount of cash equal to the product of (i) sum of (a) the number of shares of Series C Preferred Stock then held by such holder plus, (b) the number of shares of Series C Preferred Stock issuable to such holder in connection with any accrued but unpaid dividends, multiplied by (ii) the Stated Value, of $33,847.9874 per share, of Series C Preferred Stock (“the Series C Liquidation Amount”) and no distribution or payments shall be made in respect of any Junior Securities unless all Series C Liquidation Amounts, if any, are first paid in full.
On January 25, 2018 we paid a dividend on our Series C Preferred Stock of 1.733 shares of additional Series C Preferred Stock, on January 31, 2019 we paid a dividend on our Series C Preferred Stock of 12.208 shares of additional Series C Preferred Stock and on January 27, 2020 we paid a dividend on our Series C Preferred Stock of 19.542 shares of additional Series C Preferred Stock.
On February 11, 2021, we provided a redemption notice, for approximately $5.6 million, to the holder of all our outstanding shares of our Series C Preferred Stock. Shares of our Series C Preferred Stock will be redeemed on March 13, 2021 and no longer be outstanding.
The April 6, 2018 Registered Direct Offering and Private Placement
On April 6, 2018, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with certain investors pursuant to which issued an aggregate of 900,000 shares of our common stock, par value $0.001 per share, at $2.00 per share. In a concurrent private placement, we issued to the investors who participated in the registered offering, warrants exercisable for one share of common stock for each share purchased in the registered offering for an aggregate of warrants to acquire 900,000 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $2.00 per share. Each warrant is exercisable beginning on the six-month anniversary of the date of its issuance and expires five years from the date of issuance.
The July 17, 2018 Underwritten Public Offering
On July 17, 2018, we closed an underwritten public offering of units for gross proceeds of approximately $13.8 million, which includes the full exercise of the underwriter’s over-allotment option to purchase additional shares and warrants, prior to deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by us.
The offering was comprised of Class A Units, priced at a public offering price of $1.00 per unit, with each unit consisting of one share of common stock and a seven-year warrant to purchase one share of common stock with an exercise price of $1.00 per share (each, a “Warrant” and collectively, the “Warrants”), and Class B Units, priced at a public offering price of $1.00 per unit, with each unit comprised of one share of series D preferred stock (the “Series D Preferred Stock”), which is convertible into one share of common stock, and a Warrant. The conversion price of the Series D Preferred Stock issued in the transaction as well as the exercise price of the Warrants are fixed and do not contain any variable pricing features or any price based anti-dilutive features. The Series D Preferred Stock issued in this transaction included a beneficial ownership blocker but has no dividend rights (except to the extent that dividends are also paid on the common stock), liquidation preference or other preferences over common stock, and, with certain exceptions, has no voting rights. The securities comprising the units were immediately separable and have been issued separately.
At the closing of our underwritten public offering, a total of 4,436,000 shares of common stock, 9,364,000 shares of Series D Preferred Stock convertible into 9,364,000 shares of common stock, and warrants to acquire 13,800,000 shares of common stock were issued inclusive of the underwriter’s exercise of their over-allotment option to purchase 1,800,000 shares of common stock and warrants to acquire 1,800,000 shares of common stock at $1.00 per share.
Since the closing of our underwritten public offering all of the shares of Series D Preferred Stock that were issued have been converted into shares of our common stock in accordance with the terms for conversion and of the warrants issued, an aggregate of 10,265,500 Warrants were exercised for cash. In 2018, 9,505,500 Warrants were exercised and in 2020 an additional 760,000 Warrants were exercised. A total of 10,265,500 shares of Company common stock were issued as a result of the exercise of such Warrants.
The March 25, 2019 Underwritten Public Offering
On March 25, 2019, we announced the closing of an underwritten public offering for gross proceeds of approximately $12.5 million, which included the partial exercise of the underwriter’s over-allotment option to purchase additional shares and warrants, prior to deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses. The offering was comprised of 16,666,668 shares of common stock, short-term warrants to purchase up to 8,333,334 shares of common stock, and long-term warrants to purchase up to 8,333,334 shares of common stock, at a price to the public of $0.75 per share and accompanying warrants.
In connection with the public offering, we granted the underwriter a 30-day option to purchase up to 2,500,000 additional shares of common stock and/or short-term warrants to purchase 1,250,000 shares of common stock and long-term warrants to purchase 1,250,000 shares of common stock the public offering price, less underwriting discounts and commissions. The underwriter exercised its option to purchase the short-term warrants to purchase 1,250,000 shares of common stock and long-term warrants to purchase 1,250,000 shares of common stock effective as of the closing.
Each short-term warrant had an exercise price of $0.75 per share of common stock, is immediately exercisable, and expired on the earlier of (1) the eighteen-month anniversary of the date of issuance and (2) twenty-one trading days following our release of top-line data related to our Phase 2 double blind, placebo controlled clinical trial of AG013. As a result of our announcement of top-line data on the Phase 2 clinical trial of AG013 on April 15, 2020, the short-term Warrants were subject to expiration on May 14, 2020. On May 14, 2020 9,545,334 of the Company’s short-term warrants expired unexercised (exclusive of 38,000 shares previously exercised).
Each long-term warrant has an exercise price of $0.90 per share of common stock, is immediately exercisable and expires five years following the date of issuance. Through December 31, 2020 the Company issued 4,882,114 shares of Common Stock at an exercise price of $0.90 per share issued in connection with the exercise of the long-term warrants. The long-term warrant exercises provided aggregate gross proceeds to the Company of approximately $4.3 million.
November 2020 Public Offering.
On November 24, 2020, we closed an underwritten public offering for gross proceeds of approximately $6.0 million, which included the full exercise of the underwriter’s over-allotment option to purchase additional shares, prior to deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses. The offering was comprised of 14,189,189 shares of common stock at a price to the public of $0.37 per share. We granted the underwriter a 45-day option to purchase up to 2,128,378 additional shares of our common stock at the public offering price, less underwriting discounts and commissions. The underwriter exercised its option in full to purchase 2,128,378 additional shares of common stock, which the indicated gross proceeds reflect. We intend to use the net proceeds of the offering primarily to continue funding our pre-clinical development of our SARS-CoV-2 vaccine, Terra CoV-2 and our lantibiotics program and for general corporate purposes, including research and development activities, capital expenditures and working capital. Dr. Frederick Telling who is a Director of the Company, participated in the offering through the purchase of 100,000 shares of the Company’s common stock. Dr. Telling’s participation was approved by the Company’s Audit Committee.
December 2020 Registered Direct Offering.
On December 29, 2020, we closed a registered direct offering for gross proceeds of approximately $6.5 million, prior to deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses. The offering was comprised of 14,444,444 shares of common stock at a price to the public of $0.45 per share. We intend to use the net proceeds of the offering primarily to continue funding our pre-clinical development of our SARS-CoV-2 vaccine, Terra CoV-2 and our lantibiotics program and for general corporate purposes, including research and development activities, capital expenditures and working capital.
Other Financings
We enter into short term financing arrangements for the payment of our annual insurance premiums for our products liability insurance and directors and officers and employment practices insurance.
Products Liability Insurance
On March 10, 2019, we entered into a short-term note payable for $17,688 bearing interest at 5.69% to finance the product liability insurance. Principal and interest payments on this note began April 10, 2019 and are made evenly based on a straight-line amortization over an 11-month period with the final payment being made on February 14, 2020.
Directors’ and Officers’ Insurance
On August 24, 2020 we entered into a short-term note payable for $413,784 bearing interest at 5.39% to finance a portion of the directors’ and officers’ liability insurance and employment practices liability insurance premiums. Principal and interest payments on this note began August 24, 2020 and are made evenly based on a straight-line amortization over an 11-month period with the final payment being due on June 24, 2021.
On August 7, 2019 we entered into a short-term note payable for $254,889 bearing interest at 5.74% to finance a portion of the directors’ and officers’ liability insurance and employment practices liability insurance premiums. Principal and interest payments on this note began August 24, 2019 and are made evenly based on a straight-line amortization over an 11-month period with the final payment being made on June 22, 2020.
Future Capital Requirements
Our capital requirements for 2021 will depend on numerous factors, including the success of our commercialization efforts and of our research and development, the resources we devote to develop and support our technologies and our success in pursuing strategic licensing and funded product development relationships with external partners. Subject to our ability to raise additional capital including through possible joint ventures and/or partnerships, we expect to incur substantial expenditures to further commercialize or develop our technologies including continued increases in costs related to research, nonclinical testing and clinical trials, as well as costs associated with our capital raising efforts and being a public company. We will require substantial funds to conduct research and development and nonclinical and Phase 1 and Phase 2 clinical testing of our licensed, patented technologies and to develop sublicensing relationships for the Phase 2 and 3 clinical testing and manufacture and marketing of any products that are approved for commercial sale. Our plans include seeking both equity and debt financing, alliances or other partnership agreements with entities interested in our technologies, or other business transactions that would generate sufficient resources to ensure continuation of our operations and research and development programs.
Our current available cash and cash equivalent, provide us with limited liquidity. We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents together with the net proceeds from our ATM facility and warrant exercises, and net of the redemption of the Series C Preferred Stock of approximately $5.6 million, will allow us to fund our operating plan through the second quarter of 2022. We expect to continue to seek additional funding for our operations. Any such required additional capital may not be available on reasonable terms, if at all. If we were unable to obtain additional financing, we may be required to reduce the scope of, delay or eliminate some or all of our planned clinical testing, research and development and commercialization activities, which could harm our business. The sale of additional equity or debt securities may result in additional dilution to our shareholders. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of debt securities or preferred stock, these securities could have rights senior to those of our common stock and could contain covenants that would restrict our operations. We also will require additional capital beyond our currently forecasted amounts. For example, as we continue to work with EGI under the Lantibiotic ECC for the development of MU1140 homologs we will require additional capital.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of our product candidates, we are unable to estimate the exact amounts of our working capital requirements. Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to:
● conduct preclinical research for our Terra CoV-2 vaccine product candidate, file an IND with the FDA and, if approved, engage in Phase 1 clinical trials;
● identifying and securing clinical sites for the conduct of human trials for our product candidates;
● the determination to redeem all or any portion of our outstanding Series C Preferred Stock;
● the number and characteristics of the product candidates we pursue;
● the scope, progress, results and costs of researching and developing our product candidates, and conducting nonclinical and clinical trials including the research and development expenditures we expect to make in connection with our collaboration agreements with Precigen;
● the timing of, and the costs involved in, obtaining regulatory approvals for our product candidates;
● our ability to maintain current research and development licensing agreements and to establish new strategic partnerships, licensing or other arrangements and the financial terms of such agreements;
● our ability to achieve our milestones under our Lantibiotic ECC and licensing arrangements and the payment obligations we may have;
● the costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, defending and enforcing patent claims, including litigation costs and the outcome of such litigation; and
● the timing, receipt and amount of sales of, or royalties on, our products and future products, if any.
We have based our estimates on assumptions that may prove to be wrong. We may need to obtain additional funds sooner or in greater amounts than we currently anticipate. Potential sources of financing include strategic relationships, public or private sales of our shares or debt and other sources. We may seek to access the public or private equity markets when conditions are favorable due to our long-term capital requirements. We do not have any committed sources of financing at this time, and it is uncertain whether additional funding will be available when we need it on terms that will be acceptable to us, or at all. If we raise funds by selling additional shares of common stock or other securities convertible into common stock, the ownership interest of our existing stockholders will be diluted. If we are not able to obtain financing when needed, we may be unable to carry out our business plan. As a result, we may have to significantly limit our operations and our business, financial condition and results of operations would be materially harmed.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Tax Loss and Credit Carryforwards
At December 31, 2020, we have federal and state tax net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $142,893,000. Federal and state of Florida tax net operating loss carryforwards generated prior to December 31, 2017 will expire through 2037. Federal and state of Florida tax net operating loss carryforwards generated subsequent to December 31, 2017, do not expire and are no longer subject to taxable income limitation pursuant to the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, passed on March 27, 2020. State of Pennsylvania tax net operating loss carryforwards will expire through 2036. The Company also has federal research and development tax credit carryforwards of approximately $4,043,000. The federal tax credit carryforward will expire beginning in 2021 and continuing through 2040, unless previously utilized.
Utilization of net operating loss carryforwards and research and development credit carryforwards may be subject to a substantial annual limitation due to ownership change limitations that may have occurred or, could occur in the future in accordance with Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (“IRC Section 382”) and with Section 383 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as well as similar state provisions. These ownership changes may limit the amount of net operating loss carryforwards and research and development credit carryforwards that can be utilized annually to offset future taxable income and taxes, respectively. In general, an ownership change, as defined by IRC Section 382, results from transactions increasing the ownership of certain stockholders or public groups in the stock of a corporation by more than 50 percentage points over a three-year period. The Company has completed several financings since its inception which may result in a change in ownership as defined by IRC Section 382, or could result in a change in control in the future.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recorded a 100% valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets of approximately $36,580,000 and $30,098,000, respectively, as our management believes it is uncertain that they will be fully realized. If we determine in the future that we will be able to realize all or a portion of our net operating loss carryforwards, an adjustment to our net operating loss carryforwards would increase net income in the period in which we make such a determination.
Inflation
Inflation affects the cost of raw materials, goods and services that we use. In recent years, inflation has been modest. However, high energy costs and fluctuations in commodity prices can affect the cost of all raw materials and components. Although we cannot precisely determine the effects of inflation on our business, it is management’s belief that the effects on operating results will not be significant. We do not believe that inflation has had a material impact on our results of operations for the periods presented, except with respect to payroll-related costs and other costs arising from or related to government-imposed regulations.