ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
We are a 100-percent regulated natural gas distribution company. As such, our regulators determine the rates we are allowed to charge for our service based on the revenue requirements needed to achieve our authorized rates of return. We earn revenues from the delivery of natural gas, but do not earn a profit on the natural gas that we deliver, as those costs are passed through to our customers at cost. The primary components of our revenue requirements are the amount of capital invested in our business, which is also known as rate base, our allowed rate of return on our capital investments and our recoverable operating expenses, including depreciation, interest expense and income taxes. Our rates have both a fixed and a variable component, with approximately 72 percent of our natural gas sales net margin in 2020 derived from fixed monthly charges to our sales customers. The variable component of our rates is dependent on the consumption of natural gas, which is impacted primarily by the weather and, to a lesser extent, economic activity. While we have WNA mechanisms that adjust sales customers’ bills when actual HDDs differ from normalized HDDs, these mechanisms are in place for only a portion of the year, except in Kansas, and do not offset all fluctuations in usage resulting from weather variability. Accordingly, the weather can have either a positive or negative impact on our financial performance.
Our financial performance, therefore, is contingent on a number of factors, including: (1) our regulatory construct and outcomes, which determine the rates we are allowed to charge for our service and the authorized rates of return on our investments in rate base; (2) the consumption of natural gas, which impacts the amount of our net margin derived from the variable component of our rates; (3) customer growth; (4) our operating performance, which impacts our operating expenses; and (5) the perceived value of natural gas relative to other energy sources, particularly electricity, which influences our customers’ choice of natural gas to provide a portion of their energy needs.
We are subject to regulatory requirements for pipeline integrity and environmental compliance. These requirements impact our operating expenses and the level of capital expenditures required for compliance. Historically, our regulators have allowed recovery of these expenditures. However, because integrity and environmental regulation is changing constantly, our capital and operating expenditures to comply are changing as well. Although we believe our regulators will continue to allow recovery of such expenditures in the future, we will continue to make these expenditures with no assurance about if, or over what period, we will be permitted to recover them.
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
2021 February Winter Weather Event - A historic winter weather event in February 2021 impacted supply, market pricing and demand for natural gas in a number of states, including our service territories of Kansas, Oklahoma, and Texas. During this time, the governors of Kansas, Oklahoma, and Texas, each declared a state of emergency, and certain regulatory agencies issued emergency orders that impacted the utility and natural gas industries, including statewide utilities curtailment programs and orders requiring jurisdictional natural gas and electric utilities to do all things possible and necessary to ensure that natural gas and electricity utility services continue to be provided to their customers. Due to the historic nature of this winter weather event, we experienced unforeseeable and unprecedented market pricing for gas costs in our Kansas, Oklahoma, and Texas jurisdictions, which resulted in aggregated natural gas purchases for the month of February of approximately $2.2 billion. These purchases are generally payable at the end of March 2021.
On February 22, 2021, we entered into the ONE Gas 2021 Term Loan Facility to enhance our liquidity position as part of the financing of our natural gas purchases in order to provide sufficient liquidity to satisfy our obligations as a result of the 2021 winter weather event and the repayment of indebtedness.
Our purchased gas costs are recoverable through our tariffs in each state where we operate. Due to the higher level of gas purchase costs during the 2021 winter event, we are working with regulators to extend the recovery periods of such costs in order to lessen the immediate customer impact. In that regard, the Kansas Corporation Commission and the Railroad Commission of Texas each authorized certain utilities, including local natural gas distribution companies, to record a regulatory
asset to account for the extraordinary costs associated with this winter weather event, including but not limited to gas purchase costs and other costs related to the procurement and transportation of gas supply. We have also filed a motion with the Oklahoma Corporation Commission to seek comparable authority in Oklahoma to record a regulatory asset to account for the extraordinary costs, including carrying costs, associated with this winter weather event. An administrative law judge has recommended approval of our motion by the Oklahoma Corporation Commission.
See “Regulatory Activities”, “Liquidity”, Note 2 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements and Item 1A, “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report for additional discussion of the effects of this winter weather event on us.
COVID-19 - Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, we have continued to provide essential services to our customers. We have implemented a comprehensive set of policies, procedures and guidelines to protect the safety of our employees, customers and communities. The following summarizes actions we have taken and the impact on our operations:
Workforce Following the guidance of the CDC, OSHA and third-party subject matter experts we have engaged, we have established a number of protocols to protect our employees. For all employees, we are encouraging social distancing and proper hygiene, and are requiring the use of masks in our facilities. Employees who may be exhibiting symptoms or who may have been exposed to COVID-19 are required to contact a third-party medical consultant engaged by the Company who follows protocols specifically developed for COVID-19 to determine whether the employee should seek medical attention, self-isolate or can safely return to work.
Our business continuity planning and investments in IT enabled an orderly transition to remote work for approximately 50 percent of our employees. For those employees who continue to report to our offices and service centers, the reduced number of employees working in these locations provides space for social distancing. We have implemented health screenings at all of our employee work locations, which include a self-assessment health screening application using mobile devices and automated thermal temperature checks at our larger facilities. We routinely disinfect employee work locations, placing emphasis on high-touch surfaces in common areas. For employees who continue to interact with customers, we are providing additional PPE in accordance with CDC and OSHA guidelines.
In addition, we have implemented a Paid Pandemic Leave Policy, increased medical benefits for COVID-19 testing and vaccination and are reminding employees of our benefit plans and programs for their financial, physical and mental health and well-being.
Customers For customers requesting service orders, we have implemented protocols to determine whether someone in the home has been exposed to COVID-19. Employees entering customers’ homes are provided appropriate PPE in accordance with CDC and OSHA guidelines to protect themselves and our customers. Customers are also asked to provide for social distancing while our employees are in the customer’s home.
As ordered by our regulators, customer disconnects for nonpayment were suspended from mid-March through May 20, 2020, in Oklahoma, through May 31, 2020, in Kansas, and through December 31, 2020, in some areas of Texas. As of December 31, 2020, we have temporarily suspended disconnects for safety reasons across all of our jurisdictions due to the level of COVID-19 infection. Customers who are finding it difficult to pay their bills are being encouraged to contact us so we can work with them to establish alternative payment arrangements and advise them of public-assistance programs that may be available.
Operations Although we have experienced employee absences due to our protocols for self-isolation of employees who may be exhibiting symptoms or who may have been exposed to or contracted the COVID-19 virus, we have continued, and expect to continue, to execute our work in the field, including our capital work for system integrity, pipeline replacements and extending service to new customers. Our work going forward could be impacted if we do not have access to the PPE needed to keep our employees and customers safe or experience a significant increase in employee and contractor absences.
Supply Chain We are actively managing the materials, supplies and contract services necessary for our operations. We utilize a diverse group of suppliers and contractors and are in frequent contact with our vendors to understand their ability to continue to provide the materials, supplies and services we require. To date, we have not experienced significant disruption to our supply chain and have no indication of significant disruptions in the future. Our suppliers and contractors could be impacted if they, or the businesses they rely on, experience a significant increase in employee absences.
Our natural gas supply portfolio consists of contracts with varying terms from a diverse group of suppliers. We acquire our natural gas supply from natural gas processors, marketers and producers from multiple production areas and lease capacity from third-party natural gas storage providers. This strategy is designed to mitigate the impact on our supply from physical interruption, financial difficulties of a single supplier, natural disasters and other unforeseen force majeure events, as well as to ensure these resources are reliable and flexible to meet the variations of customer demands.
To date, we have not experienced disruption to our natural gas supply and we do not anticipate significant disruption in the future.
Regulatory We are in regular communication with our regulators to keep them apprised of the effects COVID-19 is having on the service we provide. We have received accounting orders in each of our jurisdictions authorizing us to accumulate and defer for regulatory purposes certain incremental costs incurred, including bad debt expenses, and certain lost revenues, net of offsetting expense reductions, associated with COVID-19.
Liquidity In April 2020, we entered into the ONE Gas 364-day Credit Agreement in the amount of $250 million, which provides us an additional source of liquidity.
At December 31, 2020, we had short-term liquidity available through our commercial paper program, credit facilities and cash on hand totaling $538.6 million.
In April 2020, we issued $300 million of 2.00 percent senior notes due 2030. The proceeds from the issuance were used to reduce the amount of our outstanding commercial paper and for general corporate purposes.
We believe our investment-grade credit ratings and strong balance sheet will enable us to access sources of liquidity that are adequate to support our current and planned level of operations.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, impacts on our results of operations as a result of COVID-19 include but are not limited to:
•lower late payment, reconnect and collection fees and incremental expenses for bad debts related to the suspension of disconnects for nonpayment in each of our rate jurisdictions;
•incremental expenses for PPE, cleaning supplies, outside services and other expenses; and
•lower expenses for travel and employee training that have been restricted due to the pandemic.
Going forward, we expect continuing impacts on our revenues and expenses during the course of the pandemic. We also could experience a possible reduction in revenues from commercial and transportation customers temporarily or permanently impacted by the pandemic. We have received accounting orders in each of our jurisdictions authorizing us to accumulate and defer for regulatory purposes certain incremental costs incurred, including bad debt expenses, and certain lost revenues, net of offsetting expense reductions associated with COVID-19. Pursuant to these orders, the recovery of any net incremental costs and lost revenue will be determined in future rate cases or alternative rate recovery filings in each jurisdiction. For financial reporting purposes, any amounts deferred as a regulatory asset for future recovery under these accounting orders must be probable of recovery. At December 31, 2020, no regulatory assets have been recorded. We continue to evaluate the impacts of COVID-19 on our business and will record regulatory assets for financial reporting purposes at such time as recovery is deemed probable. Accordingly, there could be a delay in the recognition of amounts that may be approved for recovery until the conclusion of future regulatory proceedings.
See “Regulatory Activities,” “Financial Results and Operating Information,” “Capital Expenditures and Asset Removal Costs,” Note 11 and Note 17 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements and Item 1A, “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report for additional discussion of the effects of COVID-19 on us.
At-the-Market Equity Program - In February 2020, we initiated a $250 million at-the-market equity program. Proceeds from the program are available for general corporate purposes, which may include repaying or refinancing a portion of our outstanding indebtedness and funding working capital and capital expenditures. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources” in this Annual Report for additional discussion.
Dividend - In January 2021, we declared a dividend of $0.58 per share ($2.32 per share on an annualized basis) for shareholders of record as of February 19, 2021, payable on March 5, 2021.
REGULATORY ACTIVITIES
Oklahoma - On February 12, 2021, the governor of Oklahoma declared a state of emergency for all 77 counties in the state of Oklahoma in light of expected severe weather and freezing temperatures associated with a winter weather event. The declaration cited anticipated damage to private and public properties and utilities, including electric, gas, and water systems, within the state of Oklahoma.
On February 16, 2021, the Oklahoma Corporation Commission approved an Emergency Order (the “OCC Order”) (i) directing natural gas and electric utilities to prioritize deliveries of natural gas and electricity for services necessary for life, health, and public safety, and natural gas to electric generation facilities that serve human needs customers, and (ii) directing local utilities to communicate with their customers in order to reduce all non-essential energy consumption, and to reduce load in a safe and reasonable manner. The OCC Order recognized that the severe weather conditions resulted in increased commodity prices for both gas and electric utilities, along with issues relating to commodity acquisition, line pressure, and supply shortages. The OCC Order expired on February 20, 2021.
In order to reduce the impact on customers, on February 19, 2021, Oklahoma Natural Gas filed a motion with the Oklahoma Corporation Commission to seek the authority to record a regulatory asset to account for the extraordinary costs, including costs associated with gas purchases, other operational costs and carrying costs, associated with this winter weather event. These costs will be subject to a review for reasonableness and accuracy in future regulatory proceedings. On February 25, 2021, an administrative law judge recommended for approval by the OCC an interim order granting a motion to establish a regulatory asset. The order states that Oklahoma Natural Gas shall defer to a regulatory asset the extraordinary costs associated with this unprecedented winter weather event, including commodity costs incorporating escalated spot and daily index prices, operational costs and carrying costs. The order identifies that decisions related to the recovery of the deferred costs will be addressed at a later date. The recommendation from the administrative law judge will next be considered by the OCC.
In June 2020, the OCC issued an order permitting the creation of regulatory assets and deferrals related to COVID-19. Each utility is authorized under the OCC’s order to record as a regulatory asset increased bad debt expenses, costs associated with expanded payment plans, waived fees, and incremental expenses that are directly related to the suspension of or delay in disconnection of service (or the reconnection of service) beginning March 15, 2020, as a result of the governor’s executive order declaring a state of emergency. In addition, the OCC recognizes that utilities report taking many steps to ensure the continuity of utility service, while protecting utility personnel, customers, and the general public. Such steps include procuring additional PPE, increasing sanitation efforts at facilities, implementing health-screening processes, and securing temporary facilities for potential sequestration of critical operations personnel. The OCC has stated it supports the continuation of these critical response and planning efforts and acknowledges such efforts cause incremental costs that it will allow to be deferred and reviewed in a future rate case. The OCC’s deferral authorization does not bind the OCC to any specific treatment of these items in any future proceeding, nor does it prohibit the OCC from considering the effect of any operational savings, or other financial impacts that may occur as a result of COVID-19. The recovery of the regulatory assets and deferrals will be addressed in the next rate case that is required to be filed on or before June 30, 2021.
In February 2020, Oklahoma Natural Gas filed its fourth annual PBRC application following the general rate case that was approved in January 2016. A settlement was reached, and the OCC approved a joint stipulation in July 2020. This stipulation includes a base rate increase of $9.7 million and an energy efficiency incentive of $2.2 million, with new rates reflecting these changes effective in June 2020. This stipulation also includes a credit of $12.2 million associated with EDIT to be issued through a bill credit to Oklahoma customers in the first quarter 2021.
In March 2019, Oklahoma Natural Gas filed its third annual PBRC application following the general rate case that was approved in January 2016. This filing was made in compliance with the January 2019 OCC order settling tax issues resulting
from the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017. A settlement was reached, and the OCC approved a joint stipulation in August 2019. This stipulation includes a PBRC credit of $15.6 million to be spread over a 12-month period through a bill credit to Oklahoma customers beginning in the third quarter 2019 and a credit of $12.7 million associated with EDIT.
In March 2018, Oklahoma Natural Gas filed its second annual PBRC application following the general rate case that was approved in January 2016. This filing was based on a calendar test year of 2017 and addressed the tax issues resulting from the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017. In January 2019, the OCC issued an order requiring Oklahoma Natural Gas to lower base rates by $11.3 million beginning February 2019 to reflect the lower federal corporate income tax rate and the authorized ROE of 9.5 percent prospectively and to credit customers for EDIT based upon amortization periods in compliance with the tax normalization rules for the portions of EDIT stipulated by the Code and ten years for all other components. This order also required the March 15, 2019, PBRC filing to include the return of all earnings above 9.5 percent occurring in the 2018 test year.
As required, PBRC filings are made annually on or before March 15, until the next general rate case, which is currently required to be filed on or before June 30, 2021, based on a calendar 2020 test year.
Kansas - On February 14, 2021, the governor of Kansas issued a State of Disaster Emergency due to wind chill warnings and stress on utility and natural gas providers caused by the significantly colder than normal weather from a winter weather event. The executive order also urged Kansas citizens to conserve energy to help ensure a continued supply of natural gas and electricity and keep their own personal costs down. The declaration also noted that due to increased energy demand and natural gas supply constraints caused by sub-zero temperatures, utilities at the time were experiencing wholesale natural gas prices anywhere from 10 to 100 times higher than normal.
On February 15, 2021, the KCC issued an Emergency Order (i) directing all jurisdictional natural gas and electric utilities to coordinate efforts and take all reasonably feasible, lawful, and appropriate actions to ensure adequate delivery of natural gas and electricity to interconnected, non-jurisdictional utilities in Kansas, (ii) requiring jurisdictional natural gas and electric utilities to do all things possible and necessary to ensure that natural gas and electricity utility services continue to be provided to their customers in Kansas, and (iii) allowing those electric and natural gas distribution utilities who incur extraordinary costs to ensure their customers and other interconnected customers continue to receive utility service during this unprecedented cold weather event to defer those costs to a regulatory asset account. Once this weather event is over, each jurisdictional utility will be required to file a compliance report detailing the extent of such costs incurred and present a plan to minimize the financial impacts of this event on ratepayers over a reasonable time frame. These costs will be subject to review for reasonableness and accuracy in future regulatory proceedings. Kansas Gas Service expects to file its compliance report in the first quarter of 2021.
In August 2020, Kansas Gas Service submitted an application to the KCC requesting an increase of approximately $7.8 million related to its GSRS. This filing incorporates the effect on the requested GSRS rate increase of a bill amending the Kansas income tax code that eliminates public utilities regulated by the KCC from paying Kansas state income taxes beginning January 1, 2021. In September 2020, Kansas Gas Service submitted an errata to the application which modified the requested increase to approximately $7.5 million. In November 2020, the KCC approved the increase effective December 2020.
In May 2020, a bill amending the Kansas state income tax code was signed into law that exempts public utilities regulated by the KCC from paying Kansas state income taxes beginning January 1, 2021, and authorizes the KCC to adjust utility rates for the elimination of Kansas state income tax beginning January 1, 2021. As a result of the enactment of this legislation, we remeasured our ADIT. As a regulated entity, the reduction in ADIT of $81.5 million was recorded as an EDIT regulatory liability and will be refunded to our customers. This adjustment had no material impact on our income tax expense and no impact on our cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2020. The bill stipulates that, if requested by the utility, this EDIT will be returned to Kansas customers over a period of no less than 30 years, with the exact timing to be determined in our next general rate proceeding. In August 2020, Kansas Gas Service submitted an application to the KCC to reduce its base rates to reflect the elimination of Kansas state income taxes by approximately $4.9 million. In December 2020, the KCC approved the reduction, effective January 1, 2021. See Notes 11 and 15 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report for additional information.
In April 2020, Kansas Gas Service filed an application with the KCC for an AAO to accumulate and defer certain incremental costs incurred, including bad debt expenses and lost revenues, as well as associated carrying costs, related to COVID-19 beginning March 1, 2020, for recovery in Kansas Gas Service’s next rate case filing. In July 2020, the KCC approved the request for an AAO subject to the recommendations set forth in its Staff Report and Recommendation and clarifications sought by Kansas Gas Service. The AAO provides notice that Kansas Gas Service may identify, track, document, accumulate, and defer in a regulatory asset extraordinary costs (net of any cost decreases) and lost revenue, plus carrying costs, associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. The KCC states that approval of the AAO is not a finding that tracked costs and lost revenue will be included in future rates; rather, any determination regarding recoverability will occur in a future rate proceeding. In a separate
order applicable to all regulated utilities, the KCC approved the deferral of bad debt expense and late payment fees associated with the suspension of disconnection activity and customer protection provisions. The recovery, the carrying charges and amortization period will be determined in Kansas Gas Service’s next rate case or alternative rate recovery filing.
In August 2019, Kansas Gas Service submitted an application to the KCC requesting an increase of approximately $4.2 million related to its GSRS. In November 2019, the KCC approved the increase effective December 2019.
In November 2018, Kansas Gas Service submitted an application to the KCC requesting approval of its contract to own, operate and maintain the natural gas distribution system at Fort Riley, a United States Army installation, for approximately $5.8 million. The KCC approved the Company’s application in May 2019 and Kansas Gas Service and Fort Riley began preparing for the transition. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, Kansas Gas Service entered into an agreement dated April 1, 2020, with the U.S. government to stay the transition period and contract performance until concerns surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic are resolved. The 10-month transition period work officially started in June 2020, with the understanding that there may be excusable delays in the future because of new state of Kansas requirements related to COVID-19 or changes in Fort Riley’s health protection conditions. The duration of the stay and any future excusable delays will impact the timing of the asset acquisition.
In June 2018, Kansas Gas Service filed a request with the KCC for an increase in base rates, reflecting investments in system improvements and changes in operating costs necessary to maintain the safety and reliability of its natural gas distribution system, as well as addressing the tax issues resulting from the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017. In February 2019, the KCC issued an order that included a net base rate increase of $18.6 million and a GSRS pre-tax carrying charge of approximately 9.1 percent. Kansas Gas Service was already recovering $2.9 million from customers through the GSRS, therefore, this order represents a total base rate increase of $21.5 million. The increase in base rates reflects an amortization credit for the refund of EDIT over a period in compliance with the tax normalization rules for the portions stipulated by the Code and five years for all other components of EDIT. Additionally, the settlement provides for extending application of the WNA rider to small transportation customers and the implementation of a tracker for cybersecurity expenses.
In a separate order issued by the KCC, Kansas Gas Service was required to refund to customers the amount of the regulatory liability for the decrease in the federal corporate income tax rate in 2018 through the date on which Kansas Gas Service’s new rates went into effect in February 2019. The total refund of $16.6 million was issued through a bill credit to Kansas customers in the second quarter 2019.
In April 2018, a bill amending the GSRS statute was approved. Beginning January 1, 2019, the scope of projects eligible for recovery under the statute includes safety-related investments to replace, upgrade or modernize obsolete facilities, as well as projects that enhance the integrity of pipeline system components or extend the useful life of such assets. Safety-related investments also include expenditures for physical and cyber security. Additionally, the cap on the monthly residential surcharge increased to $0.80 from $0.40.
Texas - On February 12, 2021, the governor of Texas declared a state of disaster for all 254 counties in Texas in response to the then-forecasted weather conditions. The declaration certified that severe winter weather posed an imminent threat due to prolonged freezing temperatures, heavy snow, and freezing rain statewide.
Also, on February 12, 2021, the RRC issued an Emergency Order to temporarily implement a statewide utilities curtailment program intended to protect residences, hospitals, schools, churches, and other human needs customers. On February 17, 2021, the RRC extended its Emergency Order issued on February 12, 2021, to February 23, 2021.
On February 13, 2021, the RRC issued a Notice to Local Distribution Companies that acknowledged that, due to the demand for natural gas during this winter weather event, natural gas utility LDCs may be required to pay extraordinarily high prices in the market for natural gas and may be subjected to other extraordinary costs when responding to the event. The RRC also encouraged natural gas utilities to continue to work to ensure that the citizens of the State of Texas are provided with safe and reliable natural gas service. To partially defer and reduce the impact on customers for these costs that ultimately are reflected in customer bills, the RRC authorized LDCs to record a regulatory asset to account for the extraordinary costs associated with this winter weather event, including but not limited to gas cost and other costs related to the procurement and transportation of gas supply. These costs will be subject to review for reasonableness and accuracy in future regulatory proceedings.
In April 2020, the RRC issued an order authorizing utilities to use a regulatory accounting mechanism and a subsequent process through which Texas Gas Service may seek future recovery of incremental expenses resulting from the effects of COVID-19, including bad debt and associated credit and collections costs, waived fees and other reasonable and necessary incremental costs to address the impact of COVID-19. The timing of any recovery will be determined as we work with our regulators.
West Texas Service Area - In March 2020, Texas Gas Service made GRIP filings for all customers in the West Texas service area. In June 2020, the RRC and the cities in the West Texas service area agreed to an increase of $4.7 million, and new rates became effective in June 2020.
In March 2019, Texas Gas Service made GRIP filings for all customers in the West Texas service area. In June 2019, the RRC and the cities in the West Texas service area agreed to an increase of $4.1 million, and new rates became effective in July 2019.
In March 2018, Texas Gas Service made GRIP filings for all customers in the West Texas service area. In June 2018, the RRC and the cities in the West Texas service area agreed to an increase of $3.5 million, and new rates became effective in July 2018.
Central-Gulf Service Area - In February 2021, Texas Gas Service made GRIP filings for all customers in the Central-Gulf service area, requesting an increase of $10.7 million to be effective in the third quarter of 2021.
In 2019, Texas Gas Service filed a rate case for all customers in the Central Texas and Gulf Coast service areas, seeking a rate increase of $15.6 million and a $1.3 million credit to customers associated with EDIT, and requesting to consolidate the two service areas into one. In August 2020, the RRC approved all terms of a settlement, including a $10.3 million increase in base rates, as well as consolidation of the Central Texas service area and the Gulf Coast service area into a new Central-Gulf service area. The RRC also approved an $8.5 million credit to customers associated with EDIT. The settlement included an ROE of 9.5 percent and a capital structure with equity of 59 percent and debt of 41 percent, and new rates became effective in August 2020.
In March 2019, Texas Gas Service made GRIP filings for all customers in the Central Texas service area. In June 2019, the RRC and the cities in the Central Texas service area agreed to an increase of $5.5 million, and new rates became effective in June 2019.
In March 2018, Texas Gas Service made GRIP filings for all customers in the Central Texas service area. In June 2018, the RRC and the cities in the Central Texas service area agreed to an increase of $3.3 million, and new rates became effective in July 2018.
Other Texas Service Areas - In the normal course of business, Texas Gas Service has filed rate cases and sought GRIP and COSA increases in various other Texas jurisdictions to address investments in rate base and changes in expenses. Annual rate increases associated with these filings that were approved totaled $1.8 million, $1.9 million and $1.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
In 2018, Texas Gas Service requested a total of $11.1 million of decreases to rates for customers in its service areas due to the reduction of the federal corporate income tax rate, and one-time refunds totaling $6.6 million for the reduction in the federal corporate income tax rate for the period between January 1, 2018, to the dates new rates were implemented. The requests for the decreases in rates and the one-time refunds were approved and new rates, where applicable, became effective in the second half of 2018. Four service areas in Texas have authorized EDIT to be credited to customers annually. The timing of the return of EDIT to customers in our remaining service area in Texas will be determined as we work with our regulators.
EDIT - The treatment of EDIT by our regulators is not expected to have a material impact on earnings, as any reduction or credit in rates is offset by a reduction in income tax expense, which includes the amortization of the regulatory liability as a credit in income tax expense. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we credited income tax expense $17.4 million and $12.8 million, respectively, for the amortization of the regulatory liability associated with EDIT that was returned to customers. No amortization of the regulatory liability associated with EDIT returned to customers was recorded in 2018. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources - Tax Reform” and Note 15 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017.
OTHER
Certain costs to be recovered through the ratemaking process have been capitalized as regulatory assets. Should recovery cease due to regulatory actions, certain of these assets may no longer meet the criteria for recognition and accordingly, a write-off of regulatory assets and stranded costs may be required. There were no write-offs of regulatory assets resulting from the failure to meet the criteria for capitalization during 2020, 2019 or 2018.
FINANCIAL RESULTS AND OPERATING INFORMATION
Selected Financial Results - Net income was $196.4 million, or $3.68 per diluted share, $186.7 million, or $3.51 per diluted share, and $172.2 million, or $3.25 per diluted share, for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. We operate in one reportable business segment: regulated public utilities that deliver natural gas to residential, commercial and transportation customers. We evaluate our financial performance principally on net income.
The following table sets forth certain selected financial results for our operations for the periods indicated:
Natural gas sales to customers represent revenue from contracts with customers through implied contracts established by our tariffs and rates approved by the regulatory authorities, as well as revenues from regulatory mechanisms related to natural gas sales, which are included as other revenues in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Transportation revenues represent revenue from contracts with customers through implied contracts established by our tariffs and rates approved by the regulatory authorities, as well as tariff-based negotiated contracts.
Other utility revenues include primarily miscellaneous service charges which represent implied contracts with customers established by our tariffs and rates approved by the regulatory authorities and other revenues from regulatory mechanisms, which are included in the consolidated statements of income and our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements as other revenues.
Non-GAAP Financial Measure - We have disclosed net margin, which is considered a non-GAAP financial measure, in our selected financial data and selected financial results. Net margin is comprised of total revenues less cost of natural gas. Cost of natural gas includes commodity purchases, fuel, storage, transportation and other gas purchase costs recovered through our cost of natural gas regulatory mechanisms and does not include an allocation of general operating costs or depreciation and amortization. In addition, these regulatory mechanisms provide a method of recovering natural gas costs on an ongoing basis without a profit. Therefore, although our revenues will fluctuate with the cost of natural gas that we pass-through to our customers, net margin is not affected by fluctuations in the cost of natural gas. Accordingly, we routinely use net margin in the analysis of our financial performance. We believe that net margin provides investors a more relevant and useful measure to analyze our financial performance as a 100 percent regulated natural gas utility than total revenues because the change in the cost of natural gas from period to period does not impact our operating income. As such, the following discussion and analysis of our financial performance will reference net margin rather than total revenues and cost of natural gas individually.
The following table sets forth reconciliation of net margin to the most directly comparable GAAP measure for the periods indicated:
The following table sets forth our net margin by type of customer for the periods indicated:
Our net margin on natural gas sales is comprised of two components, fixed and variable margin. Fixed margin reflects the portion of our net margin attributable to the monthly fixed customer charge component of our rates, which does not fluctuate based on customer usage in each period. Variable margin reflects the portion of our net margin that fluctuates with the volumes delivered and billed and the effects of weather normalization. The following table sets forth our net margin on natural gas sales by revenue type for the periods indicated:
2020 vs. 2019 - Net margin increased $28.1 million due primarily to the following:
•an increase of $23.1 million from new rates;
•an increase of $10.1 million in residential sales due primarily to net customer growth;
•an increase of $2.1 million in rider and surcharge recoveries due to a higher ad-valorem surcharge in Kansas, which was offset with higher regulatory amortization expense in depreciation and amortization expense; and
•an increase of $1.3 million due to the beneficial impact of a retroactive CNG federal excise tax credit, offset partially by:
•a decrease of $4.3 million due to lower fees associated with collection activities and late payments primarily related to the suspensions of disconnects for nonpayment in response to the COVID-19 pandemic in each of our rate jurisdictions;
•a decrease of $2.8 million due to lower transport volumes primarily in Kansas; and
•a decrease of $0.9 million due to lower sales volumes, net of weather normalization, primarily in Kansas and Oklahoma from warmer weather in 2020 compared with the same period in 2019. For 2020, heating degree days in Oklahoma and Kansas were 12% and 11% lower, respectively, compared with 2019.
Operating costs increased $5.4 million due primarily to the following:
•an increase of $6.4 million in expenses related to our response to the COVID-19 pandemic;
•an increase of $5.4 million in bad debt expense;
•an increase of $2.6 million in ad-valorem taxes; and
•an increase of $2.1 million in insurance expense, offset partially by:
•a decrease of $4.8 million in expenses for travel and employee training that have been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic;
•a decrease of $3.3 million in legal-related costs;
•a decrease of $1.4 million in materials for pipeline repair and maintenance activities; and
•a decrease of $1.0 million in outside service costs.
The portion of the decrease in late payment, reconnect and collection fees resulting from the suspension of disconnects for nonpayment in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and increased bad debt expense and the net incremental expenses related to the COVID-19 pandemic are eligible for future recovery under the regulatory orders we have received in each of our jurisdictions. For financial reporting purposes, the amounts deferred as a regulatory asset for future recovery under the accounting orders must be probable of recovery. At December 31, 2020, no regulatory assets have been recorded. We continue to evaluate the impacts of COVID-19 on our business and will record regulatory assets for financial statement purposes at such time as recovery is deemed probable.
Depreciation and amortization expense increased $14.5 million due primarily to an increase in depreciation from our capital expenditures being placed in service and an increase in amortization of the ad-valorem surcharge rider in Kansas.
Other Factors Affecting Net Income - Other factors that affect net income include a $1.3 million decrease, compared with 2019, in income tax expense due to a higher credit to income tax expense from the amortization of EDIT of $4.6 million, offset partially by the increase in income before income taxes.
EDIT - The return of EDIT to our customers is not expected to have a material impact on earnings, as any reduction or credit in rates is offset by a reduction in income tax expense. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we credited income tax expense $17.4 million and $12.8 million, respectively, for the amortization of the regulatory liability associated with EDIT that was returned to customers. No amortization of the regulatory liability associated with EDIT returned to customers was recorded in 2018. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources” and Note 11 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017.
Capital Expenditures and Asset Removal Costs - Our capital expenditures program includes expenditures for pipeline integrity, extending service to new areas, modifications to customer service lines, increasing system capabilities, pipeline replacements, automated meter reading, government-mandated pipeline relocations, fleet, facilities, IT assets and cybersecurity. It is our practice to maintain and upgrade our infrastructure, facilities and systems to ensure safe, reliable and efficient operations. Asset removal costs include expenditures associated with the replacement or retirement of long-lived assets that result from the construction, development and/or normal use of our assets, primarily our pipeline assets.
Capital expenditures and asset removal costs increased $47.1 million for 2020, compared with 2019, due primarily to increased system integrity activities, extension of service to new areas and higher government relocation activities. Our capital expenditures and asset removal costs are expected to be approximately $540 million for 2021, although the amount and timing of these expenditures could be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. While we have not experienced a significant impact to our capital expenditures program for the year ended December 31, 2020, our capital activity for 2021 could experience a delay if conditions associated with COVID-19 worsen, impacting employee absences, or our supply chain for contract labor, materials and supplies, which may cause us to suspend or curtail certain business operations for an indefinite period.
Selected Operating Information - The following tables set forth certain selected operating information for the periods indicated:
The increase in the average number of customers for 2020, compared with 2019, is due primarily to the connection of new customers resulting from the extension and expansion of our system in our service areas. For 2020, our average customer count includes 26,400 new customer connections compared to 22,300 in 2019. Also contributing to the increase is a reduction in disconnects for nonpayment by our customers as a result of suspensions of collection activities in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The following table reflects the total volumes delivered, excluding the effects of WNA mechanisms on sales volumes:
Total volumes delivered decreased for 2020, compared with 2019, due primarily to warmer weather in the fourth quarter 2020. The impact of weather on residential and commercial net margin is mitigated by WNA mechanisms in all jurisdictions.
The following table sets forth the HDD’s by state for the periods indicated:
Normal HDDs are established through rate proceedings in each of our rate jurisdictions for use primarily in weather normalization billing calculations. Normal HDDs disclosed above are based on:
•Oklahoma - For years 2016-2020, 10-year weighted average HDDs as of December 31, 2014, as calculated using 11 weather stations across Oklahoma and weighted on average customer count.
•Kansas - For April 2019 and forward, a 30-year rolling average for years 1988-2017 calculated using three weather stations across Kansas and weighted on HDDs by weather station and customers. For 2017 to March 2019, 30-year average for years 1981-2010 published by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, as calculated using four weather stations across Kansas and weighted on HDDs by weather station and customers.
•Texas - An average of HDDs authorized in our most recent rate proceeding in each service area and weighted using a rolling 10-year average of actual natural gas distribution sales volumes by service area.
Actual HDDs are based on year-to-date, weighted average of:
•11 weather stations and customers by month for Oklahoma;
•3 weather stations and customers by month for Kansas; and
•9 weather stations and natural gas distribution sales volumes by service area for Texas.
Selected financial results and operating information for 2019, compared with 2018, is described in Part II, Item 7 "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
CONTINGENCIES
We are a party to various litigation matters and claims that have arisen in the normal course of our operations. While the results of litigation and claims cannot be predicted with certainty, we believe the reasonably possible losses from such matters, individually and in the aggregate, are not material. Additionally, we believe the probable final outcome of such matters will not have a material adverse effect on our results of operations, financial position or cash flows. See Note 17 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report for information with respect to legal proceedings.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
General - We have relied primarily on operating cash flow and commercial paper for our liquidity and capital resource requirements. We fund operating expenses, working capital requirements, including purchases of natural gas, and capital expenditures primarily with cash from operations and commercial paper.
We believe that the combination of the significant residential component of our customer base, the fixed-charge component of our natural gas sales net margin and our rate mechanisms that we have in place result in a stable cash flow profile and historically has generated stable earnings. Additionally, we have rate mechanisms in place in our jurisdictions that reduce the lag in earning a return on our capital expenditures and provide for recovery of certain changes in our cost of service by allowing for adjustments to rates between rate cases. We anticipate that our cash flow generated from operations and our expected short- and long-term financing arrangements will enable us to maintain our current and planned level of operations and provide us flexibility to finance our infrastructure investments.
Our ability to access capital markets for debt and equity financing under reasonable terms depends on market conditions, our financial condition and credit ratings. By maintaining a conservative financial profile and stable revenue base, we expect to maintain credit ratings at a level that supports our access to diverse sources of capital at favorable rates for capital investments and expenses.
Short-term Financing - In October 2019, we exercised a one-year extension of the ONE Gas Credit Agreement and amended the agreement to provide that we may extend the maturity date by one year, subject to the lenders’ consent, two additional times. The ONE Gas Credit Agreement remains a $700 million revolving unsecured credit facility and includes a $20 million letter of credit subfacility and a $60 million swingline subfacility. We are able to request an increase in commitments of up to an additional $500 million upon satisfaction of customary conditions, including receipt of commitments from either new lenders or increased commitments from existing lenders. The ONE Gas Credit Agreement expires in October 2024, and is available to provide liquidity for working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions and mergers, the issuance of letters of credit and for other general corporate purposes.
The ONE Gas Credit Agreement contains customary events of default. Upon the occurrence of certain events of default, the obligations under the ONE Gas Credit Agreement may be accelerated and the commitments may be terminated. The ONE Gas Credit Agreement also contains certain financial, operational and legal covenants. Among other things, these covenants include maintaining ONE Gas’ total debt-to-capital ratio of no more than 70 percent at the end of any calendar quarter. The ONE Gas Credit Agreement also contains customary affirmative and negative covenants, including covenants relating to liens, indebtedness of subsidiaries, investments, changes in the nature of business, fundamental changes, transactions with affiliates, burdensome agreements, and use of proceeds. In the event of a breach of certain covenants by ONE Gas, amounts outstanding under the ONE Gas Credit Agreement may become due and payable immediately. At December 31, 2020, our total debt-to-capital ratio was 47 percent, and we were in compliance with all covenants under the ONE Gas Credit Agreement.
The ONE Gas Credit Agreement contains provisions for an applicable margin rate and an annual facility fee, both of which adjust with changes in our credit rating. Based on our current credit ratings, borrowings, if any, will accrue interest at LIBOR plus 79.5 basis points, and the annual facility fee is 8 basis points.
In April 2020, we entered into the ONE Gas 364-day Credit Agreement. The ONE Gas 364-day Credit Agreement is a $250 million revolving unsecured credit facility containing various customary conditions to borrowing and affirmative, negative and financial ratio maintenance covenants, all of which are substantially the same as those of the ONE Gas Credit Agreement. The ONE Gas 364-day Credit Agreement also contains provisions for an applicable margin rate and a quarterly facility fee, both of which adjust with changes in our credit rating. Based on our current credit ratings, borrowings, if any, will accrue interest at LIBOR plus 115 basis points, and the quarterly facility fee is 10 basis points.
Both the ONE Gas Credit Agreement and the ONE Gas 364-day Credit Agreement utilize LIBOR as the reference rate for determining interest to accrue on borrowings under the respective agreements. In the event LIBOR is not available, and such circumstances are unlikely to be temporary, our lenders for each respective agreement may establish an alternative interest rate for the impacted loans by replacing LIBOR with one or more secured overnight financing-based rates or another alternate benchmark rate.
At December 31, 2020, we had $1.2 million in letters of credit issued and no borrowings under the ONE Gas Credit Agreement or the ONE Gas 364-day Credit Agreement, with $948.8 million of combined remaining credit available to repay our commercial paper borrowings.
We have a commercial paper program under which we may issue unsecured commercial paper up to a maximum amount of $700 million to fund short-term borrowing needs. The maturities of the commercial paper notes may vary, but may not exceed 270 days from the date of issue. The commercial paper notes are generally sold at par less a discount representing an interest factor. At December 31, 2020, we had $418.2 million of commercial paper outstanding.
Long-Term Debt - On February 22, 2021, we entered into the ONE Gas 2021 Term Loan Facility to enhance our liquidity position as part of the financing of our natural gas purchases in order to provide sufficient liquidity to satisfy our obligations as a result of the 2021 winter weather event and the repayment of indebtedness.
The ONE Gas 2021 Term Loan Facility provides for a $2.5 billion unsecured term loan facility. Proceeds of the loans under the ONE Gas 2021 Term Loan Facility will be available for natural gas purchases as a result of the 2021 winter weather event and the repayment of indebtedness. The ONE Gas 2021 Term Loan Facility matures two years after the loans are funded under the ONE Gas 2021 Term Loan Facility. The loans under the ONE Gas 2021 Term Loan Facility will bear interest at a “Eurodollar Rate” or a “Base Rate” as specified in the ONE Gas 2021 Term Loan Facility, plus a margin specified in the ONE Gas 2021 Term Loan Facility which adjusts based on our debt ratings and the outstanding amount of loans remaining under the ONE Gas 2021 Term Loan Facility. Outstanding loans or commitments under the ONE Gas 2021 Term Loan Facility are required to be prepaid or reduced, as applicable, with the net cash proceeds received by ONE Gas or any of its subsidiaries from certain debt and equity issuances.
The ONE Gas 2021 Term Loan Facility contains customary conditions to borrowing, and customary affirmative and negative covenants, including a financial ratio maintenance covenant requiring us to maintain a total debt-to-capital ratio of no more than 72.5 percent at the end of any calendar quarter through December 31, 2021, and 70 percent at the end of any calendar quarter thereafter. The ONE Gas 2021 Term Loan Facility also contains various customary events of default, the occurrence of which could result in a termination of the lenders’ commitments and the acceleration of all of our obligations thereunder.
In April 2020, ONE Gas issued $300 million of 2.00 percent senior notes due 2030. The proceeds from the issuance were used to reduce the amount of outstanding commercial paper and for general corporate purposes.
The indenture governing our Senior Notes includes an event of default upon the acceleration of other indebtedness of $100 million or more. Such events of default would entitle the trustee or the holders of 25 percent in aggregate principal amount of the outstanding Senior Notes to declare those Senior Notes immediately due and payable in full.
Depending on the series, we may redeem our Senior Notes at par, plus accrued and unpaid interest to the redemption date, starting three months or six months before their maturity dates. Prior to these dates, we may redeem these Senior Notes, in whole or in part, at a redemption price equal to the principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest and a make-whole premium. The redemption price will never be less than 100 percent of the principal amount of the respective Senior Notes plus accrued and unpaid interest to the redemption date. Our Senior Notes are senior unsecured obligations, ranking equally in right of payment with all of our existing and future unsecured senior indebtedness.
At December 31, 2020, our long-term debt-to-capital ratio was 41 percent.
Credit Ratings - Our credit ratings as of December 31, 2020, were:
Our commercial paper was rated Prime-1 by Moody’s and A-1 by S&P as of December 31, 2020.
On February 23, 2021, our credit ratings changed as follows:
Also on February 23, 2021, the ratings on our commercial paper changed to Prime-2 by Moody’s and A-2 by S&P.
We intend to maintain credit metrics at a level that supports our balanced approach to capital investment and a return of capital to shareholders via a dividend that we believe will be competitive with our peer group.
At-the-Market Equity Program - In February 2020, we initiated an at-the-market equity program by entering into an equity distribution agreement under which we may issue and sell shares of our common stock with an aggregate offering price up to $250 million. Sales of common stock are made by means of ordinary brokers’ transactions on the NYSE, in block transactions or as otherwise agreed to between us and the sales agent. We are under no obligation to offer and sell common stock under the program. At December 31, 2020, we had issued and sold 179,514 shares of our common stock for $13.6 million, generating proceeds, net of issuance costs, of $13.5 million, and had $236.4 million of equity available for issuance under the program. Proceeds from the program are available for general corporate purposes, which may include repaying or refinancing a portion of our outstanding indebtedness and funding working capital and capital expenditures.
Tax Reform - We have addressed the regulatory liability for EDIT resulting from the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 in each of our jurisdictions. Our regulatory liability for income tax rate changes represents deferral of the effects of enacted federal and state income tax rate changes on our ADIT and other regulatory liabilities resulting from the effect of the changes in income taxes on our rates.
In May 2020, a bill amending the Kansas state income tax code was signed into law that exempts public utilities regulated by the KCC from paying Kansas state income taxes beginning January 1, 2021. As a result of the enactment of this legislation, we remeasured our ADIT. As a regulated entity, the reduction in ADIT of $81.5 million was recorded as an EDIT regulatory liability and will be refunded to our customers. This adjustment had no material impact on our income tax expense and no impact on our cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2020. The bill stipulates that, if requested by the utility, this EDIT will be returned to Kansas customers over a period of no less than 30 years, with the exact timing to be determined in our next general rate proceeding. In August 2020, Kansas Gas Service submitted an application to the KCC to reduce its base rates to reflect the elimination of Kansas state income taxes by approximately $4.9 million. In December 2020, the KCC approved the reduction, effective January 1, 2021.
Cash flows for years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were reduced by approximately $17.4 million and $12.8 million, respectively, for EDIT returned to customers. No amortization of the regulatory liability associated with EDIT returned to customers was recorded in 2018.
Pension and Other Postemployment Benefit Plans - We did not make any material contributions to our defined benefit pension plan or other postemployment plans in 2020. During 2019, we contributed $29.2 million to our defined benefit pension plan and $6.2 million to our other postemployment benefit plans. Information about our pension and other postemployment benefits plans, including anticipated contributions, is included under Note 14 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report.
CASH FLOW ANALYSIS
We use the indirect method to prepare our consolidated statements of cash flows. Under this method, we reconcile net income to cash flows provided by operating activities by adjusting net income for those items that impact net income but may not result in actual cash receipts or payments and changes in our assets and liabilities not classified as investing or financing activities during the period. Items that impact net income but may not result in actual cash receipts or payments include, but are not limited to, depreciation and amortization, deferred income taxes, share-based compensation expense and provision for doubtful accounts.
The following table sets forth the changes in cash flows by operating, investing and financing activities for the periods indicated:
Operating Cash Flows - Changes in cash flows from operating activities are due primarily to changes in net margin and operating expenses discussed in Financial Results and Operating Information, the effects of tax reform discussed in Regulatory Activities and changes in working capital. Changes in natural gas prices and demand for our services or natural gas, whether because of general economic conditions, variations in weather not mitigated by WNAs, changes in supply or increased competition from other service providers, could affect our earnings and operating cash flows. Typically, our cash flows from operations are greater in the first half of the year compared with the second half of the year.
2020 vs. 2019 - Cash flows from operating activities were higher in 2020 compared with 2019, due primarily to working capital changes resulting from the timing of payments for natural gas purchases.
Investing Cash Flows - 2020 vs. 2019 - Cash used in investing activities increased for 2020, compared to 2019, due primarily to capital expenditures for increased system integrity activities and extending service to new areas.
Financing Cash Flows - 2020 vs. 2019 - Cash provided by financing activities for 2020 decreased, compared with 2019, due primarily to proceeds from issuance of long-term debt, offset by larger repayments on notes payable.
2019 vs. 2018 - Cash flows in 2019, compared with 2018, are described in Part II, Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
ENVIRONMENTAL, SAFETY AND REGULATORY MATTERS
COVID-19 - Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, we have continued to provide essential services to our customers. We have implemented a comprehensive set of policies, procedures and guidelines to protect the safety of our employees, customers and communities. As ordered by our regulators, customer disconnects for nonpayment were suspended from mid-March through May 20, 2020, in Oklahoma, through May 31, 2020, in Kansas, and through December 31, 2020, in some areas of Texas. As of December 31, 2020, we have temporarily suspended disconnects for safety reasons in all of our jurisdictions due to the level of COVID-19 infection. Since the onset of the pandemic in the first quarter of 2020, we have experienced impacts on our results of operations including, but not limited to: lower late payment, reconnect and collection fees and incremental expenses for bad debts related to the suspensions of disconnects for nonpayment; incremental expenses for PPE, cleaning supplies, outside services and other expenses; and lower expenses for travel and employee training that have been impacted by the pandemic. We have received accounting orders in each of our jurisdictions authorizing us to accumulate and defer for regulatory purposes certain incremental costs incurred, including bad debt expenses, and certain lost revenues, net of offsetting expense reductions associated with COVID-19. Pursuant to these orders, the recovery of any net incremental costs and lost revenues will be determined in future rate cases or alternative rate recovery filings in each jurisdiction. For financial reporting purposes, any amounts deferred as a regulatory asset for future recovery under these accounting orders must be probable of recovery. At December 31, 2020, no regulatory assets have been recorded. We continue to evaluate the impacts of COVID-19 on our business and will record regulatory assets for financial reporting purposes at such time as recovery is deemed probable. Going forward, we expect continuing impacts on our revenues and expenses during the course of the pandemic. We also could experience a possible reduction in revenues from commercial and transportation customers temporarily or permanently impacted by the pandemic.
Environmental Matters - We are subject to multiple historical, wildlife preservation and environmental laws and/or regulations, which affect many aspects of our present and future operations. Regulated activities include, but are not limited to, those involving air emissions, storm water and wastewater discharges, handling and disposal of solid and hazardous wastes, wetland preservation, hazardous materials transportation, and pipeline and facility construction. These laws and regulations require us to obtain and/or comply with a wide variety of environmental clearances, registrations, licenses, permits and other approvals. Failure to comply with these laws, regulations, licenses and permits or the discovery of presently unknown environmental conditions may expose us to fines, penalties and/or interruptions in our operations that could be material to our results of operations. In addition, emission controls and/or other regulatory or permitting mandates under the Clean Air Act and other similar federal and state laws could require unexpected capital expenditures. We cannot assure that existing environmental statutes and regulations will not be revised or that new regulations will not be adopted or become applicable to us. Revised or additional statutes or regulations that result in increased compliance costs or additional operating restrictions could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. Our expenditures for environmental investigation, and remediation compliance to-date have not been significant in relation to our financial position, results of operations or cash flows, and our expenditures related to environmental matters had no material effects on earnings or cash flows during 2020, 2019, or 2018.
We own or retain legal responsibility for certain environmental conditions at 12 former MGP sites in Kansas. These sites contain contaminants generally associated with MGP sites and are subject to control or remediation under various environmental laws and regulations. A consent agreement with the KDHE governs all environmental investigation and remediation work at these sites. The terms of the consent agreement require us to investigate these sites and set remediation activities based upon the results of the investigations and risk analysis. Remediation typically involves the management of contaminated soils and may involve removal of structures and monitoring and/or remediation of groundwater. Regulatory closure has been achieved at three of the 12 sites, but these sites remain subject to potential future requirements that may result in additional costs.
We have an AAO that allows Kansas Gas Service to defer and seek recovery of costs necessary for investigation and remediation at, and nearby, these 12 former MGP sites that are incurred after January 1, 2017, up to a cap of $15.0 million, net of any related insurance recoveries. Costs approved for recovery in a future rate proceeding would then be amortized over a 15-year period. The unamortized amounts will not be included in rate base or accumulate carrying charges. Following a determination that future investigation and remediation work approved by the KDHE is expected to exceed $15.0 million, net of any related insurance recoveries, Kansas Gas Service will be required to file an application with the KCC for approval to increase the $15.0 million cap. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we have deferred $18.8 million and $9.8 million, respectively, for accrued investigation and remediation costs pursuant to our AAO. Kansas Gas Service expects to file an application as soon as practicable after the KDHE approves the plans we have submitted and anticipates that filing will occur in 2021.
We have completed or are addressing removal of the source of soil contamination at all 12 sites and continue to monitor groundwater at eight of the 12 sites according to plans approved by the KDHE. In 2019, we completed a project to remove a source of contamination and associated contaminated materials at the twelfth site where no active soil remediation had previously occurred. A remediation plan was submitted to the KDHE concerning this site in 2020 and the KDHE has provided comments that we are addressing. We are also working on a remediation plan that will be submitted to the KDHE in 2021 for an additional site.
As a result of our work to investigate and remediate the environmental impacts of our MGP sites in 2020, we estimated the potential costs associated with additional investigation and remediation to be in the range of $9.1 million to $23.3 million. A single reliable estimate of the remediation costs for these sites was not feasible due to the amount of uncertainty in the ultimate remediation approach that will be utilized. Accordingly, in 2020, we recorded an adjustment to our reserve of $9.1 million, which also increased our regulatory asset pursuant to our AAO in Kansas, as we believe recovery of these costs is probable through our existing AAO or future regulatory filings. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the reserve for remediation of our MGP sites was $14.5 million and $5.8 million, respectively.
We also own or retain legal responsibility for certain environmental conditions at a former MGP site in Texas. At the request of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, we began investigating the level and extent of contamination associated with the site under their Texas Risk Reduction Program. A preliminary site investigation revealed that this site contains contaminants generally associated with MGP sites and is subject to control or remediation under various environmental laws and regulations. Until the investigation is complete, we are unable to determine what, if any, active remediation will be required. A reliable estimate of potential remediation costs is not feasible at this point due to the amount of uncertainty as to the levels and extent of contamination.
Our expenditures for environmental evaluation, mitigation, remediation and compliance to date have not been significant in relation to our financial position, results of operations or cash flows, and our expenditures related to environmental matters had no material effects on earnings or cash flows during 2020, 2019 or 2018.
We are subject to environmental regulation by federal, state and local authorities. Due to the inherent uncertainties surrounding the development of federal and state environmental laws and regulations, we cannot determine with specificity the impact such laws and regulations may have on our existing and future facilities. With the trend toward stricter standards, greater regulation and more extensive permit requirements for the types of assets operated by us, our environmental expenditures could increase in the future, and such expenditures may not be fully recovered by insurance or recoverable in rates from our customers, and those costs may adversely affect our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. We do not expect expenditures for these matters to have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows.
Pipeline Safety - We are subject to PHMSA regulations, including integrity-management regulations. PHMSA regulations require pipeline companies operating high-pressure transmission pipelines to perform integrity assessments on pipeline segments that pass through densely populated areas or near specifically designated HCAs. In January 2012, the Pipeline Safety, Regulatory Certainty and Job Creation Act was signed into law. The law increased maximum penalties for violating federal pipeline safety regulations and directs the DOT and the Secretary of Transportation to conduct further review or studies on issues that may or may not be material to us. These issues include, but are not limited to, the following:
•an evaluation of whether natural gas pipeline integrity-management requirements should be expanded beyond current HCAs;
•a verification of records for pipelines in class 3 and 4 locations and HCAs to confirm MAOPs; and
•a requirement to test previously untested pipelines operating above 30 percent yield strength in HCAs.
In April 2016, PHMSA published a NPRM, the Safety of Gas Transmission & Gathering Lines Rule, in the Federal Register to revise pipeline safety regulations applicable to the safety of onshore natural gas transmission and gathering pipelines. Proposals included changes to pipeline integrity management requirements and other safety-related requirements. The NPRM comment period ended July 7, 2016, and comments were reviewed by PHMSA. As part of the comment review process, PHMSA was advised by the Technical Pipeline Safety Standards Committee, informally known by PHMSA as the GPAC, a statutorily mandated advisory committee that advises PHMSA on proposed safety policies for natural gas pipelines. The GPAC reviews PHMSA's proposed regulatory initiatives to assure the technical feasibility, reasonableness, cost-effectiveness and practicality of each proposal. The GPAC met six times since January 2017 to review public comments and make recommendations to PHMSA. The GPAC completed their review of the NPRM on March 28, 2018, except for gas gathering pipelines. The GPAC met in June 2019 on gas gathering pipelines. In addition to reviewing public and committee comments, PHMSA announced they would split this NPRM into three separate final rulemakings:
•the first final rule addresses the legislative mandates from the Pipeline Safety, Regulatory Certainty and Jobs Creation Act and is called the Safety of Gas Transmission Pipelines: MAOP Reconfirmation, Expansion of Assessment Requirements, and Other Related Amendments;
•the second final rule will be called the Safety of Gas Transmission Pipelines: Repair Criteria, Integrity Management Improvements, Cathodic Protection, Management of Change, and Other Related Amendments and will cover all remaining elements of the NPRM (except for gas gathering pipelines); and
•the third final rule will be called the Safety of Gas Gathering Pipelines and will address gas gathering pipelines.
A significant number of recommendations have been made to PHMSA to improve the NPRM. The industry trade associations filed joint comments to the “legislative mandates” rulemaking to amend the federal safety regulations applicable to gas transmission and gathering pipelines.
On October 1, 2019, PHMSA published the first of the three final rules referenced above, which addressed the 2011 congressional mandates. This final rule expands integrity management principles beyond HCAs and requires operators to collect traceable, verifiable and complete records moving forward, retain existing and new records for the life of the pipeline, and reconfirm pipeline MAOP in populated areas. The final rule also outlines methods for reconfirming a pipeline’s MAOP within 15 years. The first final rule became effective July 1, 2020. The estimated capital and operating expenditures associated with compliance with the first final rule were not material.
PHMSA has not yet issued the second final rule. The potential capital and operating expenditures associated with compliance with this rule are currently being evaluated and could be significant depending on the final regulations. We do not expect to be impacted by the third final rule, as we do not own gas gathering pipelines.
Air and Water Emissions - The Clean Air Act, the Clean Water Act, analogous state laws and/or regulations promulgated thereunder, impose restrictions and controls regarding the discharge of pollutants into the air and water in the United States. Under the Clean Air Act, a federally enforceable operating permit is required for sources of significant air emissions. We may be required to incur certain capital expenditures for air-pollution-control equipment in connection with obtaining or maintaining permits and approvals for sources of air emissions. We do not expect that these expenditures will have a material impact on our respective results of operations, financial position or cash flows. The Clean Water Act imposes substantial potential liability for the removal of pollutants discharged to waters of the United States and remediation of waters affected by such discharge.
International, federal, regional and/or state legislative and/or regulatory initiatives may attempt to regulate greenhouse gas emissions. We monitor relevant legislation and regulatory initiatives to assess the potential impact on our operations. The EPA’s Mandatory Greenhouse Gas Reporting Rule requires annual greenhouse gas emissions reporting as carbon dioxide equivalents from affected facilities and for the natural gas delivered by us to our natural gas distribution customers who are not otherwise required to report their own emissions. The additional cost to gather and report this emission data did not have, and we do not expect it to have, a material impact on our results of operations, financial position or cash flows. In addition, Congress has considered, and may consider in the future, legislation to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, including carbon dioxide and methane. Likewise, the EPA may institute additional regulatory rulemaking associated with greenhouse gas emissions. At this time, no rule or legislation has been enacted for natural gas distribution that assesses any costs, fees or expenses on any of these emissions.
CERCLA - CERCLA, also commonly known as Superfund, imposes strict, joint and several liability, without regard to fault or the legality of the original act, on certain classes of “persons” (defined under CERCLA) that caused and/or contributed to the release of a hazardous substance into the environment. These persons include, but are not limited to, the owner or operator of a facility where the release occurred and/or companies that disposed or arranged for the disposal of the hazardous substances found at the facility. Under CERCLA, these persons may be liable for the costs of cleaning up the hazardous substances released into the environment, damages to natural resources and the costs of certain health studies. We do not expect that our responsibilities under CERCLA will have a material impact on our respective results of operations, financial position or cash flows.
Pipeline Security - The U.S. Department of Homeland Security’s Transportation Security Administration issued updated pipeline security guidelines in March 2018. Our pipeline facilities have been reviewed according to the current guidelines and no material changes have been required to date.
Environmental Footprint - Our environmental and climate change strategy focuses on taking steps to minimize the impact of our operations on the environment. These strategies include: (1) developing and maintaining an accurate greenhouse gas emissions inventory according to current rules issued by the EPA; (2) improving the integrity of our pipelines; (3) following developing technologies for emission control; (4) promoting end-use conservation through programs that incentivize the use of high-efficiency equipment; and (5) reducing the loss of methane from our facilities. In addition, RNG and hydrogen technologies offer potential opportunities to secure new natural gas supply sources that could be transported on our pipeline system and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
We participate in the EPA’s Natural Gas STAR Program to voluntarily reduce methane emissions. We continue to focus on maintaining low rates of lost-and-unaccounted-for natural gas through expanded implementation of best practices to limit the release of natural gas during pipeline and facility maintenance and operations. Additionally, in March 2016, we were one of 40 founding partners to launch the EPA’s Natural Gas STAR Methane Challenge Program, whereby oil and natural gas companies agree to promote and track commitments to reduce methane emissions beyond what is federally required. Our Methane Challenge Program commitment to annually replace or rehabilitate at least two percent of our combined inventory of cast iron and noncathodically-protected steel pipe aligns with our planned system integrity expenditures for infrastructure replacements. We exceeded our goal by achieving an overall replacement rate greater than two percent annually in 2016, 2017, 2018, and 2019 and anticipate reporting on our 2020 progress in 2021.
In September 2020, we announced membership in Our Nation’s Energy Future (ONE Future), a group of natural gas companies working together to voluntarily reduce methane emissions across the natural gas value chain to one percent or less by 2025. In its most recent report, ONE Future reported that its members registered a 2019 methane intensity of 0.334%.
Additional information about our environmental matters is included in the section entitled Environmental Matters in Note 17 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report. We cannot assure that existing environmental statutes and regulations will not be revised or that new regulations will not be adopted or become applicable to us. Revised or additional regulations that result in increased compliance costs or additional operating restrictions could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. Our expenditures for environmental investigation, and remediation
compliance to-date have not been significant in relation to our financial position, results of operations or cash flows, and our expenditures related to environmental matters had no material effects on earnings or cash flows during 2020, 2019, or 2018.
Regulatory - Several regulatory initiatives impacted the earnings and future earnings potential of our business. See additional information regarding our regulatory initiatives in “Regulatory Activities” in Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
IMPACT OF NEW ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
Information about the impact of new accounting standards is included in Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report.
ESTIMATES AND CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in accordance with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions with respect to values or conditions that cannot be known with certainty that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements. These estimates and assumptions also affect the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Although we believe these estimates and assumptions are reasonable, actual results could differ from our estimates. See our Risk Factors and/or Forward-Looking Statements for factors which could impact our estimates.
The following summary sets forth what we consider to be our most critical estimates and accounting policies. Our critical accounting policies are defined as those estimates and policies most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and that require management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgment, particularly because of the need to make estimates concerning the impact of inherently uncertain matters.
Regulation - Our operations are subject to regulation with respect to rates, service, maintenance of accounting records and various other matters by the respective regulatory authorities in the states in which we operate. We account for the financial effects of the ratemaking and accounting practices and policies of the various regulatory commissions in our consolidated financial statements. We record regulatory assets for costs that have been deferred for which future recovery through customer rates is considered probable and regulatory liabilities when it is probable that revenues will be reduced for amounts that will be returned to customers through the ratemaking process. As a result, certain costs that would normally be expensed under GAAP are capitalized or deferred on the balance sheet because it is probable they can be recovered through rates. Discontinuing the application of this method of accounting for regulatory assets and liabilities could significantly increase our operating expenses, as fewer costs would likely be capitalized or deferred on the balance sheet, which could reduce our net income. Further, regulation may impact the period in which revenues or expenses are recognized. The amounts to be recovered or recognized are based upon historical experience and our understanding of the regulations. The impact of regulation on our operations may be affected by decisions of the regulatory authorities or the issuance of new regulations.
For further discussion of regulatory assets and liabilities, see Note 11 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report.
Revenue Recognition - For regulated deliveries of natural gas, we read meters and bill customers on a monthly cycle. We recognize revenues upon the delivery of natural gas commodity or services rendered to customers. The billing cycles for customers do not necessarily coincide with the accounting periods used for financial reporting purposes. We accrue unbilled revenues for natural gas that has been delivered but not yet billed at the end of an accounting period. Accrued unbilled revenue is based on a percentage estimate of amounts unbilled each month, which is dependent upon a number of factors, some of which require management’s judgment. These factors include customer consumption patterns and the impact of weather on usage. The accrued unbilled natural gas sales revenue at December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $144.9 million and $109.7 million, respectively, and is included in accounts receivable on our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
We adopted ASC 606 which clarifies the revenue recognition principles under GAAP for our interim and annual reports beginning in the first quarter 2018, using the modified retrospective method. We evaluated all of our sources of revenue to determine the potential effect of the new standard on our financial position, results of operations, cash flows and the related accounting policies and business processes. Upon adoption, there was no cumulative adjustment to our opening retained earnings. The only impact of adopting ASC 606 is that we reclassified certain revenues that do not meet the requirements under ASC 606 as revenues from contracts with customers, but will continue to be reflected as other revenues in determining total revenue. The items we reclassified relate primarily to the WNA mechanism in Kansas, where the KCC determines how we reflect variations in weather in our rates billed to customers.
We have determined the majority of our natural gas sales and transportation tariffs to be implied contracts with customers, which are settled over time, where our performance obligation is settled with our customer when natural gas is delivered and simultaneously consumed by the customer. In addition, we used the invoice method practical expedient, where we recognized revenue for volumes delivered for which we have a right to invoice. For our other utility revenue, which are primarily one-time service fees that meet the requirements under ASC 606, the performance obligation is satisfied at a point in time when services are rendered to the customer. See Note 3 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report for additional information regarding our revenues.
Pension and Other Postemployment Benefits - We have defined benefit pension plans covering eligible retirees and full-time employees. We also sponsor welfare plans that provide other postemployment medical and life insurance benefits to eligible retirees and employees who retire with at least five years of service.
To calculate the expense and liabilities related to our plans, we utilize an outside actuarial consultant, which uses statistical and other factors to anticipate future events. These factors include assumptions about the discount rate, expected return on plan assets, rate of future compensation increases, age and mortality and employment periods. We use tables issued by the Society of Actuaries to estimate mortality rates. In determining the projected benefit costs, assumptions can change from period to period and may result in material changes in the costs and liabilities we recognize.
We did not make any material contributions to our defined benefit pension plan or other postemployment plans in 2020. In 2021, our contributions are expected to be $1.1 million to our defined benefit pension plans, and no contributions are expected to be made to our other postemployment benefit plans. In 2020, we paid $12.5 million of lump-sum settlements to certain terminated-vested participants in our defined benefit pension plan. In 2019, we purchased a group annuity contract and transferred approximately $49.2 million of liabilities related to certain participants in our defined benefit pension plan to a third-party insurance company.
We recorded net periodic benefit costs for our defined benefit pension plans, prior to regulatory deferrals, of $28.2 million in 2020, and estimate that in 2021, we will record expenses of approximately $26.4 million. Net periodic benefits costs for our postemployment benefit plans, prior to regulatory deferrals, were a credit of $6.2 million in 2020, and estimate that in 2021, we will record credits of approximately $8.9 million, prior to regulatory deferrals.
The following table sets forth the significant assumptions used to determine our estimated 2021 net periodic benefit cost related to our defined benefit pension and other postemployment benefit plans and sensitivity to changes with respect to these assumptions:
(a) Approximate impact a quarter percentage point decrease in the assumed rate would have on net periodic pension costs.
(b) Approximate impact a quarter percentage point decrease in the assumed rate would have on defined benefit pension obligation.
(c) Expected long-term return on plan assets for pension and other postemployment benefits are 7.15 percent and 7.50 percent, respectively.
Impairment of Goodwill - We assess our goodwill for impairment at least annually as of July 1, unless events of change in circumstances indicate an impairment may have occurred before that time. Goodwill impairment reviews are performed at a reporting unit level, which for ONE Gas equates to our single business segment. Our goodwill impairment analysis, performed in 2020 and 2018, utilized a qualitative assessment and did not result in any impairment indicators, nor did our analysis reflect our reporting unit at risk. Additionally, we performed a quantitative analysis in 2019 which did not result in any impairment indicators. Subsequent to July 1, 2020, no event has occurred indicating that our fair value is less than the carrying value of our net assets.
As part of our goodwill impairment test, we first assess qualitative factors (including macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors and overall financial performance) to determine whether it is more likely than not that our fair value is less than the carrying amount of our net assets. If further testing is necessary or a quantitative test is elected to refresh our recurring qualitative assessment, we perform an impairment test for goodwill. Our impairment test is made by comparing our fair value with our book value, including goodwill. If the fair value is less than the book value, an impairment is measured by the amount of our carrying value that exceeds our fair value, not to exceed the carrying amount of our goodwill.
To estimate our fair value, we use two generally accepted valuation approaches, an income approach and a market approach, using assumptions consistent with a market participant’s perspective. Under the income approach, we use anticipated cash flows over a period of years plus a terminal value and discount these amounts to their present value using appropriate discount rates. Under the market approach, we apply acquisition multiples to forecasted cash flows. The acquisition multiples used are consistent with historical market transactions. The forecasted cash flows are based on average forecasted cash flows over a period of years.
Our impairment tests require the use of assumptions and estimates, such as industry economic factors and the profitability of future business strategies. If actual results are not consistent with our assumptions and estimates or our assumptions and estimates change due to new information, we may be exposed to future impairment charges.
See Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report for further discussion of goodwill.
Contingencies - Our accounting for contingencies covers a variety of business activities, including contingencies for legal and environmental exposures. We accrue these contingencies when our assessments indicate that it is probable that a liability has been incurred or an asset will not be recovered and an amount can be reasonably estimated. We expense legal fees as incurred and base our legal liability estimates on currently available facts and our assessments of the ultimate outcome or resolution. Accruals for estimated losses from environmental remediation obligations generally are recognized no later than the completion of a remediation feasibility study. Recoveries of environmental remediation costs from other parties are recorded as assets when their receipt is deemed probable. In 2020, we submitted a remediation plan to the KDHE for one of our sites and the KDHE has provided comments that we are addressing. We are also working on a remediation plan that will be submitted to the KDHE in 2021 for an additional site. As a result of our work to investigate and remediate the environmental impacts of our MGP sites in 2020, we estimated the potential costs associated with additional investigation and remediation to be in the range of $9.1 million to $23.3 million. A single reliable estimate of the remediation costs for these sites was not feasible due to the amount of uncertainty in the ultimate remediation approach that will be utilized. Accordingly, in 2020, we recorded an adjustment to our reserve of $9.1 million, which also increased our regulatory asset pursuant to our AAO in Kansas, as we believe recovery of these costs is probable through our existing AAO or future regulatory filings. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the reserve for remediation of our MGP sites was $14.5 million and $5.8 million, respectively.
We have an AAO that allows Kansas Gas Service to defer and seek recovery of costs necessary for investigation and remediation at, and nearby, these 12 former MGP sites that are incurred after January 1, 2017, up to a cap of $15.0 million, net of any related insurance recoveries. Costs approved for recovery in a future rate proceeding would then be amortized over a 15-year period. The unamortized amounts will not be included in rate base or accumulate carrying charges. Following a determination that future investigation and remediation work approved by the KDHE is expected to exceed $15.0 million, net of any related insurance recoveries, Kansas Gas Service will be required to file an application with the KCC for approval to increase the $15.0 million cap. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we have deferred $18.8 million and $9.8 million, respectively, for accrued investigation and remediation costs pursuant to our AAO.
Our expenditures for environmental evaluation, mitigation, remediation and compliance to date have not been significant in relation to our financial position or results of operations, and our expenditures related to environmental matters had no material effect on earnings or cash flows for 2020, 2019 or 2018. Environmental issues may exist with respect to these MGP sites that are unknown to us. Accordingly, future costs are dependent on the final determination and regulatory approval of any remedial actions, the complexity of the site, level of remediation required, changing technology and governmental regulations, and to the extent not recovered by insurance or recoverable in rates from our customers, could be material to our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows.
See Note 17 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report for additional discussion of contingencies.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
The following table sets forth our contractual obligations at December 31, 2020:
Long-term debt, commercial paper borrowings and interest payments on debt - Long-term debt includes our four debt issuances at their due dates. Interest payments on debt are calculated by multiplying our long-term debt by the respective coupon rates.
On February 22, 2021, we entered into the ONE Gas 2021 Term Loan Facility to enhance our liquidity position as part of the financing of our natural gas purchases in order to provide sufficient liquidity to satisfy our obligations as a result of the 2021 winter weather event and the repayment of indebtedness.
Firm transportation and storage contracts - We are party to fixed-price contracts providing us with firm transportation and storage capacity. The commitments associated with these contracts are recoverable through our purchased-gas cost mechanisms as allowed by the applicable regulatory authority.
Natural gas purchase commitments - We are party to fixed-price and variable-price contracts for the purchase of natural gas. Future variable-price natural gas purchase commitments are estimated based on market price information as of December 31, 2020. Actual future variable-price purchase commitments may vary depending on market prices at the time of delivery. As market information changes daily and is potentially volatile, these values may change significantly. The commitments associated with these contracts are recoverable through our purchased-gas cost mechanisms as allowed by the applicable regulatory authority.
Due to the historic winter weather event in February 2021, we experienced unforeseeable and unprecedented market pricing for gas costs in our Kansas, Oklahoma, and Texas jurisdictions, which resulted in aggregated natural gas purchases for the month of February of approximately $2.2 billion. These purchases are generally payable at the end of March 2021.
Operating leases - Our operating leases consist primarily of office facilities and IT leases. See Note 6 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report for discussion of leases.
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
Some of the statements contained and incorporated in this Annual Report are forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. The forward-looking statements relate to our anticipated financial performance, liquidity, management’s plans and objectives for our future operations, our business prospects, the outcome of regulatory and legal proceedings, market conditions and other matters. We make these forward-looking statements in reliance on the safe harbor protections provided under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. The following discussion is intended to identify important factors that could cause future outcomes to differ materially from those set forth in the forward-looking statements.
Forward-looking statements include the items identified in the preceding paragraph, the information concerning possible or assumed future results of our operations and other statements contained or incorporated in this Annual Report identified by words such as “anticipate,” “estimate,” “expect,” “project,” “intend,” “plan,” “believe,” “should,” “goal,” “forecast,” “guidance,” “could,” “may,” “continue,” “might,” “potential,” “scheduled,” “likely,” and other words and terms of similar meaning.
One should not place undue reliance on forward-looking statements, which are applicable only as of the date of this Annual Report. Known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors may cause our actual results, performance or achievements
to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by forward-looking statements. Those factors may affect our operations, costs, liquidity, markets, products, services and prices. In addition to any assumptions and other factors referred to specifically in connection with the forward-looking statements, factors that could cause our actual results to differ materially from those contemplated in any forward-looking statement include, among others, the following:
•our ability to recover costs (including operating costs and increased commodity costs related to the recent winter weather storm), income taxes and amounts equivalent to the cost of property, plant and equipment, regulatory assets and our allowed rate of return in our regulated rates;
•our ability to manage our operations and maintenance costs;
•the concentration of our operations in Kansas, Oklahoma, and Texas;
•changes in regulation of natural gas distribution services, particularly those in Oklahoma, Kansas and Texas;
•regulations in local jurisdictions in which we operate authorizing utilities to record in a regulatory asset account or comparable account the expenses associated with the recent winter weather event, including but not limited to gas costs, other costs related to the procurement and transportation of gas supply and the associated financing costs;
•the economic climate and, particularly, its effect on the natural gas requirements of our residential and
commercial customers;
•the length and severity of a pandemic or other health crisis, such as the outbreak of COVID-19, including the impact to our operations, customers, contractors, vendors and employees, and the measures that international, federal, state and local governments, agencies, law enforcement and/or health authorities implement to address it, which may (as with COVID-19) precipitate or exacerbate one or more of the above-mentioned and/or other risks, and significantly disrupt or prevent us from operating our business in the ordinary course for an extended period;
•competition from alternative forms of energy, including, but not limited to, electricity, solar power, wind power, geothermal energy and biofuels;
•conservation and energy efficiency efforts of our customers;
•adverse weather conditions and variations in weather, including seasonal effects on demand and/or supply, the occurrence of storms, including the most recent unprecedented winter weather storm in the territories in which we operate and the related effects on supply, demand, and costs and disasters, and climate change;
•indebtedness could make us more vulnerable to general adverse economic and industry conditions, limit our ability to borrow additional funds and/or place us at competitive disadvantage compared with competitors;
•our ability to secure reliable, competitively priced and flexible natural gas transportation and supply, including decisions by natural gas producers to reduce production or shut-in producing natural gas wells and expiration of existing supply and transportation and storage arrangements that are not replaced with contracts with similar terms and pricing;
•our ability to complete necessary or desirable expansion or infrastructure development projects, which may delay or prevent us from serving our customers or expanding our business;
•operation and mechanical hazards or interruptions;
•adverse labor relations;
•the effectiveness of our strategies to reduce earnings lag, margin protection strategies and risk mitigation strategies, which may be affected by risks beyond our control such as commodity price volatility, counterparty performance or creditworthiness and interest rate risk;
•the capital-intensive nature of our business, and the availability of and access to, in general, funds to meet our debt obligations prior to or when they become due and to fund our operations and capital expenditures, either through (i) cash on hand, (ii) operating cash flow, or (iii) access to the capital markets and other sources of liquidity;
•our ability to raise capital to reduce the draw under the ONE Gas 2021 Term Loan Facility and/or repay a portion of the proceeds under the ONE Gas 2021 Term Loan Facility to reduce the costs of indebtedness;
•in light of ONE Gas recently entering into the ONE Gas 2021 Term Loan Facility, our ability to borrow additional funds, if needed, including raising the funds on commercially reasonable terms, or on terms acceptable to us, or at all;
•limitations on our operating flexibility, earnings and cash flows due to restrictions in our financing arrangements;
•cross-default provisions in our borrowing arrangements, which may lead to our inability to satisfy all of our outstanding obligations in the event of a default on our part;
•changes in the financial markets during the periods covered by the forward-looking statements, particularly those affecting the availability of capital and our ability to refinance existing debt and fund investments and acquisitions to execute our business strategy;
•actions of rating agencies, including the ratings of debt, general corporate ratings and changes in the rating agencies’ ratings criteria;
•changes in inflation and interest rates;
•our ability to recover the costs of natural gas purchased for our customers, including related to the recent winter weather storms and any financings required to support our purchase of natural gas supply;
•impact of potential impairment charges;
•volatility and changes in markets for natural gas and our ability to secure additional and sufficient liquidity on reasonable commercial terms to cover costs associated with such volatility;
•possible loss of LDC franchises or other adverse effects caused by the actions of municipalities;
•payment and performance by counterparties and customers as contracted and when due, including our counterparties maintaining ordinary course terms of supply and payments;
•changes in existing or the addition of new environmental, safety, tax and other laws to which we and our subsidiaries are subject, including those that may require significant expenditures, significant increases in operating costs or, in the case of noncompliance, substantial fines or penalties;
•the effectiveness of our risk-management policies and procedures, and employees violating our risk-management policies;
•the uncertainty of estimates, including accruals and costs of environmental remediation;
•advances in technology, including technologies that increase efficiency or that improve electricity’s competitive position relative to natural gas;
•population growth rates and changes in the demographic patterns of the markets we serve, and conditions in these areas’ housing markets;
•acts of nature and the potential effects of threatened or actual terrorism and war;
•cyber-attacks, which, according to experts, have increased in volume and sophistication since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, or breaches of technology systems that could disrupt our operations or result in the loss or exposure of confidential or sensitive customer, employee or Company information; further, increased remote working arrangements as a result of the pandemic have required enhancements and modifications to our IT infrastructure (e.g. Internet, Virtual Private Network, remote collaboration systems, etc.), and any failures of the technologies, including third-party service providers, that facilitate working remotely could limit our ability to conduct ordinary operations or expose us to increased risk or effect of an attack;
•the sufficiency of insurance coverage to cover losses;
•the effects of our strategies to reduce tax payments;
•the effects of litigation and regulatory investigations, proceedings, including our rate cases, or inquiries and the requirements of our regulators as a result of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017;
•changes in accounting standards;
•changes in corporate governance standards;
•discovery of material weaknesses in our internal controls;
•our ability to comply with all covenants in our indentures, the ONE Gas Credit Agreement, the ONE Gas 364-day Credit Agreement and the ONE Gas 2021 Term Loan Facility, a violation of which, if not cured in a timely manner, could trigger a default of our obligations;
•our ability to attract and retain talented employees, management and directors, and shortage of skilled-labor;
•unexpected increases in the costs of providing health care benefits, along with pension and postemployment health care benefits, as well as declines in the discount rates on, declines in the market value of the debt and equity securities of, and increases in funding requirements for, our defined benefit plans; and
•the ability to successfully complete merger, acquisition or divestiture plans, regulatory or other limitations imposed as a result of a merger, acquisition or divestiture, and the success of the business following a merger, acquisition or divestiture.
These factors are not necessarily all of the important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed in any of our forward-looking statements. Other factors could also have material adverse effects on our future results. These and other risks are described in greater detail in Part 1, Item 1A, Risk Factors, in this Annual Report. All forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf are expressly qualified in their entirety by these factors. Other than as required under securities laws, we undertake no obligation to update publicly any forward-looking statement whether as a result of new information, subsequent events or change in circumstances, expectations or otherwise.