ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following is a discussion and analysis of (i) industry operations that have an impact on the Company’s financial position and results of operations, (ii) the Company’s financial condition at December 31, 2020 and 2019 and its results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, and (iii) critical accounting policies used in the preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements. All dollar amounts are presented in thousands, except daily dollar amounts and per share amounts.
GENERAL
We are a leading provider of energy transportation services, delivering crude oil and petroleum products. Our 25 vessel fleet operates as a single reportable segment. We believe that this is appropriate as our chief operating decision maker makes decisions about resource allocations and reviews and measures our results as one line of business with similar regulatory requirements, customers and commodities transported. Our active vessel fleet, of which 22 are U.S. Flag vessels, consists of three crude oil tankers doing business in Alaska, two conventional ATBs, two lightering ATBs, three shuttle tankers, ten MR tankers, and two non-Jones Act MR tankers that participate in the U.S. Maritime Security Program. The Company also owns and operates two Marshall Islands flagged MR tankers which trade internationally. Revenues are derived predominantly from time charter agreements, which provide a more predictable level of revenues. We derived approximately 18% of our total shipping revenues and 16% of our total TCE revenues in the spot market and COAs for 2020.
The ongoing Coronavirus pandemic has severely impacted global and national economies. Lockdown orders, business closures and travel restrictions among many other events have reduced the demand for many products, including petroleum. This has led to a significant reduction in refinery operations and end user demand for transportation fuels. The reduced demand has created extreme business uncertainty for our customers and the result has been a reluctance to enter into longer term transportation commitments. We believe that as their visibility and confidence in the future returns there will be a resumption of more typical customer behavior and time charter activity will rebound.
This has resulted in the non-renewal of charters for vessels whose time charters were ending late in 2020 and early in 2021. In response to this we have placed seven vessels in layup as of March 1, 2021. This allows us to reduce the costs associated with vessels that are without charter. We anticipate that this situation will resolve itself as vaccines are widely distributed and there is a lifting of the COVID-19 restrictions.
OPERATIONS AND OIL TANKER MARKETS
Our revenues are highly sensitive to patterns of supply and demand for vessels of the size and design configurations owned and operated by us and the trades in which those vessels operate. Rates for the transportation of crude oil and refined petroleum products are determined by market forces such as the supply and demand for oil, the distance that cargoes must be transported, and the number of vessels expected to be available at the time cargoes need to be transported. In the Jones Act trades within which the substantial majority of our vessels operate, demand factors for transportation are affected almost exclusively by supply and distribution decisions of oil producers, refiners and distributors based in the United States. Further, the demand for U.S. domestic oil shipments is significantly affected by the state of the U.S. and global economies, the level of imports into the U.S. from OPEC and other foreign producers, oil production in the United States, and the relative price differentials of U.S. produced crude oil and refined petroleum products as compared with comparable products sourced from or destined for foreign markets, including the cost of transportation on international flag vessels to or from those markets. The number of vessels is affected by newbuild deliveries and by the removal of existing vessels from service, principally through storage, deletions, or conversions. Our revenues are also affected by the mix of charters between spot (voyage charter which includes short-term time charter) and long-term (time or bareboat charter).
Beginning in the 2020 first quarter, COVID-19 has resulted in disruptions in demand and oversupply of oil. Many analysts predict that gasoline and diesel demand will recover in 2021. Jet fuel demand is anticipated to remain well below 2019 levels through at least the end of 2021. These predictions reflect estimates on the prevalence of COVID-19 and the recovery of the U.S. economy. While COVID-19 has presented our industry and markets with significant challenges, we believe that we have thus far managed its impact on our business operations well, with all of our Jones Act and internationally trading vessels able to load, transit and discharge cargo without material interruption.
27 Overseas Shipholding Group, Inc.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have implemented procedures to protect the health and safety of our employees, crew and contractors. These procedures and protocols are those mandated or recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the U.S. Coast Guard, local ports and shipyards, and country- and state-specific requirements. They include such actions as providing personal protective equipment, minimizing crew changes, managing the locations where crew members board and depart from our vessels, requiring crew members to disclose symptoms and the health of those they have been in contact with, sanitization of the vessels, mandating face coverings, social distancing and temperature checks, and requiring testing in certain instances. COVID-19 has also impacted planned shipyard maintenance and vetting activities, resulting in delays, rescheduling and extensions. These additional procedures and delays have resulted in increased costs, which at this point in time, have not been material but are expected to continue and may increase.
Having our vessels committed on time charters is a fundamental objective of our chartering strategy. The majority of available vessel operating days are covered with medium-term charters or contracts of affreightment. However, medium-term charters may not always be remunerative, nor prove achievable under certain market conditions. As a result, some of our vessels operate in the spot market, which is more volatile and less predictable. Because shipping revenues and voyage expenses are significantly affected by the mix between voyage charters and time charters, we manage our vessels based on TCE revenues and rates, which are non-GAAP measures.
TCE rates for Jones Act Product Carriers and large ATBs (defined as vessels having carrying capacities greater than 140,000 barrels) available for service in the spot market decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020 from 2019 for all of our vessel classes. The decrease in rates can be attributed to lower demand for coastwise crude oil and refined product as a result of the impact of COVID-19. Spot market activity was low in 2020 due to all Jones Act vessels being employed on time charters for the first half of the year, as some time charters ended in the second half of the year, and low demand due to COVID-19.
Our time charter coverage was substantial for the year and provided some insulation from the market turmoil that has followed not only the outbreak of COVID-19, but also the decline in transportation fuel demand affecting both crude oil and refined product pricing. Our vessels were employed for 94% of available days during 2020, with 398 of a total 6,524 available days (available days excludes 340 days vessels were offhire due to drydock requirements) seeing vessels idle without employment.
Industry-wide, there were no firm Jones Act vessel orders as of December 31, 2020. There were two deliveries in 2020, one in the second quarter and one in the fourth quarter, consisting of two large ATBs, which were our orders.
Delaware Bay lightering volumes averaged 58,000 b/d in 2020 compared with 125,000 b/d in 2019. Refinery demand for crude oil was significantly reduced in 2020 due to COVID-19, reducing the need for lightering services. We have contract minimums with our refinery customers that compensate us for barrels not lightered below those minimum amounts. In June 2019, one of our lightering customers, Philadelphia Energy Solutions (“PES”), suffered an explosion and fire at its refinery in the Delaware Bay. The refinery has been shut down since the fire. In July 2019, PES filed for protection under Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code. In May 2020, the PES bankruptcy process resulted in the sale of the refinery complex, which will be permanently closed. Due to the reduction in lightering volumes, we operate one, rather than two, lightering ATBs in the Delaware Bay. The second lightering barge is utilized in the Gulf of Mexico.
On March 12, 2020, our subsidiaries completed the purchase of the Alaskan Explorer, Alaskan Legend and Alaskan Navigator from BP Oil Shipping Company USA and AP AMI Leasing Inc. (“BP”) and have entered into a bareboat charter with BP for a fourth vessel, the Alaskan Frontier. The Alaskan Frontier is currently in layup. In connection with these transactions, we also completed the acquisition of the other members’ interests in ATC, making ATC a wholly owned subsidiary of OSG. Operating results of these vessels are included from that date.
28 Overseas Shipholding Group, Inc.
RESULTS FROM VESSEL OPERATIONS
During the year ended December 31, 2020, shipping revenues increased by $63,145, or 17.8% compared to 2019. The increase primarily resulted from the addition to our fleet of two Marshall Islands flagged MR tankers, Overseas Gulf Coast and Overseas Sun Coast, which entered service during the fourth quarter of 2019, three crude oil tankers, Alaskan Explorer, Alaskan Legend and Alaskan Navigator, which were purchased in March 2020, and two ATBs, OSG 204 and OSG Endurance and OSG 205 and OSG Courageous, which were delivered at the end of May 2020 and beginning of December 2020, respectively. The increase was offset by (a) two fewer ATBs in our fleet, (b) a 322-day increase in scheduled drydocking, (c) a decrease in Delaware Bay lightering volumes, discussed above, and (d) a 160-day increase in lay-up days primarily due to one vessel that was redelivered from time charter during the third quarter of 2020 and placed in lay-up, a decision taken in light of the lack of demand due to COVID-19 economic impact.
Reconciliations of TCE revenues, a non-GAAP measure, to shipping revenues as reported in the consolidated statements of operations follows:
Consistent with general practice in the shipping industry, we use TCE revenues, which represents shipping revenues less voyage expenses, as a measure to compare revenue generated from a voyage charter to revenue generated from a time charter. TCE revenues, a non-GAAP measure, provides additional meaningful information in conjunction with shipping revenues, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, because it assists management in decisions regarding the deployment and use of our vessels and in evaluating their financial performance.
The following table provides a breakdown of TCE rates achieved for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 between spot and fixed earnings and the related revenue days.
(a) Excludes one Alaska vessel currently in layup.
During 2020, TCE revenues increased by $40,746, or 12.2%, to $375,879 from $335,133 in 2019. The increase primarily resulted from the addition to our fleet of two Marshall Islands flagged MR tankers, Overseas Gulf Coast and Overseas Sun Coast, which entered service during the fourth quarter of 2019, three crude oil tankers, Alaskan Explorer, Alaskan Legend and Alaskan Navigator, which were purchased in March 2020, and two ATBs, OSG 204 and OSG Endurance and OSG 205 and OSG Courageous, which were delivered at the end of May 2020 and beginning of December 2020, respectively. The increase was offset by (a) two fewer ATBs in our fleet, (b) a 322-day increase in scheduled drydocking, (c) a decrease in Delaware Bay lightering volumes and (d) a 160-day increase in lay-up days primarily due to one vessel that was redelivered from time charter during the third quarter of 2020 and placed in lay-up, a decision taken in light of the lack of demand due to COVID-19 economic impact.
29 Overseas Shipholding Group, Inc.
Vessel expenses increased by $24,848, or 18.5%, to $159,466 in 2020 from $134,618 in 2019 primarily due to an increase in crewing costs. The increase in crewing costs was due to the addition to our fleet of two Marshall Islands flagged MR tankers, Overseas Gulf Coast and Overseas Sun Coast, which entered service during the fourth quarter of 2019, and three crude oil tankers, Alaskan Explorer, Alaskan Legend and Alaskan Navigator, which were purchased in March 2020, offset by two fewer ATBs in our fleet.
Depreciation expense increased by $6,014, or 11.5%, to $58,513 in 2020 from $52,499 in 2019. The increase primarily resulted from an increase in depreciation expense due to the Overseas Gulf Coast and Overseas Sun Coast, our two newbuild Marshall Islands flagged MR tankers, which entered service at the beginning of the fourth quarter of 2019, the addition of three crude oil tankers, Alaskan Explorer, Alaskan Legend and Alaskan Navigator, to our fleet in March 2020 and the addition of our newbuild barge, OSG 204, which entered service during the second quarter of 2020.
Two reflagged U.S. Flag Product Carriers participate in the U.S. Maritime Security Program, which is designed to ensure that privately-owned, military-useful U.S. Flag vessels are available to the U.S. Department of Defense in the event of war or national emergency. Each of the vessel-owning companies receives an annual stipend, subject in each case to annual congressional appropriations, which is intended to offset the increased cost incurred by such vessels from operating under the U.S. Flag. Such stipend was $5,058 on one vessel and $4,607 on one vessel in 2020 and $5,000 for each vessel in 2019.
Under the terms of the program, we expect to receive up to $5,200 for each vessel beginning in 2021. We do not receive a stipend for any days for which either of the two vessels operate under a time charter to a U.S. government agency.
In June 2019, one of our lightering customers, PES, suffered an explosion and fire at its refinery in the Delaware Bay. The PES refinery complex, which consists of two refineries, has been shut down since the fire. Due to the expected reduction in lightering volumes, we redeployed one of our two lightering ATBs to the U.S. Gulf of Mexico for alternative employment. In July 2019, PES filed a Chapter 11 bankruptcy petition. At December 31, 2019, we had outstanding receivables from PES of approximately $4,300. The ultimate recovery of these receivables is currently unknown. We established a loss provision of $4,300 for the year ended December 31, 2019. In May 2020, the PES bankruptcy process resulted in the sale of the refinery complex, which will be permanently closed.
GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES
During 2020, general and administrative expenses increased by $3,470, or 14.8%, to $26,869 from $23,399 in 2019. The increase was primarily driven by an increase in compensation and benefit costs due to our acquisition of ATC and the resulting increase in headcount.
GAIN ON TERMINATION OF PRE-EXISTING ARRANGEMENT
Gain on termination of pre-existing arrangement was $19,172 for 2020 compared to $0 in 2019. The increase was due to our acquisition of ATC on March 12, 2020. Our pre-existing ATC arrangements with a minimum term through December 2023 were terminated at the time of acquisition and a non-cash gain equal to the value of the remaining arrangement of $19,172 was recognized.
INTEREST EXPENSE
Interest expense, including administrative and other fees, was $24,045 for 2020 compared with $25,633 in 2019. The decrease in interest expense was primarily associated with the decrease in the 30-Day LIBOR rate on our term loans, due 2023 and 2026, from the same period in 2019. The decrease was offset by additional debt outstanding at December 31, 2020 compared to at December 31, 2019.
INCOME TAX EXPENSE
The effective tax rates for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were 17.1% and 5.8%, respectively. The effective rate varied from 2019 to 2020 due to the change in a state tax rate that created a large benefit in 2019. In addition, the favorable tonnage tax exclusion was a smaller percentage of book income in 2020 than it was in 2019.
As of December 31, 2020, we had U.S. federal net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $193,300 that are available to reduce future taxes, if any. The existing federal net operating loss carryforwards begin to expire in 2034.
30 Overseas Shipholding Group, Inc.
LIQUIDITY AND SOURCES OF CAPITAL
Our business is capital intensive. Our ability to successfully implement our strategy is dependent on the continued availability of capital on attractive terms. In addition, our ability to successfully operate our business to meet near-term and long-term debt repayment obligations is dependent on maintaining sufficient liquidity.
Liquidity
Working capital from continuing operations at December 31, 2020 was approximately $(93,000) compared with approximately $(104,000) at December 31, 2019. Excluding the current portion of operating and finance lease liabilities, working capital was approximately $1,700 at December 31, 2020 compared to $(9,880) at December 31, 2019. The increase in working capital was primarily due to an increase in cash and cash equivalents related to the proceeds we received from the OSG 205 LLC and OSG Courageous II LLC term loan and the OSG 204 term loan discussed below. The increase was offset by a decrease in working capital due to increases in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other current liabilities and current installments of long-term debt. The increase in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other current liabilities was primarily related to increases in accrued drydock expenses due to (a) a 322-day increase in scheduled drydocking from December 31, 2019 and (b) accrued expenses due to the addition of the Alaskan Explorer, Alaskan Legend, and Alaskan Navigator, to our fleet and our acquisition of ATC. The increase in current installments of long-term debt was due to the additional debt outstanding at December 31, 2020 compared to at December 31, 2019.
As of December 31, 2020, we had total liquidity on a consolidated basis comprised principally of $69,697 of cash and cash equivalents. We manage our cash in accordance with our intercompany cash management system, subject to the requirements of our debt facilities. Our cash and cash equivalents, as well as our restricted cash balances, generally exceed Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation insurance limits. We place our cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash in what we believe to be creditworthy financial institutions. In addition, certain of our money market accounts invest in U.S. Treasury securities or other obligations issued or guaranteed by the U.S. government or its agencies. Restricted cash as of December 31, 2020 was related to requirements under the Unsecured Senior Notes.
As of December 31, 2020, we had total debt outstanding (net of original issue discount and deferred finance costs) of $429,120 and a total debt to total capitalization of 53.0%, compared to $368,047 and 51.9%, respectively, at December 31, 2019. Net debt at December 31, 2020 was $359,423 compared to $326,544 at December 31, 2019.
Sources, Uses and Management of Capital
We generate significant cash flows from our complementary mix of time charters, voyage charters and contracts of affreightment. Net cash provided by operating activities in the year ended December 31, 2020 was $52,668. In addition to operating cash flows, our other current potential sources of funds are proceeds from additional issuances of equity securities, additional borrowings and proceeds from the opportunistic sales of our vessels. In the past, we have also obtained funds from the issuance of long-term debt securities.
We use capital to fund working capital requirements, maintain the quality of our vessels, comply with U.S. and international shipping standards and environmental laws and regulations and repay or repurchase our outstanding loan facilities. We may also use cash generated by operations to finance capital expenditures to modernize and grow our fleet.
We are presently assessing the impact of the discontinuation of LIBOR, expected by year-end 2021.
The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in a significant reduction in demand for oil and refined petroleum products worldwide which has had a direct impact on our business. In an effort to conserve costs, several of the vessels in our fleet have been placed in layup in late 2020 and 2021. In recognition that certain of the financial covenants that were in place in each of our vessel financing facilities did not appropriately reflect the current situation, in March 2021, the Company obtained waivers and amendments of certain financial covenants in each of its vessel financing facilities, with respect to fourth quarter 2020 and later periods’ compliance requirements.
31 Overseas Shipholding Group, Inc.
In November 2020, two of the Company’s subsidiaries, OSG 205 LLC and OSG Courageous II LLC, entered into a construction loan in the original principal amount of $49,150 of which $46,711 was drawn down to finance a new 204,000-barrel U.S. Flag oil and chemical ATB barge, OSG 205, and to refinance the tug to which the barge is being paired, the OSG Courageous. The Company made a prepayment of $15,811, which included accrued interest on its term loan, due 2023. On December 3, 2020, upon completion and delivery of the OSG 205, the remainder of the construction loan was drawn down and the construction loan was converted to a term loan. The loan is guaranteed by the Company, bears a fixed rate of interest of 6.37% and has a seven-year term maturing on December 1, 2027.
In June 2020, one of the Company’s subsidiaries, OSG 204 LLC, entered into a loan with Wintrust Commercial Finance and other syndicate lenders in the aggregate original principal amount of $32,933 to finance a new 204,000-barrel U.S. Flag oil and chemical ATB barge. The loan is guaranteed by the Company, bears a fixed rate of interest of 5.00% and has a five-year term maturing on June 1, 2025.
On March 12, 2020, the Company entered into a loan with Banc of America Leasing & Capital, LLC and other syndicate lenders in the aggregate original principal amount of $54,000 to finance the purchase of three U.S.-flagged crude oil carrier vessels, the Alaskan Explorer, Alaskan Legend, and Alaskan Navigator. The loan bears a fixed rate of interest of 4.43% and has a five-year term maturing on March 12, 2025.
In August 2019, two of the Company’s subsidiaries entered into loans in an aggregate principal amount of $50,000 to finance the Overseas Gulf Coast and the Overseas Sun Coast. The loans bear a fixed rate of interest of 5.54% and have a 5-year term maturing on September 30, 2024 with a 17-year amortization schedule. On July 30, 2020, the Company repaid, using cash on hand, its $24,000 term loan secured by the Overseas Gulf Coast.
In December 2018, the Company and several of its subsidiaries entered into a term loan with PGIM, Inc. as Administrative Agent for a syndication of lenders, which is secured by a guarantee from the Company. This loan is in the aggregate original principal amount of $325,000 and has a five-year term maturing in December 2023.
In November 2018, two of the Company’s subsidiaries, Mykonos Tanker LL and Santorini Tanker LLC, entered into a loan with Wintrust Commercial Finance which is guaranteed by the Company. This loan is in the aggregate original principal amount of $27,500 and has a seven-year term maturing on November 1, 2026.
Outlook
The Company’s revenues are sensitive to often highly cyclical patterns of supply and demand. In the core Jones Act trades within which the majority of our vessels operate, demand factors for transportation have historically been affected almost exclusively by supply and distribution of refined petroleum products in the United States. The emergence of demand for domestic crude oil transportation has in recent years added a new dimension to understanding traditional Jones Act trades. Balancing time charter coverage with spot market exposure in an uncertain demand environment is a persistent challenge, and considerations about the appropriate amount of capacity to remain active in the spot market are a regular management discussion point. Over the longer term, we consider the “normalized” market in which our vessels trade to be one that should be characterized by stable, longer term chartering relationships with our customer base. Notwithstanding this belief, during periods of surplus of available capacity, as was evident in recent years, low charter rates make medium term charters unattractive or simply unavailable. In such market environments, we have considered the cost of acquiring cash flow visibility by committing vessels to charter contracts at sustained loss-making rates as being too high when measured against what we believed to be an asymmetrical upside potential of being positioned to benefit from a recovery in rates. As time charters expire, it is possible that such time charters will not renew and, even if they do, they may not renew on comparable terms. Increased exposure to spot markets has been, and in the future will likely continue to be a consequence of such thinking. Conversely, as supply and demand move more consistently into balance, and time charters become more available at remunerative rates, an increase in both the number and duration of period charters entered into with our customers can be expected.
Earnings volatility which accompanies spot market exposure has important implications for liquidity management. The retention of relatively high cash balances and efforts to reduce overall levels of debt and operating and administrative costs should be understood as a necessary response to heightened uncertainty. In recent years, we have witnessed a strong trend towards rebalance of supply, as tightening age restrictions imposed by our core customer base has progressively limited the acceptability for use in service of vessels exceeding 20 years of age. A notable decline in the number of available trading vessels has occurred. Further, we have seen demand for domestic crude oil transportation act as an important swing factor in affecting a healthy balance between available vessel supply and overall domestic transportation demand. This recent positive trend has been interrupted by the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic which has caused a dramatic drop in domestic and international transportation fuels demand. Changing mobility patterns arising out of stay-at-home and restricted travel policies have impacted the refining and distribution industry acutely. The short-term need for marine assets to move fuels in a constrained demand environment has been equally affected. These developments have resulted in increased volatility and decreased forward visibility of our future earnings, given the uncertainty surrounding the timing and the extent of a future recovery of normalized demand. Notwithstanding these immediately evident uncertainties, the market transition that has seen a rebalancing of supply in the period prior to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic offers cause for optimism that a return to a market offering an increase in both the number and the duration of time charter contracts for our vessels is foreseeable. The future impact of increased fiscal stimulus, continued monetary policy support, and an expected vaccine-enabled release of substantial pent-up demand provide a hopeful combination for a restoration of fuels demand. A return to normalized levels of demand, should that occur, would largely restore the market conditions which we consider to be supportive of our long-term business objectives.
32 Overseas Shipholding Group, Inc.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
INSW entered into guarantee arrangements in connection with the spin-off from OSG on November 30, 2016. On October 7, 2019, INSW sold its ownership interest in their joint venture with Qatar Gas Transport Company Ltd, releasing OSG from all obligations under the guarantee arrangements.
Carrying Value of Vessels
We believe that the availability, quality and reliability of fair market valuations of U.S Flag vessels are limited given the fact that the U.S. Flag market is relatively small and illiquid with very limited second hand sales and purchases activity from which to benchmark vessel values. As discussed in Note 9, “Fair Value Measurements and Fair Value Disclosures,” to our consolidated financial statements set forth in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” we monitor for any indicators of impairment in regards to the carrying value of our vessels.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The Company’s consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, which require the Company to make estimates in the application of its accounting policies based on the best assumptions, judgments, and opinions of management. Following is a discussion of the accounting policies that involve a higher degree of judgment and the methods of their application. For a description of all of the Company’s material accounting policies, see Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the Company’s consolidated financial statements set forth in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Revenue Recognition
The majority of revenue is generated from time charters and is accounted for as operating leases and are thus recognized ratably over the rental periods of such charters, as service is performed. The Company does not recognize time charter revenues during periods that vessels are off hire.
The Company generates a portion of its revenue from voyage charters. Within the shipping industry, there are two methods used to account for voyage charter revenue: (1) ratably over the estimated length of each voyage and (2) completed voyage. The recognition of voyage revenues ratably over the estimated length of each voyage is the most prevalent method of accounting for voyage revenues in the shipping industry and the method used by OSG. Under each method, voyages may be calculated on either a load-to-discharge or discharge-to-discharge basis.
The Company recognizes revenue from voyage charters ratably over the estimated length of each voyage, calculated on a load-to-discharge basis. Under voyage charters, expenses such as fuel, port charges, canal tolls, cargo handling operations and brokerage commissions are paid by the Company whereas, under time and bareboat charters, such voyage costs are generally paid by the Company’s customers.
The Company enters into contracts of affreightment (each a “COA”) to provide transportation services between specified points for a stated quantity of cargo over a specific time period, but without designating voyage schedules. The Company’s COAs include minimum purchase requirements from customers that are expressed in either fixed monthly barrels, annual minimum barrel volume requirements or annual minimum number of voyages to complete. The Company is required to transport and the charterer is required to provide the Company with a minimum volume requirement. These contract minimums represent fixed consideration within the contract which is recognized as the distinct services of delivering barrels or voyages are performed in the series over time. The Company adjusts estimated revenue recognized for any minimum volume unexercised right.
Vessel Lives and Salvage Values
The carrying value of each of the Company’s vessels represents its original cost at the time it was delivered or purchased less depreciation calculated using an estimated useful life of 25 years (except for new ATBs for which estimated useful lives of 30 years are used) from the date such vessel was originally delivered from the shipyard or 20 years from the date the Company’s ATBs were rebuilt. A vessel’s carrying value is reduced to its new cost basis (i.e. its current fair value) if a vessel impairment charge is recorded.
33 Overseas Shipholding Group, Inc.
If the estimated economic lives assigned to the Company’s vessels prove to be too long because of new regulations, an extended period of weak markets, the broad imposition of age restrictions by the Company’s customers, or other future events, it could result in higher depreciation expense and impairment losses in future periods related to a reduction in the useful lives of any affected vessels. See Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” for further details.
The United States has not adopted the Hong Kong International Convention for the Safe and Environmentally Sound Recycling of Ships (the “Convention”). While the Convention is not in effect in the United States, the EPA and the MarAd have, from time to time, required the owners of U.S. Flag vessels to make certifications regarding the presence of certain toxic substances onboard vessels that they are seeking to sell to parties who (a) are not citizens of the United States and (b) intend to recycle the vessels after they have been purchased (the “Recycling Purchasers”). In the event that more stringent requirements are imposed upon the owners of U.S. Flag vessels seeking to sell their vessels to the Recycling Purchasers, such requirements could (a) negatively impact the sales prices obtainable from the Recycling Purchasers or (b) require companies, including OSG, to incur additional costs in order to sell their U.S. Flag vessels to the Recycling Purchasers or to other foreign buyers intending to use such vessels for further trading.
Intangible Assets
The Company allocates the cost of acquired companies to the identifiable tangible and intangible assets and liabilities acquired, with the remaining amount being classified as goodwill. The Company’s intangible assets represent long-term customer relationships acquired as part of the 2006 purchase of Maritrans, Inc. See Note 9, “Fair Value Measurements and Fair Value Disclosures,” for further discussion.
Drydocking
Within the shipping industry, there are two methods that are used to account for dry dockings: (1) capitalize drydocking costs as incurred (deferral method) and amortize such costs over the period to the next scheduled drydocking, and (2) expense drydocking costs as incurred. Since drydocking cycles typically extend over two and a half years or five years, management uses the deferral method because management believes it provides a better matching of revenues and expenses than the expense-as-incurred method.
Newly Issued Accounting Standards
See Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” to the Company’s consolidated financial statements set forth in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
Acquisition of Alaska Tanker Company, LLC and related transactions
In connection with the Company’s acquisition of three vessels and remaining equity ownership interest in ATC, the Company accounted for these transactions collectively as an asset acquisition, with substantially all the cost of the acquisition attributed to the three vessels purchased from BP. The accounting for these transactions as an asset acquisition required the Company to estimate the fair value of the acquired vessels and related long term charter arrangements for determining whether the acquired assets were concentrated in a single asset. In doing so, the Company considered various assumptions including estimated salvage value of vessels, insured values of vessels, loan-to-value ratios and gross margin assumptions compared to similar existing arrangements. The Company also considered these estimates when allocating the purchase price to the acquired assets. See Note 6, “Investment in Alaska Tanker Company, LLC,” for further discussion on the Company’s acquisition of ATC.
34 Overseas Shipholding Group, Inc.
Income Taxes, Deferred Tax Assets and Valuation Allowance
Our income tax expense, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and reserves for unrecognized tax benefits reflect management’s best assessment of estimated future taxes to be paid. We are subject to income taxes only in the U.S. Significant judgments and estimates are required in determining the consolidated income tax expense.
Deferred income taxes arise from temporary differences between the financial reporting and the tax basis of assets and liabilities and from events that have been recognized in the financial statements and will result in taxable or deductible amounts based on provisions of the tax law in different periods. In evaluating our ability to recover our net deferred tax assets within the jurisdiction from which they arise we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, tax planning strategies and recent financial operations. A valuation allowance is established to the extent it is more likely than not that some portion or the entire deferred tax asset will not be realized. Changes in tax laws and rates could also affect recorded deferred tax assets and liabilities in the future.
Pension Benefits
In connection with the acquisition of Maritrans in November 2006, the Company assumed the obligations under the noncontributory defined benefit pension plan that covered eligible employees of Maritrans (“the Maritrans Plan”). The Company froze the benefits payable under the Maritrans Plan as of December 31, 2006. The Company has recorded pension benefit costs based on assumptions and valuations developed with the support of its actuarial consultants. These valuations are based on estimates and key assumptions, including those related to the discount rates, the rates expected to be earned on investments of plan assets and the life expectancy/mortality of plan participants. OSG is required to consider market conditions in selecting a discount rate that is representative of the rates of return currently available on high-quality fixed income investments. A higher discount rate would result in a lower benefit obligation and a lower rate would result in a higher benefit obligation. The expected rate of return on plan assets is management’s best estimate of expected returns on plan assets. A decrease in the expected rate of return will increase net periodic benefit costs and an increase in the expected rate of return will decrease benefit costs. The mortality assumption is management’s best estimate of the expected duration of future benefit payments at the measurement date. The estimate is based on the specific demographics and other relevant facts and circumstances of the Maritrans Plan and considers all relevant information available at the measurement date. Longer life expectancies would result in higher benefit obligations and a decrease in life expectancies would result in lower benefit obligations.
In determining the benefit obligations at the end of the year measurement date, the Company continues to use the equivalent single weighted-average discount rate, rounded to the nearest 5 basis points, that best matches projected benefit payments. See Note 16, “Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans,” for further discussion on the Company’s pension plans.
Vessel Impairment
The carrying values of the Company’s vessels may not represent their fair market value or the amount that could be obtained by selling the vessel at any point in time since the market prices of second-hand vessels tend to fluctuate with changes in charter rates and the cost of newbuilds. Historically, both charter rates and vessel values tend to be cyclical. Management evaluates the carrying amounts of vessels held and used by the Company for impairment only when it determines that it will sell a vessel or when events or changes in circumstances occur that cause management to believe that future cash flows for any individual vessel will be less than its carrying value. In such instances, an impairment charge would be recognized if the estimate of the undiscounted future cash flows expected to result from the use of the vessel and its eventual disposition is less than the vessel’s carrying amount. This assessment is made at the individual vessel level as separately identifiable cash flow information for each vessel is available.
In developing estimates of future cash flows, the Company must make assumptions about future performance, with significant assumptions being related to charter rates, ship operating expenses, utilization, drydocking requirements, residual value and the estimated remaining useful lives of the vessels. These assumptions are based on historical trends as well as future expectations. Specifically, in estimating future charter rates, management takes into consideration rates currently in effect for existing time charters and estimated daily time charter equivalent rates for each vessel class for the unfixed days over the estimated remaining lives of each of the vessels. The estimated daily time charter equivalent rates used for unfixed days beyond the expiry of any current time charters are based on internally forecasted rates that take into consideration average annual rates published by a third party maritime research service and are consistent with forecasts provided to the Company’s senior management and Board of Directors. The internally forecasted rates are based on management’s evaluation of current economic data and trends in the shipping and oil and gas industries. Recognizing that the transportation of crude oil and petroleum products is cyclical and subject to significant volatility based on factors beyond the Company’s control, management believes the use of estimates based on the internally forecasted rates to be reasonable.
Estimated outflows for operating expenses and drydocking requirements are based on historical and budgeted costs and are adjusted for assumed inflation. Finally, utilization is based on historical levels achieved and estimates of a residual value are consistent with the pattern of recycling rates used in management’s evaluation of salvage value.
In estimating the fair value of vessels for the purposes of the impairment tests, the Company utilizes estimates of discounted future cash flows for each of the vessels (income approach) since the secondhand sale and purchase market for the type of U.S. Flag vessels owned by OSG is not considered to be robust. See Note 9, “Fair Value Measurements and Fair Value Disclosures,” for further discussion.