ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The Company’s measure of profit for its reportable segments is segment operating profit, which consists of consolidated earnings from continuing operations before interest income, interest expense, and provision for income taxes and excludes amounts related to certain items that management considers not representative of ongoing operations as well as certain retained corporate costs. The segment data presented below is prepared in accordance with general accounting principles for segment reporting. The lines titled “reportable segment totals” in both net sales and segment operating profit, however, are non-GAAP measures when presented outside of the financial statement footnotes. Management has included reportable segment totals below to facilitate the discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations and believes this information allows the Board of Directors, management, investors and analysts to better understand the Company’s financial performance. The Company’s management uses segment operating profit, in combination with net sales and selected cash flow information, to evaluate performance and to allocate resources. Segment operating profit is not, however, intended as an alternative measure of operating results as determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP and is not necessarily comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies.
In March 2020, the World Health Organization categorized COVID-19 as a pandemic, and it continues to spread throughout the United States and other countries across the world. To limit the spread of COVID-19, governments have taken various actions, including the issuance of stay-at-home orders and social distancing guidelines. As a result, many businesses have adjusted, reduced or suspended operating activities, either due to requirements under government orders or as a result of a reduction in demand for many products from direct or ultimate customers. Fortunately, the manufacture of glass containers has been largely viewed as essential to the important food and beverage value chain in the countries in which the Company operates. However, the Company is still impacted by broader supply chain issues and, in some cases, certain end use categories that it serves are not deemed essential. While the Company’s plants continued to operate as essential businesses, some plants suspended operations or cut back on shifts for a portion of 2020 due to government actions to address COVID-19. Additional suspensions and cutbacks may occur as the impacts from COVID-19 and related responses continue to develop.
The following discussion describes the Company’s consolidated results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020. The COVID-19 pandemic impacted the Company’s shipment and production levels in 2020, and the Company is actively monitoring the continued impact of the pandemic, which could negatively impact its business, results of operations, cash flows and financial position beyond 2020.
On July 31, 2020, the Company completed the sale of its Australia and New Zealand (“ANZ”) businesses, which comprised the majority of the Asia Pacific region (approximately 85% of net sales for the full year 2019), to Visy. After the sale of the ANZ businesses, the remaining businesses in the Asia Pacific region do not meet the criteria of an individually reportable segment. For the 2020 results presented below, the results for the Asia Pacific reportable segment reflect only seven months of the results of the ANZ businesses. For 2019, the results of the Asia Pacific segment have been recast to reflect only the results of the ANZ businesses. The sales and operating results of the other businesses that historically comprised the Asia Pacific segment, and that have been retained by the Company, have been reclassified to Other sales and Retained corporate costs and other, respectively.
For discussion related to changes in financial condition and the results of operations for 2019 compared to 2018, refer to Part II, Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, which was filed with the SEC on February 21, 2020.
Financial information regarding the Company’s reportable segments is as follows (dollars in millions):
Note: all amounts excluded from reportable segment totals are discussed in the following applicable sections.
Executive Overview-Comparison of 2020 with 2019
● Net sales in 2020 were down approximately 9% compared to 2019, primarily due to lower volumes due to COVID-19, the sale of the Company’s ANZ businesses on July 31, 2020 and the unfavorable effects of changes in foreign currency exchange rates, partially offset by incremental sales from the Nueva Fanal acquisition in mid-2019 and higher prices.
● Segment operating profit for reportable segments was down approximately 21% in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to lower sales volumes and higher operating costs driven by lower production levels to comply with government decrees to manage the pandemic, as well as the Company’s effort to align supply with lower demand and manage inventory. Segment operating profit was also impacted by the sale of the Company’s ANZ businesses and the unfavorable effects of changes in foreign currency
exchange rates.
● On January 6, 2020 (the “Petition Date”), Paddock voluntarily filed for relief under Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code to equitably and finally resolve all of its current and future asbestos-related claims. O-I Glass and O-I Group were not included in the Chapter 11 filing. Following the Chapter 11 filing, Paddock became subject to review and oversight by the bankruptcy court. As a result, the Company no longer has exclusive control over Paddock’s activities during the bankruptcy proceedings. Therefore, Paddock was deconsolidated and its assets and liabilities were derecognized from the Company’s consolidated financial statements as of the Petition Date. Simultaneously, the Company recognized a $471 million liability related to its support agreement with Paddock. Taken together, these transactions resulted in a loss of approximately $14 million, which was recorded as a charge in the first quarter of 2020.
● In May 2020, the Company issued $700 million of senior notes at an interest rate of 6.625% to repay upcoming debt maturities.
● On July 31, 2020, the Company completed the sale of its ANZ businesses to Visy. Gross proceeds are approximately USD $677 million, and amounts received were used to reduce debt. The Company recorded a gain of approximately $275 million in 2020 related to this sale.
Net sales in 2020 were $600 million lower than the same period in the prior year primarily due to lower sales volumes driven by COVID-19, the sale of the Company’s ANZ businesses on July 31, 2020, and the unfavorable effects of changes in foreign currency exchange rates, partially offset by incremental sales from the Nueva Fanal acquisition in mid-2019 and higher prices.
Earnings from continuing operations before income taxes were $614 million higher in 2020 than in the prior year, primarily due to a gain on the sale of the ANZ businesses in 2020 and the nonoccurrence of a goodwill impairment charge that was recorded in 2019, partially offset by lower segment operating profit in 2020. Segment operating profit for reportable segments in 2020 was $178 million lower than in the prior year. The decrease was largely due to lower sales volumes and higher operating costs driven by unabsorbed fixed costs from lower production levels to comply with government decrees to manage the pandemic, as well as the Company’s effort to align supply with lower demand and manage inventory. Segment operating profit was also impacted by the sale of the Company’s ANZ businesses and the unfavorable effects of changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
Net interest expense in 2020 decreased $46 million compared to 2019. Net interest expense included $44 million and $65 million for note repurchase premiums, the write-off of deferred finance fees and third-party fees in 2020 and 2019, respectively, that related to debt that was repaid prior to its maturity. Net interest expense decreased in 2020 compared to the prior year due to debt reduction and refinancing activities, as well as lower note repurchase premiums, third-party fees and the write-off of deferred finance fees.
For 2020, the Company recorded net earnings from continuing operations attributable to the Company of $249 million, or $1.57 per share (diluted), compared to a net loss from continuing operations attributable to the Company of $397 million, or $2.56 per share, in 2019. Net earnings (loss) from continuing operations attributable to the Company in 2020 and 2019 included items that management considered not representative of ongoing operations. These items increased net earnings attributable to the Company by $55 million, or $0.35 per share, in 2020 and decreased net earnings attributable to the Company by $748 million, or $4.80 per share, in 2019.
Results of Operations-Comparison of 2020 with 2019
Net Sales
The Company’s net sales in 2020 were $6,091 million compared to $6,691 million in 2019, a decrease of $600 million, or approximately 9%. Unfavorable foreign currency exchange rates decreased sales by $180 million in 2020 compared to the prior year, as the U.S. dollar strengthened against the Australian dollar, Brazilian real, Mexican peso and the Colombian peso, partially offset by the U.S. dollar weakening against the Euro. Total glass container shipments, in tons, were approximately 7% lower in 2020 compared to the prior year, due in part to the sale of the Company’s ANZ businesses on July 31, 2020 and due to COVID-19. Excluding the ANZ businesses, glass container shipments were down approximately 4% in 2020 compared to 2019, or approximately $248 million, primarily due to COVID-19. The divestiture of the Company’s ANZ businesses decreased net sales by approximately $229 million in 2020. Higher selling prices increased net sales by $81 million in 2020. Other sales, consisting primarily of machine parts, were approximately $24 million lower in 2020 than the prior year.
The change in net sales of reportable segments can be summarized as follows (dollars in millions):
Americas: Net sales in the Americas in 2020 were $3,322 million compared to $3,622 million in 2019, a decrease of $300 million, or 8%. Total glass container shipments in the region were down approximately 4% in 2020 compared to the prior year, driven primarily by lower shipments to alcoholic beverage customers in the U.S. largely due to ongoing trends in beer shipments, and due to a decline in organic sales volumes linked to COVID-19. The net impact of lower organic sales more than offset the additional sales from the Nueva Fanal acquisition and resulted in a $126 million reduction to net sales in 2020 compared to 2019. The unfavorable effects of foreign currency exchange rate changes decreased net sales $204 million in 2020 compared to 2019. Higher selling prices increased net sales by $30 million in 2020.
Europe: Net sales in Europe in 2020 were $2,364 million compared to $2,387 million in 2019, a decrease of $23 million, or 1%. Glass container shipments in 2020 were down approximately 5% compared to 2019, primarily driven by COVID-19, resulting in $115 million of lower net sales. Selling prices in Europe increased net sales by $51 million in 2020 compared to the prior year. Favorable changes in foreign currency exchange rates improved the region’s sales by approximately $41 million in 2020 as the Euro strengthened in relation to the U.S. dollar.
Asia Pacific: Net sales in Asia Pacific in 2020 were $281 million compared to $534 million in 2019, a decrease of $253 million, or 47%. The decline in sales in 2020 was due to approximately $17 million of unfavorable changes in foreign currency exchange rates and approximately $236 million of lower sales volumes, primarily due to the sale of the ANZ businesses in the third quarter of 2020. On July 31, 2020, the Company completed the sale of its ANZ businesses, which comprised the majority of the Asia Pacific region, to Visy. For 2020, the results for the Asia Pacific reportable segment reflect only seven months of the results of the ANZ businesses.
Earnings from Continuing Operations before Income Taxes and Segment Operating Profit
Earnings from continuing operations before income taxes were $353 million in 2020 compared to a loss of $261 million from continuing operations before income taxes in 2019, an increase of $614 million. This increase was primarily due to the gain on the sale of the ANZ businesses in 2020 and the nonoccurrence of a goodwill impairment charge that was recorded in 2019, partially offset by lower segment operating profit in 2020 compared to the prior year.
Operating profit of the reportable segments includes an allocation of some corporate expenses based on a percentage of sales and direct billings based on the costs of specific services provided. Unallocated corporate expenses and certain other expenses not directly related to the reportable segments’ operations are included in Retained corporate costs and other. For further information, see Segment Information included in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Segment operating profit of reportable segments in 2020 was $678 million compared to $856 million in 2019, a decrease of $178 million, or 21%. The decrease was largely due to lower sales volumes and higher operating costs as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the sale of the Company’s ANZ businesses in the third quarter of 2020 and the unfavorable effects of changes in foreign currency exchange rates. The Company’s operating costs were impacted by an approximate 7.5% decrease in production levels in 2020, which reflected required curtailments to comply with government decrees to manage the pandemic, as well as the Company’s effort to align supply with lower demand and manage inventory. The Company’s turnaround initiatives, strong operating performance and cost control measures partially offset the impact of lower production levels.
The change in segment operating profit of reportable segments can be summarized as follows (dollars in millions):
Americas: Segment operating profit in the Americas in 2020 was $395 million compared to $495 million in 2019, a decrease of $100 million, or 20%. The decrease in sales volume discussed above decreased segment operating profit in 2020 by $54 million. The effects of changes in foreign currency exchange rates decreased segment operating profit by $19 million in 2020. Despite temporary production downtime due to the impacts of COVID-19, improved operating performance and lower costs drove operating costs lower and increased segment operating profit by $11 million in 2020. The region’s closure of a plant in 2020 did not have a material impact on its profitability this year, and significant savings are not expected in future years, but the closure is expected to avoid anticipated losses from this plant in the future. Cost inflation more than offset higher selling prices resulting in a net $38 million decrease to segment operating profit in the current year.
Europe: Segment operating profit in Europe in 2020 was $264 million compared to $317 million in 2019, a decrease of $53 million, or 17%. The decrease in sales volume discussed above decreased segment operating profit in 2020 by $27 million. The region’s operating costs in 2020 were approximately $78 million higher driven by temporary production downtime associated with COVID-19, which decreased segment operating profit compared to the same period in the prior year. Higher net selling prices (net of cost inflation) increased segment operating profit by $51 million in 2020 compared to the prior year. The effects of changes in foreign currency exchange rates increased segment operating profit by $1 million in 2020.
Asia Pacific: Segment operating profit in 2020 was $19 million compared to $44 million in 2019, a decrease of $25 million, or 57%. For 2020, the results for the Asia Pacific reportable segment reflect only seven months of
the results of the ANZ businesses since those businesses were sold on July 31, 2020. This divestiture resulted in a decrease of approximately $24 million in 2020 compared to the prior year. Prior to this sale, lower sales volumes reduced segment operating profit in 2020 by $2 million. Lower net selling prices (net of cost inflation) decreased segment operating profit by $10 million in 2020 compared to the prior year. The effects of changes in foreign currency exchange rates decreased segment operating profit by $1 million in 2020. Partially offsetting this, the region’s operating costs in 2020 were approximately $12 million lower due to improved factory performance, which increased segment operating profit compared to the same period in the prior year.
Interest Expense, Net
Net interest expense in 2020 was $265 million compared to $311 million in 2019. Net interest expense included $44 million and $65 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively, for the write-off of deferred finance fees and third-party fees that were related to debt that was repaid prior to its maturity. Net interest expense decreased in 2020 compared to the prior year due to debt reduction and refinancing activities, as well as lower note repurchase premiums, third-party fees and the write-off of deferred finance fees.
Provision for Income Taxes
The Company’s effective tax rate from continuing operations for 2020 was 25.2% compared to (45.2%) for 2019. The effective tax rate for 2020 differed from 2019 primarily due to minimal tax on the gain on the sale of the ANZ businesses due to utilization of tax attributes in 2020 and the goodwill impairment charge recorded in 2019, which was not deductible for income tax purposes.
Net Earnings (Loss) from Continuing Operations Attributable to the Company
For 2020, the Company recorded earnings from continuing operations attributable to the Company of $249 million, or $1.57 per share (diluted), compared to a loss from continuing operations attributable to the Company of $397 million, or $2.56 per share, in 2019. Earnings in 2020 and 2019 included items that are not representative of ongoing operations as set forth in the following table (dollars in millions):
Foreign Currency Exchange Rates
Given the global nature of its operations, the Company is subject to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. As described above, the Company’s reported revenues and segment operating profit in 2020 were decreased due to foreign currency effects compared to 2019.
This trend may continue into 2021. During times of a strengthening U.S. dollar, the reported revenues and segment operating profit of the Company’s international operations will be reduced because the local currencies will translate into fewer U.S. dollars. The Company uses certain derivative instruments to mitigate a portion of the risk associated with changing foreign currency exchange rates.
Forward Looking Operational and Financial Impacts from the COVID-19 Pandemic
● The Company expects that full year 2021 sales shipment growth to be 2 to 4 percent (in tons) compared to 2020, representing a partial volume recovery to 2019 levels. Likewise, the Company expects continued benefits from its initiatives to expand margins. These incremental savings should more than offset the headwind from temporary cost reduction efforts in 2020 to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic that will not repeat in 2021.
● The Company will continue to focus on long-term value creation, including advancing the MAGMA deployment. Also, the Company has substantially completed its strategic and tactical divestiture program with proceeds used to reduce debt and improve financial flexibility. Finally, the Company will continue to advance the Paddock Chapter 11 process to establish a final, certain and equitable resolution of its legacy asbestos-related claims liabilities.
● Cash provided by continuing operating activities is expected to approximate $615 million or higher in 2021. This outlook assumes capital expenditures of approximately $375 million and the continued suspension of all asbestos-related claims payments, pending final resolution of the Paddock Chapter 11.
● The Company will continue to actively monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The extent to which the Company’s operations will be impacted by the pandemic will depend largely on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, including new information that may emerge concerning the severity of the outbreak and actions by government authorities to contain the outbreak or treat its impact, among other things.
Items Excluded from Reportable Segment Totals
Retained Corporate Costs and Other
After the sale of the ANZ businesses, the remaining businesses in the Asia Pacific region do not meet the criteria of an individually reportable segment. Starting on August 1, 2020 and for the historical periods, the operating results of the other businesses that were historically included in the Asia Pacific segment and that have been retained by the Company have been reclassified to Retained corporate costs and other. The results of these entities were not significant for the years ending December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Retained corporate costs and other for 2020 were $145 million compared to $112 million in 2019. These costs were higher in the 2020 periods primarily due to the nonoccurrence of equity earnings from a soda ash joint venture that was sold by the Company in the fourth quarter of 2019, higher research and development costs and higher incentive compensation, partially offset by efforts to reduce costs.
Restructuring, Asset Impairment and Other Charges
During 2020, the Company recorded charges totaling $142 million for restructuring, asset impairment and other charges. These charges reflect $96 million of employee costs, such as severance, benefit-related costs, asset impairments and other exit costs primarily related to a reduction-in-force program for certain salaried employees and a plant closure in the Americas. The Company expects that the majority of the remaining cash expenditures related to the accrued employee and other exit costs will be paid out over the next several years. These charges also reflect approximately $46 million of other charges, which included approximately $36 million of non-cash impairment charges related to an equity investment (Retained corporate costs and other).
During 2019, the Company recorded charges totaling $114 million for restructuring, asset impairment and other charges. These charges reflect $69 million of employee costs, such as severance, benefit-related costs and other exit costs primarily related to a severance program for certain salaried employees at the Company’s corporate and Americas headquarters and a furnace closure in the Americas. These charges also reflect approximately $45 million of other charges, including approximately $22 million of non-cash asset impairment charges related to the Company’s operations in Argentina and China, primarily due to macroeconomic conditions in those countries.
See Notes 6 and 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Strategic Transaction and Corporate Modernization Costs
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded charges totaling $8 million for strategic transaction costs, which relate to activities that are aimed at exploring options to maximize investor value, focused on aligning the Company’s business with demand trends and improving the Company’s operating efficiency, cost structure and working capital management. These activities are ongoing and may result in tactical divestitures, corporate transactions or similar actions, and could cause the Company to incur restructuring, impairment, disposal or other related charges in future periods.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company incurred costs of $31 million related to the Corporate Modernization and a strategic portfolio review. See Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Pension Settlement Charges
In the past several years, the Company has settled a portion of its pension obligations, which resulted in settlement charges as noted below.
During 2020, the Company recorded charges totaling $26 million for pension settlements, primarily in Canada, Mexico and the United States.
During 2019, the Company recorded charges totaling $26 million for pension settlements, primarily in the United States and the United Kingdom.
Charge for Paddock Deconsolidation
Following its Chapter 11 filing, the activities of Paddock are now subject to review and oversight by the bankruptcy court. As a result, the Company no longer has exclusive control over Paddock’s activities during the bankruptcy proceedings. Therefore, Paddock was deconsolidated as of the Petition Date, and its assets and liabilities, which primarily included $47 million of cash, the legacy asbestos-related liabilities, as well as certain other assets and liabilities, were derecognized from the Company’s consolidated financial statements. Simultaneously, the Company recognized a liability related to the support agreement of $471 million, based on the accrual required under applicable accounting standards. Taken together, these transactions resulted in a loss of approximately $14 million, which was recorded as a charge in the first quarter of 2020.
See Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Gain on Sale of the ANZ Businesses
On July 31, 2020, the Company completed the sale of its ANZ businesses, which comprised the majority of its businesses in the Asia Pacific region (approximately 85% of net sales in that region for the full year 2019), to Visy. As a result, the Company recorded a net gain (including costs directly attributable to the sale of ANZ) of approximately $275 million.
Charge for Goodwill Impairment
As part of its on going assessment of goodwill, the Company determined that indicators of impairment had occurred during the third quarter of 2019. The triggering events were management’s update to its long-range plan, which indicated lower projected future cash flows for its North American reporting unit (in the Americas segment) as compared to the projections used in the most recent goodwill impairment test performed as of October 1, 2018, and a significant reduction in the Company’s share price. The Company’s business in North America has experienced declining shipments to its alcoholic beverage customers, primarily in the beer category, and this trend is likely to continue into the foreseeable future. These factors, combined with the narrow difference between the estimated fair value and carrying value of the North American reporting unit as of December 31, 2018, resulted in the Company performing an interim impairment analysis during the third quarter of 2019. As a result, the Company recorded a non-cash impairment charge of $595 million in the third quarter of 2019, which was equal to the excess of the North American reporting unit's carrying value over its fair value. Goodwill related to the Company’s other reporting units was determined to not be impaired as a result of the interim impairment analysis.
See Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Charge for Asbestos-Related Costs
For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company’s comprehensive legal review of its asbestos-related liabilities resulted in a $35 million charge. This charge was primarily due to a 9% increase in the estimated average disposition cost per claim (including related legal costs), driven primarily by plaintiffs leveraging a changing litigation environment, and an immaterial decrease in the estimated number of claims likely to be asserted against the Company in the future.
Following the Corporate Modernization transactions, asbestos-related liabilities that were previously paid by O-I now reside at Paddock. On January 6, 2020, Paddock voluntarily filed for relief under Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code in the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the District of Delaware, to equitably and finally resolve all of its current and future asbestos-related claims. O-I Glass and O-I Group were not included in the Chapter 11 filing. Paddock’s ultimate goal in its Chapter 11 case is to confirm a plan of reorganization under Section 524(g) of the Bankruptcy Code and utilize this specialized provision to establish a trust that will address all current and future asbestos-related claims. The Company undertook the Corporate Modernization transactions to improve the Company’s operating efficiency and cost structure, which resulted in the legacy liabilities of O-I residing within Paddock, separate from the active operations of the Company’s subsidiaries, while fully maintaining Paddock’s ability to access the value of those operations to support its legacy liabilities through the support agreement. The Corporate Modernization transactions also helped ensure that Paddock has the same ability to fund the costs of defending and resolving present and future Asbestos Claims as O-I previously did, through Paddock’s retention of its own assets to satisfy these claims and through its access to additional funds from the Company through the support agreement. The ultimate amount that the Company may be required to fund on account of asbestos-related liabilities paid out in connection with a confirmed Chapter 11 plan of reorganization cannot be estimated with certainty at this time.
The Company anticipates that cash flows in 2021 will continue to benefit from the operation of the automatic stay in Paddock’s Chapter 11 filing, which stays ongoing litigation and submission of claims and defers payment in connection with asbestos-related liabilities.
Following the Chapter 11 filing, the activities of Paddock became subject to review and oversight by the bankruptcy court. As a result, the Company no longer has exclusive control over Paddock’s activities during the bankruptcy proceedings. Therefore, Paddock was deconsolidated as of the Chapter 11 filing date of January 6, 2020, and its assets and liabilities were derecognized from the Company’s consolidated financial statements on a prospective basis.
See “Critical Accounting Estimates” and Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Gain on Sale of Equity Investment
During 2019, the Company recorded a gain of approximately $107 million related to the sale of the Company’s 25% interest in Tata Chemicals (Soda Ash) Partners, which was an equity investment of the Company.
Discontinued Operations
On December 6, 2018, an ad hoc committee for the World Bank’s International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”) rejected the request by the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (“Venezuela”) to annul the award issued by an ICSID tribunal in favor of OI European Group B.V. (“OIEG”) related to the 2010 expropriation of OIEG’s majority interest in two plants in Venezuela (the “Award”). The annulment proceeding with respect to the Award is now concluded.
On July 31, 2017, OIEG sold its right, title and interest in amounts due under the Award to an Ireland-domiciled investment fund. Under the terms of the sale, OIEG received a payment, in cash, at closing equal to $115 million (the “Cash Payment”). OIEG may also receive additional payments in the future (“Deferred Amounts”) calculated based on the total compensation that is received from Venezuela as a result of collection efforts or as settlement of the Award with Venezuela. OIEG’s right to receive any Deferred Amounts is subject to the limitations described below.
OIEG’s interest in any amounts received in the future from Venezuela in respect of the Award is limited to a percentage of such recovery after taking into account reimbursement of the Cash Payment to the purchaser and reimbursement of legal fees and expenses incurred by the Company and the purchaser. OIEG’s percentage of such recovery will also be reduced over time. Because the Award has yet to be satisfied and the ability to successfully enforce the Award in countries that are party to the ICSID Convention is subject to significant challenges, the Company is unable to reasonably predict the amount of recoveries from the Award, if any, to which the Company may be entitled in the future. Any future amounts that the Company may receive from the Award are highly speculative, and the timing of any such future payments, if any, is highly uncertain. As such, there can be no assurance that the Company will receive any future payments under the Award beyond the Cash Payment.
A separate arbitration involving two other subsidiaries of the Company -- Fabrica de Vidrios Los Andes, C.A. (“Favianca”), and Owens-Illinois de Venezuela, C.A. (“OIDV”) -- was initiated in 2012 to obtain compensation primarily for third-party minority shareholders’ lost interests in the two expropriated plants. However, on November 13, 2017, ICSID issued an award that dismissed this arbitration on jurisdiction grounds. In March 2018, OIDV and Favianca submitted to ICSID an application to annul the November 13, 2017 award; on November 22, 2019, OIDV and Favianca’s request to annul the award was rejected by an ICSID ad hoc committee. The two subsidiaries are evaluating potential next steps.
The Company incurred $0 and $3 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively, for losses from discontinued operations for matters related to the Venezuelan expropriation.
Capital Resources and Liquidity
On June 25, 2019, certain of the Company’s subsidiaries entered into a Senior Secured Credit Facility Agreement (as amended by that certain Amendment No. 1 to the Third Amended and Restated Credit Agreement and Syndicated Facility Agreement dated as of December 13, 2019, and as further amended by that certain Amendment No. 2 to the Third Amended and Restated Credit Agreement and Syndicated Facility Agreement dated as of December 19, 2019, the “Agreement”), which amended and restated the previous credit agreement (the “Previous Agreement”). The proceeds from the Agreement were used to repay all outstanding amounts
under the Previous Agreement. The Company recorded $4 million of additional interest charges for third-party fees and the write-off of unamortized fees related to the Agreement during 2019.
The Agreement provides for up to $3.0 billion of borrowings pursuant to term loans and revolving credit facilities. The term loans mature, and the revolving credit facilities terminate, in June 2024. At December 31, 2020, the Agreement includes a $300 million revolving credit facility, a $1.2 billion multicurrency revolving credit facility, and a $1.5 billion term loan A facility ($1,067 million outstanding balance at December 31, 2020, net of debt issuance costs). At December 31, 2020, the Company had unused credit of $1.5 billion available under the Agreement. The weighted average interest rate on borrowings outstanding under the Agreement at December 31, 2020 was 1.68%.
The Agreement contains various covenants that restrict, among other things and subject to certain exceptions, the ability of the Company to incur certain indebtedness and liens, make certain investments, become liable under contingent obligations in certain defined instances only, make restricted payments, make certain asset sales within guidelines and limits, engage in certain affiliate transactions, participate in sale and leaseback financing arrangements, alter its fundamental business, and amend certain subordinated debt obligations.
The Agreement also contains one financial maintenance covenant, a Total Leverage Ratio (the “Leverage Ratio”), that requires the Company not to exceed a ratio of 5.0x calculated by dividing consolidated total debt, less cash and cash equivalents, by Consolidated EBITDA, with such Leverage Ratio decreasing to (a) 4.75x for the quarter ending June 30, 2021 and (b) 4.50x for the quarter ending December 31, 2021 and thereafter, as defined and described in the Agreement. The maximum Leverage Ratio is subject to an increase of 0.5x for (i) any fiscal quarter during which certain qualifying acquisitions (as specified in the Agreement) are consummated and (ii) the following three fiscal quarters, provided that the Leverage Ratio shall not exceed 5.0x. The Leverage Ratio could restrict the ability of the Company to undertake additional financing or acquisitions to the extent that such financing or acquisitions would cause the Leverage Ratio to exceed the specified maximum.
Failure to comply with these covenants and other customary restrictions could result in an event of default under the Agreement. In such an event, the Company could not request borrowings under the revolving facilities, and all amounts outstanding under the Agreement, together with accrued interest, could then be declared immediately due and payable. Upon the occurrence and for the duration of a payment event of default, an additional default interest rate equal to 2.0% per annum will apply to all overdue obligations under the Agreement. If an event of default occurs under the Agreement and the lenders cause all of the outstanding debt obligations under the Agreement to become due and payable, this would result in a default under the indentures governing the Company’s outstanding debt securities and could lead to an acceleration of obligations related to these debt securities. As of December 31, 2020, the Company was in compliance with all covenants and restrictions in the Agreement. In addition, the Company believes that it will remain in compliance and that its ability to borrow funds under the Agreement will not be adversely affected by the covenants and restrictions.
The Leverage Ratio also determines pricing under the Agreement. The interest rate on borrowings under the Agreement is, at the Company’s option, the Base Rate or the Eurocurrency Rate, as defined in the Agreement, plus an applicable margin. The applicable margin is linked to the Leverage Ratio. The margins range from 1.00% to 1.50% for Eurocurrency Loans and from 0.00% to 0.50% for Base Rate Loans. In addition, a commitment fee is payable on the unused revolving credit facility commitments ranging from 0.20% to 0.30% per annum linked to the Leverage Ratio.
Obligations under the Agreement are secured by substantially all of the assets, excluding real estate and certain other excluded assets, of certain of the Company’s domestic subsidiaries and certain foreign subsidiaries. Such obligations are also secured by a pledge of intercompany debt and equity investments in certain of the Company’s domestic subsidiaries and, in the case of foreign obligations, of stock of certain foreign subsidiaries. All obligations under the Agreement are guaranteed by certain domestic subsidiaries of the Company, and certain foreign obligations under the Agreement are guaranteed by certain foreign subsidiaries of the Company.
In July 2019, the Company redeemed €250 million aggregate principal amount of its outstanding 6.75% senior notes due 2020. The redemption was funded with cash on hand and revolver borrowings.
In November 2019, the Company issued €500 million aggregate principal amount of senior notes. The senior notes bear interest at a rate of 2.875% per annum and mature on February 15, 2025. The senior notes were issued via a private placement and are guaranteed by certain of the Company’s domestic subsidiaries. The net proceeds, after deducting debt issuance costs, totaled approximately €492 million and were used to redeem the remaining €250 million aggregate principal amount of the Company’s outstanding 6.75% senior notes due 2020 and €212 million aggregate principal amount of the Company’s outstanding 4.875% senior notes due 2021.
In December 2019, subsidiaries of the Company completed consent solicitations to amend and waive certain provisions of the indentures governing certain of their senior notes. On December 11, 2019, those subsidiaries entered into supplemental indentures reflecting the amendments and waivers, which were obtained to facilitate the implementation of the Corporate Modernization. The Company recorded approximately $5 million of additional interest charges for third-party fees in 2019 related to these activities.
The Company recorded approximately $56 million of additional interest charges for note repurchase premiums and the write-off of unamortized finance fees related to the senior note redemptions conducted during 2019.
In May 2020, the Company issued $700 million aggregate principal amount of senior notes. The senior notes bear interest at a rate of 6.625% per annum and mature on May 13, 2027. The senior notes were issued via a private placement and are guaranteed by certain of the Company’s domestic subsidiaries. The net proceeds, after deducting debt issuance costs, totaled approximately $690 million and were used to redeem the remaining $130 million aggregate principal amount of the Company’s outstanding 4.875% senior notes due 2021, approximately $419 million aggregate principal amount of the Company’s outstanding 5.00% senior notes due 2022 and approximately $105 million of other secured borrowings. The Company recorded approximately $38 million of additional interest charges for note repurchase premiums and write-off of unamortized finance fees related to these redemptions.
In August 2020, the Company redeemed the remaining $81 million aggregate principal amount of the Company’s outstanding 5.00% senior notes due 2022. The Company recorded approximately $6 million of additional interest charges for note repurchase premiums and write-off of unamortized finance fees related to this redemption.
In order to maintain a capital structure containing appropriate amounts of fixed and floating-rate debt, the Company has entered into a series of interest rate swap agreements. These interest rate swap agreements were accounted for as either fair value hedges or cash flow hedges (see Note 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information).
The Company assesses its capital raising and refinancing needs on an ongoing basis and may enter into additional credit facilities and seek to issue equity and/or debt securities in the domestic and international capital markets if market conditions are favorable. Also, depending on market conditions, the Company may elect to repurchase portions of its debt securities in the open market.
Cash Flows
Operating activities: Cash provided by continuing operating activities was $457 million for 2020, compared to $408 million for 2019. The increase in cash provided by continuing operating activities in 2020 was largely due to the staying of all asbestos-related payments as a result of Paddock’s Chapter 11 filing in early January 2020. The Company made $0 and $151 million of asbestos-related payments in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Company anticipates that cash flows in 2021 will continue to benefit from the operation of the automatic stay in Paddock’s Chapter 11 filing, which stays ongoing litigation and submission of claims and defers payment in
connection with asbestos-related liabilities. See Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on Paddock.
Working capital was a use of cash of $181 million in 2020, compared to a use of cash of $176 million in 2019. The higher use of cash from working capital in 2020 compared to the prior year was primarily due to accounts receivable. The Company reduced the amount of its trade receivables that were factored by approximately $103 million at year-end 2020 compared to 2019, which resulted in a larger use of working capital in 2020. Excluding the impact of accounts receivable factoring, the Company’s days sales outstanding were slightly lower as of December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019. Partially offsetting the impact of lower factored receivables was a decline in inventory levels. As a result of COVID-19, the Company reduced production levels to align with lower sales demand, and this resulted in approximately $75 million of a lower use of cash from working capital in 2020 compared to 2019.
During 2020, the Company contributed $103 million to its defined benefit pension plans, compared with $33 million in 2019. As part of these contributions, the Company elected to make $50 million and $0 in 2020 and 2019, respectively, in discretionary contributions. Cash payments for restructuring activities were $37 million in 2020 compared to $54 million in 2019. In addition, the Company experienced a $103 million increase in cash provided by other operating items for 2020 compared to the prior year, which included the impact of higher dividends received from equity affiliates, lower equity earnings due to the sale of a soda ash joint venture in December 2019 and less cash spent on pallets and repair parts.
Investing activities: Cash provided by investing activities was $93 million for 2020, compared to $437 million utilized in investing activities for 2019. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, the Company took a number of measures, including limiting its capital expenditures, to reduce costs and preserve its financial flexibility. Capital spending for property, plant and equipment was $311 million during 2020, compared to $426 million in 2019. The Company estimates that its full year 2021 capital expenditures will be approximately $375 million. Cash paid for acquisitions was $0 and $190 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively. On June 28, 2019, the Company completed its acquisition of Nueva Fábrica Nacional de Vidrio, S. de R.L. de C.V., a four-furnace glass plant located near Mexico City, Mexico, from Grupo Modelo, a wholly owned affiliate of Anheuser-Busch InBev SA/NV. Contributions and advances to joint ventures were $0 and $22 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. No significant contributions are planned to the Company’s joint ventures in 2021.
On July 31, 2020, the Company completed the sale of its ANZ businesses to Visy. Cash proceeds, net of costs directly attributable to the sale of ANZ, of approximately $441 million were received in the third quarter of 2020. Approximately 95% of proceeds were received at the time of closing and the remaining balance will be paid within 12 months of closing without conditions precedent. In addition and as discussed below, the Company received proceeds for a sale leaseback transaction executed in conjunction with the ANZ sale.
The Company received approximately $10 million and $197 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively, of net proceeds from the disposal of assets. In 2019, these net proceeds primarily related to the sale of the Company’s 25% equity interest in Tata Chemicals (Soda Ash) Partners.
Following the Chapter 11 filing in January 2020, the activities of Paddock are now subject to review and oversight by the bankruptcy court. As a result, the Company no longer has exclusive control over Paddock’s activities during the bankruptcy proceedings. Therefore, Paddock was deconsolidated and its assets and liabilities were derecognized from the Company’s financial statements, which resulted in an investing outflow of $47 million in the Company’s 2020 consolidated cash flows. See Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
Financing activities: Cash utilized in financing activities was $557 million for 2020, compared to $68 million of cash provided by financing activities for 2019. Financing activities in 2020 included additions to long-term debt of $1,845 million, which included the issuance of $700 million of senior notes. Financing activities in 2020 also included the repayment of long-term debt of $2,460 million, which included the paydown of approximately $410 million of the Term Loan A facility, the repurchase of the remaining €118 million aggregate principal amount of the Company’s outstanding 4.875% senior notes due 2021, approximately $500 million aggregate principal amount of the Company’s outstanding 5.00% senior notes due 2022 and approximately $230 million of other secured
borrowings. Financing activities in 2019 included additions to long-term debt of $4,265 million, which included the issuance of €500 million of senior notes and the refinancing of the Company’s Senior Secured Credit Facility. Financing activities in 2019 also included the repayment of long-term debt of $4,099 million, which included the repayment of the previous credit facility and the repurchase of the outstanding €500 million aggregate principal amount of outstanding 6.75% senior notes due 2020 and the partial redemption of €212 million outstanding 4.875% senior notes due 2021.
Borrowings under short-term loans decreased by $15 million in 2020. As a result of financing activities, the Company paid finance fees of $51 million and $85 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively. Also, the Company paid approximately $8 million and received $28 million in proceeds related to hedging activity in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The Company paid $8 million and $31 million in dividends in 2020 and 2019, respectively. In 2020 and 2019, the Company repurchased $0 and $38 million, respectively, of the Company’s stock. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company suspended its quarterly dividend after the first quarter of 2020 and paused share repurchases for 2020. In February 2021, the Company’s Board of Directors authorized a $150 million anti-dilutive share repurchase program for the Company’s common stock that the Company intends to use to offset stock-based compensation provided to the Company’s directors, officers and employees. This authorization supersedes and replaces any prior repurchase authorizations. The Company expects to repurchase approximately $35 million of the Company’s common stock in 2021.
In addition, the Company received approximately $155 million in proceeds for a sale leaseback transaction in 2020 that was executed in conjunction with the ANZ sale.
The Company anticipates that cash flows from its opera­tions and from utiliza­tion of credit available under the Agreement will be sufficient to fund its operating and seasonal working capital needs, debt service and other obligations on a short-term (12 months) and long-term basis. However, as the Company cannot predict the duration or scope of the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on its customers and suppliers, the negative financial impact to the Company’s results cannot be reasonably estimated, but could be material. The Company is actively managing the business to maintain cash flow and it has significant liquidity. The Company believes that these factors will allow it to meet its anticipated funding requirements. The Company anticipates that cash flows in 2021 will continue to benefit from the operation of the automatic stay in Paddock’s Chapter 11 filing, which stays ongoing litigation and submission of claims and defers payment in connection with asbestos-related liabilities.
Contractual Obligations and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The following information summarizes the Company’s significant contractual cash obligations at December 31, 2020 (dollars in millions).
(1) Amounts based on rates and assumptions at December 31, 2020.
(2) The Company’s purchase obligations consist principally of contracted amounts for energy and molds. In cases where variable prices are involved, current market prices have been used. The amount above does not include ordinary course of business purchase orders because the majority of such purchase orders may be canceled. The Company does not believe such purchase orders will adversely affect its liquidity position.
(3) In order to maintain minimum funding requirements, the Company is required to make contributions to its defined benefit pension plans of approximately $60 million in 2021. Future funding requirements for the Company’s pension plans will depend largely on actual asset returns and future actuarial assumptions, such as discount rates, and can vary significantly.
The Company is unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate as to when cash settlement with taxing authorities may occur for its unrecognized tax benefits. Therefore, the liability for unrecognized tax benefits is not included in the table above. See Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The Company’s analysis and discussion of its financial condition and results of operations are based upon its consolidated financial statements that have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. The Company evaluates these estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Estimates and assumptions are based on historical and other factors believed to be reasonable under the circumstances at the time the financial statements are issued. The results of these estimates may form the basis of the carrying value of certain assets and liabilities and may not be readily apparent from other sources. Actual results, under conditions and circumstances different from those assumed, may differ from estimates.
The impact of, and any associated risks related to, estimates and assumptions are discussed within Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, as well as in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, if applicable, where estimates and assumptions affect the Company’s reported and expected financial results.
The Company believes that accounting for the impairment of long-lived assets, pension benefit plans, contingencies and litigation related to its asbestos-related liability, and income taxes involves the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of its consolidated financial statements.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Property, Plant and Equipment (PP&E) - The Company tests for impairment of PP&E whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable. PP&E held for use in the Company’s business is grouped for impairment testing at the lowest level for which cash flows can reasonably be identified, typically a segment or a component of a segment. The Company evaluates the recoverability of PP&E based on undiscounted projected cash flows, excluding interest and taxes. If an asset group is considered impaired, the impairment loss to be recognized is measured as the amount by which the asset
group’s carrying amount exceeds its fair value. PP&E held for sale is reported at the lower of carrying amount or fair value less cost to sell.
Impairment testing requires estimation of projected future cash flows generated by the asset group. The assumptions underlying cash flow projections represent management’s best estimates at the time of the impairment review. Factors that management must estimate include, among other things: industry and market conditions, sales volume and prices, production costs and inflation. Changes in key assumptions or actual conditions which differ from estimates could result in an impairment charge. The Company uses reasonable and supportable assumptions when performing impairment reviews and cannot predict the occurrence of future events and circumstances that could result in impairment charges.
Goodwill - Goodwill is tested for impairment annually as of October 1 (or more frequently if impairment indicators arise). When performing a quantitative test for goodwill impairment, the Company compares the business enterprise value (“BEV”) of each reporting unit with its carrying value. The BEV is computed based on estimated future cash flows, discounted at the weighted average cost of capital of a hypothetical third-party buyer. If the BEV is less than the carrying value for any reporting unit, then any excess of the carrying value over the BEV is recorded as an impairment loss. The calculations of the BEV are based on internal and external inputs, such as projected future cash flows of the reporting units, discount rates, terminal business value, among other assumptions. The valuation approach utilized by management represents a Level 3 fair value measurement measured on a non-recurring basis in the fair value hierarchy due to the Company’s use of unobservable inputs. The Company’s projected future cash flows incorporate management’s best estimates of the expected future results including, but not limited to, price trends, customer demand, material costs, asset replacement costs and any other known factors.
Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level, which is the operating segment or one level below the operating segment, also known as a component. Two or more components of an operating segment shall be aggregated into a single reporting unit based on an assessment of various factors. The aggregation of the components of the Company’s reporting units was based on their economic similarity as determined by the Company using a number of quantitative and qualitative factors, including gross margins, the manner in which the Company operates the business, the consistent nature of products, services, production processes, customers and methods of distribution, as well as the level of shared resources and assets between the components. Despite the consolidation of the Americas segment effective January 1, 2018, the Company has not changed the reporting units within this reportable segment or the goodwill allocated to its reporting units. The Americas reportable segment is comprised of two reporting units - North America and Latin America. The Company has determined that the Europe segment is also a reporting unit. Prior to 2020, the Company aggregated the components of the Asia Pacific segment, which had no goodwill, into a single reporting unit equal to the reportable segment. On July 31, 2020, the Company completed the sale of its ANZ businesses, which comprised the majority of its businesses in the Asia Pacific region (approximately 85% of net sales in that region for the full year 2019). After the sale of the ANZ businesses, the remaining businesses in the Asia Pacific region do not meet the criteria of an individually reportable segment.
The COVID-19 pandemic had an adverse impact on the Company’s business during the second quarter of 2020, resulting in a significant decline in revenue and earnings, along with a decline in the Company’s stock price and associated market capitalization. The Company determined that the impact of COVID-19 was a triggering event that required the Company to perform a quantitative interim goodwill impairment test in the second quarter of 2020. This interim test indicated that the BEV of each of the Company’s reporting units exceeded its respective carrying amount in the second quarter of 2020; therefore, no goodwill impairment existed. As part of its on going assessment of goodwill in 2019, the Company determined that indicators of impairment had occurred during the third quarter of 2019. The triggering events were management’s update to its long-range plan, which indicated lower projected future cash flows for its North American reporting unit (in the Americas segment) as compared to the projections used in the most recent goodwill impairment test performed as of October 1, 2018, and a significant reduction in the Company’s share price. As a result, the Company recorded a non-cash impairment charge of $595 million in the third quarter of 2019, which was equal to the excess of the
North American reporting unit's carrying value over its fair value. Goodwill related to the Company’s other reporting units was determined to not be impaired as a result of the 2019 interim impairment analysis.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company completed its annual impairment testing and determined that no impairment of goodwill existed. Goodwill at December 31, 2020 totaled approximately $1.95 billion, representing 22% of total assets. As of December 31, 2020, the Company has three reporting units and includes approximately $933 million of recorded goodwill to the Company’s Europe reporting unit, approximately $446 million of recorded goodwill to the Company’s North America reporting unit and approximately $572 million of recorded goodwill to the Company’s Latin America reporting unit. There can be no assurance that anticipated financial results will be achieved, and the goodwill balances remain susceptible to future impairment charges. The goodwill related to the North America reporting unit remains the reporting unit that has the greatest risk of future impairment charges given the difference (approximately 19%) between the BEV and carrying value of this reporting unit as of October 1, 2020. Future changes in the Company’s cost of capital or expected cash flows may cause the Company’s goodwill to become impaired, resulting in a non-cash charge against the Company’s results of operations. For example, if the Company’s assumed perpetuity growth rate, which would impact projected future cash flows, were one percentage point lower and the Company’s assumed weighted average cost of capital were one percentage point higher, the testing performed as of October 1, 2020, would have indicated a goodwill impairment of approximately $25 million related to the Company’s North American reporting unit. The BEVs of the Company’s Europe and Latin America reporting units more substantially exceeded their carrying values. Any impairment charges that the Company may take in the future could be material to its consolidated results of operations and financial condition.
During the time subsequent to the annual evaluation, and at December 31, 2020, the Company considered whether any events and/or changes in circumstances had resulted in the likelihood that the goodwill of any of its reporting units may have been impaired and has determined that no such events have occurred. The Company will monitor conditions throughout 2021 that might significantly affect the projections and variables used in the impairment test to determine if a review prior to October 1 may be appropriate. If the results of impairment testing confirm that a write-down of goodwill is necessary, then the Company will record a charge at that time. In the event the Company would be required to record a significant write-down of goodwill, the charge would have a material adverse effect on reported results of operations and net worth.
Other Long-Lived Assets - Intangibles - Other long-lived assets consist primarily of purchased customer relationships intangibles and are amortized using the accelerated amortization method over their estimated useful lives. The Company reviews these assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable. In the event that a decline in fair value of an asset occurs, and the decline in value is considered to be other than temporary, an impairment loss is recognized. The test for impairment would require the Company to make estimates about fair value, which may be determined based on discounted cash flows, third-party appraisals or other methods that provide appropriate estimates of value. The Company continually monitors the carrying value of its assets.
Pension Benefit Plans
Estimates - The determination of pension obligations and the related pension expense or credits to operations involves certain estimations. The most critical estimates are the discount rate used to calculate the actuarial present value of benefit obligations and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. The Company uses discount rates based on yields of high quality fixed rate debt securities at the end of the year. At December 31, 2020, the weighted average discount rate was 2.61% and 1.92% for U.S. and non-U.S. plans, respectively. The Company uses an expected long-term rate of return on assets that is based on both past performance of the various plans’ assets and estimated future performance of the assets. Due to the nature of the plans’ assets and the volatility of debt and equity markets, actual returns may vary significantly from year to year. The Company refers to average historical returns over longer periods (up to 10 years) in determining its expected rates of return because short-term fluctuations in market values do not reflect the rates of return the Company expects to achieve based upon its long-term investing strategy. For purposes of determining pension charges and credits in 2020, the
Company’s estimated weighted average expected long-term rate of return on plan assets is 7.15% for U.S. plans and 5.23% for non-U.S. plans compared to 7.25% for U.S. plans and 5.50% for non-U.S. plans in 2019. The Company recorded pension expense from continuing operations (exclusive of settlement charges) of $32 million, $25 million, and $26 million for the U.S. plans in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively, and $6 million, $7 million, and $6 million for the non-U.S. plans in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. Depending on currency translation rates, the Company expects to record approximately $35 million of total pension expense for the full year of 2021. The 2021 pension expense will reflect a 6.85% and 5.20% expected long-term rate of return for the U.S. assets and non-U.S. assets, respectively.
Future effects on reported results of operations depend on economic conditions and investment performance. For example, a one-half percentage point change in the actuarial assumption regarding discount rates used to calculate plan liabilities or in the expected rate of return on plan assets would result in a change of approximately $6 million and $11 million, respectively, in the pretax pension expense for the full year of 2021.
Recognition of Funded Status - The Company recognizes the funded status of each pension benefit plan on the balance sheet. The funded status of each plan is measured as the difference between the fair value of plan assets and actuarially calculated benefit obligations as of the balance sheet date. Actuarial gains and losses are accumulated in Other Comprehensive Income, and the portion of each plan that exceeds 10% of the greater of that plan’s assets or projected benefit obligation is amortized to income on a straight-line basis over the average remaining service period of employees still accruing benefits or the expected life of participants not accruing benefits if all, or almost all, of the plan’s participants are no longer accruing benefits.
Contingencies and Litigation Related to Asbestos Liability
For many years, the Company has conducted an annual comprehensive legal review of its asbestos-related liabilities and costs in connection with finalizing and reporting its annual results of operations, unless significant changes in trends or new developments warrant an earlier review. As part of its annual comprehensive legal review for the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company provided historical claims filing data to a third-party consultant with expertise in predicting future claims filings based on actuarial inputs such as disease incidence and mortality. The Company used those estimates of total future claims, along with its legal judgment regarding an estimation of future disposition costs and related legal costs, as inputs to develop a reasonable estimate of probable liability.
Following the Corporate Modernization transactions, asbestos-related liabilities that were previously paid by O-I now reside at Paddock. On January 6, 2020, Paddock voluntarily filed for relief under Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code in the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the District of Delaware, to equitably and finally resolve all of its current and future asbestos-related claims. O-I Glass and O-I Group were not included in the Chapter 11 filing. Paddock’s ultimate goal in its Chapter 11 case is to confirm a plan of reorganization under Section 524(g) of the Bankruptcy Code and utilize this specialized provision to establish a trust that will address all current and future asbestos-related claims. Although the Chapter 11 proceedings are progressing, it is not possible to predict the form of any ultimate resolution or when an ultimate resolution might occur at this time. The Company undertook the Corporate Modernization transactions to improve the Company’s operating efficiency and cost structure, which resulted in the legacy liabilities of O-I residing within Paddock, separate from the active operations of the Company’s subsidiaries, while fully maintaining Paddock’s ability to access the value of those operations to support its legacy liabilities through the support agreement. The Corporate Modernization transactions also helped ensure that Paddock has the same ability to fund the costs of defending and resolving present and future Asbestos Claims as O-I previously did, through Paddock’s retention of its own assets to satisfy these claims and through its access to additional funds from the Company through the support agreement. The ultimate amount that the Company may be required to fund on account of such asbestos-related liabilities paid out in connection with a confirmed Chapter 11 plan of reorganization cannot be estimated with certainty at this time.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes as required by general accounting principles under which management judgment is required in determining income tax expense/(benefit) and the related balance sheet amounts. This judgment includes estimating and analyzing historical and projected future operating results, the reversal of taxable and tax deductible temporary differences, tax planning strategies, and the ultimate outcome of uncertain income tax positions. Actual income taxes paid may vary from estimates, depending upon changes in income tax laws, actual results of operations, and the effective settlement of uncertain tax positions. The Company has received tax assessments in excess of established reserves for uncertain tax positions. The Company is contesting these tax assessments, and will continue to do so, including pursuing all available remedies such as appeals and litigation, if necessary.
The Company believes that adequate provisions for all income tax uncertainties have been made. However, if tax assessments are settled against the Company at amounts in excess of established reserves, it could have a material impact to the Company’s results of operations, financial position or cash flows. Changes in the estimates and assumptions used for calculating income tax expense and potential differences in actual results from estimates could have a material impact on the Company’s results of operations and financial condition.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the tax effects of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities measured using enacted tax rates and for tax attributes such as operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined separately for each tax jurisdiction on a separate or on a consolidated tax filing basis, as applicable, in which the Company conducts its operations or otherwise incurs taxable income or losses. A valuation allowance is recorded when it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The realization of deferred tax assets depends on the ability to generate sufficient taxable income of the appropriate character within the carryback or carryforward periods provided for in the tax law for each applicable tax jurisdiction. The Company considers the following possible sources of taxable income when assessing the realization of deferred tax assets:
● taxable income in prior carryback years;
● future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences;
● future taxable income exclusive of reversing temporary differences and carryforwards; and
● prudent and feasible tax planning strategies that the Company would be willing to undertake to prevent a deferred tax asset from otherwise expiring.
The assessment regarding whether a valuation allowance is required or whether a change in judgment regarding the valuation allowance has occurred also considers all available positive and negative evidence, including, but not limited to:
● nature, frequency, and severity of cumulative losses in recent years;
● duration of statutory carryforward and carryback periods;
● statutory limitations against utilization of tax attribute carryforwards against taxable income;
● historical experience with tax attributes expiring unused; and
● near- and medium-term financial outlook.
The weight given to the positive and negative evidence is commensurate with the extent to which the evidence may be objectively verified. Accordingly, it is generally difficult to conclude a valuation allowance is not required when there is significant objective and verifiable negative evidence, such as cumulative losses in recent years. The Company uses the actual results for the last two years and current year results as the primary measure of cumulative losses in recent years.
The evaluation of deferred tax assets requires judgment in assessing the likely future tax consequences of events recognized in the financial statements or tax returns and future profitability. The recognition of deferred
tax assets represents the Company’s best estimate of those future events. Changes in the current estimates, due to unanticipated events or otherwise, could have a material effect on the Company’s results of operations and financial condition.
In certain tax jurisdictions, the Company’s analysis indicates that it has cumulative losses in recent years. This is considered significant negative evidence which is objective and verifiable and, therefore, difficult to overcome. However, the cumulative loss position is not solely determinative, and, accordingly, the Company considers all other available positive and negative evidence in its analysis. Based on its analysis, the Company has recorded a valuation allowance for the portion of deferred tax assets where based on the weight of available evidence it is unlikely to realize those deferred tax assets.
Based on the evidence available, including a lack of sustainable earnings, the Company in its judgment previously recorded a valuation allowance against substantially all of its net deferred tax assets in the United States. If a change in judgment regarding this valuation allowance were to occur in the future, the Company will record a potentially material deferred tax benefit, which could result in a favorable impact on the effective tax rate in that period. The utilization of tax attributes to offset taxable income reduces the amount of deferred tax assets subject to a valuation allowance.
In 2017, the Company elected to treat Global Intangible Low Taxed Income (“GILTI”), which was effective in 2018 for the Company, as a period cost.
The U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “Act”) was enacted on December 22, 2017. Additional guidance related to the Act continues to be issued providing further clarification on the application of the Act, including regulations related to the GILTI high-tax exception, interest deductibility, base erosion and anti-abuse tax, and foreign tax credits. In addition, global taxing authorities will be reviewing current legislation for potential modifications in reaction to the implementation of the Act. This additional guidance, along with the potential for additional global tax legislation changes, such as restrictions on interest deductibility and deductibility of cross-jurisdictional payments, could have a material adverse impact on net income and cash flow by impacting significant deductions or income inclusions.