Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Important Note about Forward-Looking Statements
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2020 and notes thereto included in this document and our unaudited 10-Q filings for the first three quarters of 2020 and the notes thereto. In addition to historical information, the following discussion and other parts of this Form 10-K contain forward-looking information that involves risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated by such forward-looking information due to factors discussed elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
The statements that are not historical constitute ‘‘forward-looking statements.’’ Said forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties that may cause the actual results, performance or achievements of the Company to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements, expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are identified by the use of such terms and phrases as ‘‘expects,’’ ‘‘intends,’’ ‘‘goals,’’ ‘‘estimates,’’ ‘‘projects,’’ ‘‘plans,’’ ‘‘anticipates,’’ ‘‘should,’’ ‘‘future,’’ ‘‘believes,’’ and ‘‘scheduled.’’
The variables, which may cause differences include, but are not limited to, the following: general economic and business conditions; competition; success of operating initiatives; operating costs; advertising and promotional efforts; the existence or absence of adverse publicity; changes in business strategy or development plans; the ability to retain management; availability, terms and deployment of capital; business abilities and judgment of personnel; availability of qualified personnel; labor and employment benefit costs; availability and costs of raw materials and supplies; and changes in, or failure to comply with various government regulations. Although the Company believes that the assumptions underlying the forward-looking statements contained herein are reasonable, any of the assumptions could be inaccurate; therefore, there can be no assurance that the forward-looking statements included in this Form 10-K will prove to be accurate.
In light of the significant uncertainties inherent in the forward-looking statements included herein, the inclusion of such information should not be regarded as a representation by the Company or any person that the objectives and expectations of the Company will be achieved.
Overview
Orbital Energy Group, Inc. is a Colorado corporation organized on April 21, 1998. The Company’s principal place of business is located at 1924 Aldine Western, Houston, Texas 77038, phone (832) 467-1420. Orbital Energy Group is a platform company dedicated to maximizing stockholder value through the acquisition, development and commercialization of new, innovative technologies. Through its subsidiaries, Orbital Energy Group has built a diversified portfolio of industry leading technologies that touch many markets.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our financial statements and related public financial information are based on the application of accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (‘‘GAAP’’). GAAP requires the use of estimates, assumptions, judgments and subjective interpretations of accounting principles that have an impact on the assets, liabilities, revenue, and expense amounts reported. These estimates can also affect supplemental information contained in our external disclosures including information regarding contingencies, risk and financial condition. We believe our use of estimates and underlying accounting assumptions adhere to GAAP and are consistently applied. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We continue to monitor significant estimates made during the preparation of our financial statements.
While all of our significant accounting policies impact the Company’s financial condition and results of operations, we view certain of these policies as critical. Policies determined to be critical are those policies that have the most significant impact on our financial statements and require management to use a greater degree of judgment and estimates. Actual results may differ from those estimates. Our management believes that given current facts and circumstances, it is unlikely that applying any other reasonable judgments or estimate methodologies would have caused a material change in our results of operations, financial position or liquidity for the periods presented in this report.
Finite-Lived Asset Impairment
The Company reviews its long-lived assets including finite-lived intangibles for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the asset exceeds its fair value and may not be recoverable. In performing the review for recoverability, the Company estimates the future cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset and its eventual disposition. If the sum of the expected future cash flows (undiscounted and without interest charges) is less than the carrying amount of the asset, an impairment loss is recognized as the excess of the carrying amount over the fair value. Otherwise, an impairment loss is not recognized. Management estimates the fair value and the estimated future cash flows expected. Any changes in these estimates could impact whether there was impairment and the amount of the impairment.
In the fourth quarter of 2019, the Company determined that certain acquisition intangibles related to CUI-Canada, which were classified as held for sale in 2019 did not have adequate forecasted revenue to justify its valuation at that time and were written off. This was primarily driven by the Company's decision to close the facility by the end of 2020. The impairment of $92 thousand is reported in discontinued operations.
Goodwill from Acquisition
The Company accounts for business combinations under the acquisition method of accounting in accordance with ASC 805, ‘‘Business Combinations,’’ where the total purchase price is allocated to the tangible and identified intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values. The purchase price is allocated using the information currently available, and may be adjusted, up to one year from acquisition date, after obtaining more information regarding, among other things, asset valuations, liabilities assumed and revisions to preliminary estimates. The purchase price in excess of the fair value of the tangible and identified intangible assets acquired less liabilities assumed is recognized as goodwill.
Upon acquisition of Reach Construction Group, LLC, the Company recorded $7.0 million of goodwill. Goodwill was valued as of April 1, 2020 by a third-party valuation expert and was recorded following the recognition of Reach's tangible assets and liabilities and $13.7 million of finite-lived identifiable intangible assets. Factors that contributed to the Company's goodwill are Reach Construction's skilled workforce and reputation within its industry. The Company also expected to achieve future synergies between Reach Construction and Orbital Power Services business. These synergies were expected to be achieved in the form of power line work necessary when bringing new solar power systems online. The Company tests for impairment of indefinite-lived intangibles and goodwill in the second quarter of each year and when events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of goodwill exceeds its fair value and may not be recoverable. Management completed a qualitative analysis to determine whether it was more likely than not that the fair value of its reporting unit was less than its carrying amount, including goodwill. To complete the qualitative review, management evaluated the fair value of the goodwill and considered all known events and circumstances that might trigger an impairment of goodwill. During management's review of goodwill as of December 31, 2020, the Company determined that there were not indicators present to suggest that it was more likely than not that the fair value of the Orbital Solar Services reporting unit was less than its carrying amount and thus no impairment was necessary.
2019 Goodwill Impairments
In the fourth quarter of 2019, the Company determined that it was more likely than not that the fair value of its goodwill at CUI-Canada and CUI Japan was less than the carrying amounts. The Company hired a third-party valuation expert to perform a valuation and it was determined that the remaining goodwill held by CUI-Canada and CUI Japan should be written down to zero. With those write downs, the Company did not have any remaining goodwill at December 31, 2019.
Revenue Recognition
On January 1, 2018, we adopted the accounting standard ASC 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers” and all the related amendments (“new revenue standard"), which supersedes nearly all existing revenue recognition guidance under U.S. GAAP. This guidance includes the required steps to achieve the core principle that a company should recognize revenue when it transfers promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the company expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. For the majority of contracts, revenue is still measured over time using the cost-to-cost method. The change that most affected the transition adjustment on revenue was the requirement to limit revenue recognition on certain contracts without an enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date. Without a specific enforceable right to payment throughout the life of the contract, revenue is recorded at completion of the contact. For the Company's new Orbital Power Services and Orbital Solar businesses, all contracts are classified over time due to the guidance that allows for over time revenue recognition for construction contracts where the Company's performance creates or enhances an asset that the customer controls as the asset is being created or enhanced. This criterion is met since the Company is typically constructing the solar farms and electric power construction services on customer owned or customer controlled property, so the customer controls the asset as it is created.
The Company generates its revenue from a portfolio of products, services and resources that offer a diverse range of personalized gas engineering solutions to the gas utilities, power generation, petrochemical, emissions, manufacturing and automotive industries, among others.
Orbital Gas Systems accounts for a majority of its contract revenue proportionately over time. For our performance obligations satisfied over time, we recognize revenue by measuring the progress toward complete satisfaction of that performance obligation. The selection of the method to measure progress towards completion can be either an input method or an output method and requires judgment based on the nature of the goods or services to be provided.
For our construction contracts, revenue is generally recognized over time. Our fixed price construction projects generally use a cost-to-cost input method to measure our progress towards complete satisfaction of the performance obligation as we believe it best depicts the transfer of control to the customer. Under the cost-to-cost measure of progress, the extent of progress towards completion is measured based on the ratio of costs incurred to date to the total estimated costs at completion of the performance obligation.
The timing of revenue recognition for Integrated Energy Infrastructure solutions and services also depends on the payment terms of the contract, as our performance does not create an asset with an alternative use to us. For those contracts which we have a right to payment for performance completed to date at all times throughout our performance, inclusive of a cancellation, we recognize revenue over time. As discussed above, these performance obligations use a cost-to-cost input method to measure our progress towards complete satisfaction of the performance obligation as we believe it best depicts the transfer of control to the customer. However, for those contracts for which we do not have a right, at all times, to payment for performance completed to date, we recognize revenue at the point in time when control is transferred to the customer, generally when shipped.
For our services contracts, revenue is generally recognized over time as the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits of our performance as we perform the service. For our fixed price service contracts with specified service periods, revenue is generally recognized on a straight-line basis over such service period when our inputs are expended evenly, and the customer receives and consumes the benefits of our performance throughout the contract term.
For certain of our revenue streams, such as call-out repair and service work, outage services and training that are performed under time and materials contracts, our progress towards complete satisfaction of such performance obligations is measured using an output method as the customer receives and consumes the benefits of our performance completed to date.
Due to uncertainties inherent in the estimation process, it is possible that estimates of costs to complete a performance obligation will be revised in the near-term. For those performance obligations for which revenue is recognized using a cost-to-cost input method, changes in total estimated costs, and related progress towards complete satisfaction of the performance obligation, are recognized on a cumulative catch-up basis in the period in which the revisions to the estimates are made. When the current estimate of total costs for a performance obligation indicate a loss, a provision for the entire estimated loss on the unsatisfied performance obligation is made in the period in which the loss becomes evident.
Our contracts with certain customers may be subject to contract cancellation clauses. Contracts with other cancellation provisions may require judgment in determining the contract term, including the existence of material rights, transaction price and identifying the performance obligations and whether a contract should be accounted for over time or on a completed contract basis. Revenue is recognized for certain integration systems over time using cost-based input methods, in which significant judgement is required to evaluate assumptions including the amount of total estimated costs to determine our progress towards contract completion and to calculate the corresponding amount of revenue to recognize.
At times, customers may request changes that either amend, replace or cancel existing contracts. Judgment is required to determine whether the specific facts and circumstances within the contracts require the changes to be accounted for as a separate contract or as a modification. Generally, contract modifications containing additional goods and services that are determined to be distinct and sold at their stand-alone selling price are accounted for as a separate contract. For contract modifications where goods and services are not determined to be distinct and sold at their stand-alone selling price, the original contract is updated and the required adjustments to revenue and contract assets, liabilities, and other accounts will be made accordingly.
Product-type contracts (for example, sale of GasPT units) for which revenue does not qualify to be recognized over time are recognized at a point in time. Revenues from extended warranty and maintenance activities are recognized ratably over the term of the warranty and maintenance period.
Variable Consideration
The nature of our contracts gives rise to several types of variable consideration. In rare instances, we include in our contract estimates, additional revenue for submitted contract modifications or claims against the customer when we believe we have an enforceable right to the modification or claim, the amount can be estimated reliably and its realization is probable. In evaluating these criteria, we consider the contractual/legal basis for the claim, the cause of any additional costs incurred, the reasonableness of those costs and the objective evidence available to support the claim. These amounts are included in our calculation of net revenue recorded for our contracts and the associated remaining performance obligations. Additionally, if the contract has a provision for liquidated damages in the case that the Company misses a timing target, or fails to meet any other contract benchmarks, the Company accounts for those estimated liquidated damages as variable consideration and will adjust revenue accordingly with periodic updates to the estimated variable consideration as the job progresses. Liquidated damages are recognized as variable consideration only when the Company estimates that they will be a factor in the performance of the contract.
In contracts where there are timing differences between when we transfer a promised good or service to the customer and when the customer pays for that good or service, we have determined that, our contracts do not include a significant financing component.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
As of December 31, 2020, Orbital Energy Group, Inc. held Cash and cash equivalents of $3.0 million and Restricted cash of $1.5 million. Operations, acquisitions, and equipment have been funded through cash on hand, the Orbital Solar line of credit ("LOC"), seller financing, the issuance of convertible debt and financing through the sale of future revenues, during the year ended December 31, 2020. Including discontinued operations, the Company's cash used in operations was more in 2020 than in 2019 primarily driven by a larger net loss in 2020 compared to 2019. Major uses of cash in 2020 included the Orbital Solar (formerly Reach Construction Group, LLC) acquisition, a working capital adjustment payment on the sale of the Power business, purchases of property and equipment, deposits toward the VE Technology purchase and changes in working capital. The Company continues to work to improve its short-term liquidity through management of its working capital. Long-term liquidity is expected to benefit from revenues and earnings through Orbital Solar and Orbital Power Services. Overall volume growth in the Company's businesses both organically and through acquisitions are expected to benefit cash flows as well. In addition, the Company filed a Form S-3 in the second quarter and subsequent to year end, the Company issued $45 million of common stock on that S-3, and filed another S-3 for the possible issuance of an additional $150 million in stock or public debt.
Cash used in Operations
There was a use of cash from operations of approximately $15.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. This was an increase from the use of cash from operations of approximately $11.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Overall, the change in cash used in operations is primarily the result of the loss from continuing operations, net of income taxes in 2020 before non-cash expenses affected by changes in assets and liabilities.
Cash used in operations in 2020 was a $3.5 million increase in cash used compared to the amount used in operations in 2019. Cash used in operations for 2020 were approximately $8.3 million in the Electric Power and Solar Infrastructure Services segment, $8.2 million in the Other segment, $2.7 million in the Integrated Energy Infrastructure Solutions and Services segment partially partially offset by $4.2 million provided by discontinued operations. This compares to 2019 cash from operations consisting of $5.9 million use of cash in the Other segment and $8.3 million use of cash in the Integrated Energy Infrastructure segment, which was partially offset by a source of cash in discontinued operations of $2.7 million. There were no 2019 cash flows from operations in the Electric Power and Solar Infrastructure Services segment since this segment got its start in 2020. Increased uses of cash in 2020 are primarily for merger and acquisition activity in the Other segment in addition to normal administrative costs, and cash usage in the Electric Power and Solar Infrastructure Services segment primarily related to start-up costs on the Company's new Orbital Power Services group and a downturn due to the COVID-19 crisis. While the Company saw an initial cost increase from Orbital Power Services, management expects this group to become cash flow positive, as the business environment normalizes and it continues to increase service crews deployed. The Company believes overall cash used in operations will continue to improve through revenue growth associated with new customers and larger projects, the additional cash expected from operations of Orbital Solar and in process cost reductions coupled with continued management of working capital allocation. The Company's cash usage in the other segment normalized in the second half with a use of cash of $2.1 million compared to $6.1 million in the first six months of the year as a result of the Company closing of the Reach Construction Group acquisition in April. Cash provided by discontinued operations were primarily due to final orders by CUI-Canada customers. Also contributing to the cash flows from discontinued operations were approximately $0.5 million of tariff refunds related to the former domestic power and electromechanical businesses sold in 2019.
During 2020, in addition to the Company's net loss after non-cash items, significant factors affecting cash used in operating activities included the change in trade accounts receivable, accrued liabilities, accounts payable and changes in contract liabilities. The change in trade accounts receivable accounted for a $3.7 million source of cash in operating activities and was due to positive timing differences at Orbital Solar and from CUI-Canada as the Company collected final receivables on final orders prior to the Company closing the Canada facility in the fourth quarter. A $3.8 million source of cash due to timing of inventory purchases was primarily due to the use of inventory at CUI-Canada as the Company sold its Canada inventory prior to closing of the facility. A $1.2 million use of cash related to accrued expenses was largely due to the payout of severance at CUI-Canada that was accrued for in 2019 offset by an accrual for stock appreciation rights in 2020 . Change in accounts payable, which was a $3.5 million use of cash, was largely due to the paydown of accounts payable at Orbital Solar, which was acquired on April 1, 2020. Accounts payable paid down did not get replaced at the same rate due to decreased business activity at Orbital Solar due to the COVID-19 pandemic and timing of customer projects. Change in contract liabilities was a source of cash due to increased billings in excess of cash at Orbital Solar partially offset by the decrease in provision for loss contracts at Orbital Solar as the estimated contract losses recorded on the acquisition date were realized as vendors were paid.
We expect cash used in operating activities will improve in 2021, primarily due to the top and bottom-line growth in Orbital Power Services and Orbital Solar.
During 2019, in addition to the Company's net loss after non-cash items, significant factors affecting cash used in operating activities included the change in trade accounts receivable and accrued liabilities. The change in trade accounts receivable accounted for $1.5 million source of cash in operating activities and was due to lower overall fourth quarter revenues in the Integrated Energy Infrastructure Solutions and Services segment compared to the revenues in the fourth quarter of 2018. Increased cash source of $2.2 million from change in accrued liabilities was due to a non-cash severance accrual recorded at CUI-Canada in preparation for closing that facility in late 2020. Refund liabilities were a $1.3 million use of cash as customers looked to utilize their refunds prior to the divesture of the power and electromechanical business. A $14.1 million gain on the sale of the company's domestic power and electromechanical businesses and a $2.6 million deferred tax gain were non-cash income statement items that did not affect cash from operations.
During 2020 and 2019, the Company used stock and options as a form of payment to certain vendors, consultants, directors and employees. For years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company recorded a total of $0.3 million and $0.2 million, respectively for share-based compensation related to equity given, or to be given, to employees, directors and consultants for services provided and as payment for royalties earned. The increase in 2020 compared to 2019 was due to greater stock-based bonuses and greater stock-based director compensation. There was no stock option vesting expense in 2020 or 2019.
Proceeds from Sale of Businesses, Capital Expenditures and Investments
In 2019, the Company sold its domestic power and electromechanical businesses in two separate transactions for total proceeds of $35.4 million.
During the years ended 2020 and 2019, Orbital Energy Group invested $1.7 million and $0.3 million, respectively, in fixed assets. These investments typically include additions to equipment including vehicles and equipment for powerline service and maintenance, engineering and research and development, tooling for manufacturing, furniture, computer equipment for office personnel, facilities improvements and other fixed assets as needed for operations. The increase in 2020 was due to the start-up costs associated with the Company's Orbital Power Services business. The Company anticipates further investment in fixed assets during 2021 in support of its on-going business and continued development of product lines, technologies and services.
Orbital Energy Group invested $11 thousand and $0.4 million in other intangible assets during 2020 and 2019, respectively. These investments typically include product certifications, technology rights, capitalized website development, software for engineering and research and development and software upgrades for office personnel. Investments in 2020 and 2019 primarily related to product certifications in the discontinued Power and Electromechanical businesses and investments in software in the Integrated Energy Infrastructure Solutions and Services segment. The Company expects to continue to invest in software and technology in 2021.
The Company made an additional $0.3 million investment in a convertible note receivable from Virtual Power Systems ("VPS") in 2020 including payments made related to the Company's transition agreement with VPS. This note was converted to equity in VPS in the third quarter of 2020 along with an additional contribution of $0.5 million and a non-cash contribution of inventory in the amount of $0.3 million.
During 2019, Orbital Energy Group made cash investments of $2.1 million and elected to convert its $0.7 million of convertible notes receivable to VPS stock. In addition to the cash investments, the Company contributed certain property and equipment, other intangible assets, inventories, prepaid assets, open purchases orders, research and development expenditures and the convertible note receivable for a total investment of $5.9 million for a 21.4% equity investment in Virtual Power Systems ("VPS"). Through December 31, 2019, the noncash portion of the investment was $3.8 million. The Company's share ownership percentage was diluted to 20.58% as of December 31, 2019 due to additional share issuances by VPS.
Investments made by the Company are subject to an investment policy, which limits our risk of loss exposure by setting appropriate credit quality requirements for investments held, limiting maturities to be one year or less, and setting appropriate concentration levels to prevent concentrations. This includes a requirement that no more than 3% of the portfolio, or $500,000, whichever is greater, may be invested in one particular issue. Since the investment in VPS was considered a strategic investment, the board and management reviewed and approved the investment above the board set limit for individual issuers.
Financing Activities
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company issued payments of $4 thousand and $4 thousand, respectively, against capital leases of equipment. The Company had proceeds from notes payable in 2020 of $8.1 million including a convertible note payable, compared to zero in 2019. See Note 7, Note payable for more information on the Company's notes payable. The Company made payments on notes payable of $4.1 million in 2020 and $0.3 million in 2019.
During April 2019, Orbital Energy Group replaced the existing line of credit and overdraft facilities with a new two-year credit facility with Bank of America for CUI Inc. and CUI-Canada, perfected by a first security lien on all assets of CUI Inc. and CUI-Canada. The facility also included a $3 million sub-limit for use by Orbital Energy Group's non-loan party subsidiaries as a reserve under the borrowing base. The credit facility provided for working capital and general corporate purposes. The credit facility provided up to $10,000,000 in a Revolving Line of Credit Facility (“Revolver”), including a sub-limit for letters of credit. Interest was based upon Daily Floating LIBOR at LIBOR + 2.00%. The Company discontinued this line of credit in 2019 upon the sale of the domestic power and electromechanical businesses. The additional credit was no longer needed due to the cash influx from the sale of the businesses, and the sold businesses were a primary source of collateral for the line of credit.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company recorded proceeds of $0 and $6.8 million, respectively, from the Company's overdraft facility in the U.K., and $0.1 million and $27.5 million respectively, from the Company's lines of credit. Those proceeds were paid back during that time and in 2019 both facilities were discontinued. The 2020 proceeds of $0.1 million were from a line of credit that was acquired as part of the Reach Construction Group, LLC acquisition. This line of credit was paid and closed in the first quarter of 2021.
On February 12, 2021, Orbital Energy Group, Inc. (the “Company”) amended and restated the convertible note payable, that was previously issued to the Company and reported on Form 8-K dated November 18, 2020. The amended and restated Note was executed February 12, 2021 with an effective date of February 8, 2021 pursuant to a certain Amendment Agreement of the same date in replacement of and substitution for the Original Note. The amendment was to remove the convertible option of the note and make the note a conventional note payable.
S-3 registration and share issuances
The Company filed a Form S-3 registration statement on July 17, 2020 containing a prospectus that was effective September 2, 2020. The filing enabled Orbital Energy Group to issue various types of securities, including common stock, preferred stock, debt securities and/or warrants, up to an aggregate amount of $50 million. On January 5, 2021, the Company issued 5,555,556 shares of common stock at a purchase price of $1.80 per share and $10 million in total before fees to institutional investors as a supplemental prospectus under the S-3 the Company filed in July 2020. On January 15, 2021, the Company issued 10,000,000 shares of common stock at a purchase price of $3.50 per share and $35 million in total before fees to institutional investors as a supplemental prospectus under the S-3 the Company filed in July 2020.
On February 3, 2021, the Company filed a Form S-3 shelf registration, amended on February 24, 2021, that will enable the Company to issue up to $150 million in equity or public debt. The future net proceeds from the sale of securities offered by this prospectus will be used for general corporate purposes, which may include operating expenses, working capital to improve and promote our commercially available products and service offerings, advance product and service offering candidates, future acquisitions, share repurchases, expand our market presence and commercialization, general capital expenditures, and for satisfaction of debt obligations. The Company will have significant discretion in the use of any net proceeds.
As the Company focuses on growing its infrastructure services market presence both organically and through strategic acquisitions, technology development, product and service line additions, and increasing Orbital’s market presence, it will fund these activities together with related operating, sales and marketing efforts for its various product offerings with cash on hand, and possible proceeds from future issuances of equity through the S-3 registration statement, and available debt.
Orbital Energy Group may raise additional capital needed to fund the further development and marketing of its products and services as well as payment of its debt obligations.
See the section entitled Recent Sales of Unregistered Securities for a complete listing of all unregistered securities transactions.
Financing activities - related party activity
During 2020 and 2019, $0 and $0.2 million, respectively in interest payments were made in relation to the promissory notes issued to related party, IED, Inc. The promissory note terms included a due date of May 15, 2020 and an interest rate of 5% per annum, with interest payable monthly and the principal due as a balloon payment at maturity. In 2019, this note was assumed by the buyer as part of the sale of the Electromechanical operations.
Recap of Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company had a net loss of $27.4 and cash used in operating activities of $15.0 million during 2020. As of December 31, 2020, the Company's accumulated deficit is $149.7. The Company issued debt in the second half of 2020, and supplemented its liquidity by issuing $45 million of shares of stock in January 2021 along with issuing another S-3 in February 2021 that will allow the Company to issue as much as $150 million in additional shares of common or preferred stock or public debt.
The Company expects the revenues from its continuing operations, and cash on hand, including funds raised in Q1 2021 equity issuances, to cover operating and other expenses for the next twelve months of operations. However, in the short-term, the Company expects to continue to need cash support as the Company's businesses increase their market positions and revenue. The Company may issue additional debt or equity to support continuing operations and acquisition activities in 2021.
At December 31, 2020, and 2019 the Company had cash and cash equivalents balances of $3.0 million and $23.4 million. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had $0.6 million and $1.0 million, respectively, of cash and cash equivalents balances at domestic financial institutions, which were covered under the FDIC insured deposits programs and $0.2 million and $0.3 million, respectively, at foreign financial institutions covered under the United Kingdom Financial Services Compensation (FSC) and the Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation (CDIC). At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company held $0 and $0.2 million, respectively, in Japanese foreign bank accounts, $1.2 million and $0.6 million, respectively, in European foreign bank accounts and $1.0 million and $0.2 million, respectively, in Canadian bank accounts.
The following tables present our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had an accumulated deficit of $149.7 million.
The Company expects the revenues from its continuing operations, and cash on hand including funds raised in Q1 2021, to cover operating and other expenses for the next twelve months of operations. However, in the short-term, the Company expects its Orbital Power Services and Eclipse Foundation businesses to need cash support as the Company acquires fixed assets to grow their businesses. Orbital Gas Systems operations in Houston and the U.K. will also continue to need cash support as the businesses increase their market positions and revenue.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements - Obligations under Certain Guarantee Contracts
The Company may enter into guarantee arrangements in the normal course of business to facilitate commercial transactions with third parties. As of December 31, 2020, the Company is an indemnitor on three surety bonds for a total dollar value of approximately $1.0 million. Two of the bonds were in the U.K. and one was on an Orbital Power Services job in the U.S. The U.K. jobs were for unconsolidated third parties related to two separate projects that had less than $0.1 million left to complete the jobs, for a combined bond amount of approximately $0.6 million, and were expected to be returned in early 2021 without needing to be used. The remaining U.S. bond was for a third party related to two ongoing related unit-based projects that as of December 31, 2020 had a consolidated contract value of less than $0.4 million. The bond's value, which expires in April 2022, is tied to the contract values, which are expected to increase in the future as demonstrated by the approximately $8 million of backlog related to the contracts expected to be fulfilled in the next two years. The Company does not expect any liability associated with these off-balance sheet arrangements.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth, for the periods indicated, certain financial information regarding revenue and costs by segment:
Revenue
2020 compared to 2019
Revenues in 2020 are attributable to continued sales and marketing efforts. Net revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were greater than in 2019 due to the acquisition of Orbital Solar Services and the development of the Company's Orbital Power Services business. This increase was partially offset by lower integration revenues in the Orbital Gas Systems operations during 2020. The U.K. market continues to face headwinds surrounding COVID-19, Brexit, and the impact of the political environment on investment within the sector while the U.S. markets also continue to face headwinds surrounding COVID-19. Revenues will fluctuate generally around the timing of customer project delivery schedules.
The Electric Power and Solar Infrastructure Services Segment held backlogs of customer orders of approximately $30.3 million as of December 30, 2020 and zero at December 31, 2019. Integrated Energy Infrastructure Solutions and Services segment held backlogs of customer orders of approximately $10.1 million as of December 31, 2020, a slight increase from the December 31, 2019 backlog of $9.6 million due to timing, higher translation rates in the U.K partially offset by lower backlogs in North America.
Cost of Revenues
2020 compared to 2019
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the cost of revenues as a percentage of revenue increased to 81.5% from 75.3% during 2019. This increase was attributable to start-up costs at the Company's Orbital Power Services group and lower margin projects during the period for Orbital Solar Services. Margins improved sequentially in each quarter in 2020. This percentage will vary based upon the mix of natural gas systems sold, proprietary technology included in projects, contract labor necessary to complete gas related projects, mix of Orbital Power Services projects including emergency response services and Orbital Solar Services solar projects, the competitive markets in which the Company competes, and foreign exchange rates. The year ended December 31, 2020 was also affected negatively by the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting world-wide economic slowdown.
The Company expects to continue the improvement in 2021 that was seen in each quarter starting in the second quarter of 2020 as Orbital Power Services continues to gain efficiencies and increase revenues, companies continue to learn to cope with the COVID-19 pandemic, more people are vaccinated, and new Orbital Solar Services solar projects begin.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
Selling, General and Administrative (SG&A) expenses includes such items as wages, commissions, consulting, general office expenses, business promotion expenses and costs of being a public company including legal and accounting fees, insurance and investor relations. SG&A expenses are generally associated with the ongoing activities to reach new customers, promote new product lines including Orbital Solar Services, Orbital Power Services, GasPT, VE Technology, and other new product and service introductions.
2020 compared to 2019
During the year ended December 31, 2020, SG&A increased $9.3 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in SG&A for 2020 compared to 2019 was due to increased SG&A costs in the Electric Power and Solar Infrastructure Services segment primarily due to start-up costs at Orbital Power Services group which included increased payroll and insurance costs. Also contributing to the increase were increased corporate costs largely due to strategic initiatives, which included increased professional fees and costs associated with due diligence activities related to prospective acquisitions. The addition of Orbital Solar Services in the second quarter also contributed to the increase in SG&A costs. These increases were partially offset by decreased SG&A costs in the Integrated Energy Infrastructure Solutions and Services segment that implemented costs cutting measures.
SG&A decreased to 76.5% of total revenue in 2020 compared to 85.4% of total revenue during the year ended December 31, 2019 due to economies of scale on 63.5% higher consolidated revenues.
Depreciation and Amortization
(1) For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, depreciation and amortization totals included $0 and $0.8 million, respectively that were classified in income from discontinued operations on the Consolidated Statements of Operations in the Other segment. For the year ended December 31, 2020, depreciation and amortization totals included $0.5 million that were classified as cost of revenues in the Consolidated Statement of Operations in the Electric Power and Solar Infrastructure Services segment.
The depreciation and amortization expenses are associated with depreciating buildings, furniture, vehicles, equipment, software and other intangible assets over the estimated useful lives of the related assets.
2020 compared to 2019
Depreciation and amortization expense in the year ended December 31, 2020 was up compared to 2019 primarily due to the amortization of Orbital Solar Services acquisition intangibles and depreciation of equipment used by Orbital Power Services, which began operations in 2020. This was partially offset by the sale of the Company's domestic power and electronic components businesses in the fourth quarter of 2019. The Other segment, which includes discontinued operations in 2019, is down due to the Company's Power and Electromechanical businesses being sold in 2019, and its Canada operations, were closed and assets sold in the fourth quarter of 2020 after being held for sale since the third quarter of 2019.
Provision for Bad Debt
Provision for bad debt in 2020 primarily relates to accounts receivable write-offs on Orbital Solar Services customer balances that were deemed to be uncollectible. Provision for bad debt in 2019 represented less than 1% of total revenues and related to miscellaneous receivables, which the Company had either recorded an allowance for doubtful collections of the receivable or for which the Company had determined the balance to be uncollectible.
Other Income (Expense)
Fluctuations in Other Income (Expense) are largely due to fluctuations in foreign currency rates. Foreign currency gains and losses are primarily related to intercompany receivables/payables between Orbital Energy Group and its U.K Orbital Gas Systems subsidiary. The increase in interest income is primarily related to the note receivable the Company holds, which was received as part of the Company's sale of its electromechanical business in 2019. Increased sublet rental income is due to the subleasing of the Company's Oregon home office following the sale of the Power and electromechanical businesses. Loss on extinguishment of debt in 2020 was due to the refinancing of the Company's sale-of-revenue note payable, which had a remaining unamortized discount at the time it was refinanced that was written off as a loss on extinguishment of debt.
Investment Income
During the three months ended March 31, 2016, Orbital Energy Group's investment in Test Products International, Inc. ("TPI"), was exchanged for a note receivable from TPI of $0.4 million, which was the carrying value of the investment, earning interest at 5% per annum, through maturity. The Company recorded interest income on the note of $0 and $8 thousand for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The interest receivable was settled on a quarterly basis via a non-cash offset against the finders-fee royalties earned by TPI on GasPT sales. Any remaining finders-fee royalties balance was offset against the note receivable quarterly. The Company received full payment on the note during 2019.
On March 30, 2019, the Company converted its $0.7 million in notes receivable into preferred stock of VPS. In addition, the Company contributed $0.3 million of cash and $2.5 million of other assets, as well as $1.8 million of future expenditures recorded as liabilities by the Company, of which $1.7 million were paid in 2019. In return, the Company acquired a minority ownership stake in VPS. During the three months ended June 30, 2019, the Company recorded a $0.6 million gain based on the fair value of the non-cash assets contributed as part of the investment in VPS, which is included in discontinued operations.
Prior to the third quarter of 2020, based on its equity ownership and that the Company maintains a board seat and participated in operational activities of VPS, the Company maintained significant influence to account for the investment as an equity-method investment. Under the equity method of accounting, results are not consolidated, but the Company records a proportionate percentage of the profit or loss of VPS as an addition to or a subtraction from the VPS investment asset balance. With the decrease in ownership percentage following a Q3 2020 equity raise by VPS and additional board seats placed, Orbital Energy Group, Inc. no longer has significantt influence to recognize the investment under the equity method. The investment is held at December 31, 2020 under the cost method of accounting for investments. The VPS investment basis at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 was $1.1 million and $4.9 million as reflected on the consolidated balance sheets. The Company recorded a $4.8 million loss on its equity-method investment in the six months ended June 30, 2020.
The Company made an additional $0.3 million investment in a convertible note receivable from Virtual Power Systems ("VPS") in 2020 including payments made related to the Company's transition agreement with VPS. This note was converted to equity in VPS in the third quarter of 2020 along with an additional contribution of $0.5 million and a non-cash contribution of inventory in the amount of $0.3 million.
Interest Expense
The Company incurred $1.3 million and $61 thousand of interest expense during 2020 and 2019, respectively. Interest expense is for interest on the short-term and long-term notes payable including seller-financed notes, non-recourse payable agreements, convertible note payable, insurance financing notes notes, secured promissory note, overdraft facility, and lines of credit. The Company's secured promissory note, overdraft facilities, and non-Reach Construction line of credit were paid off in 2019.
Provision (benefit) for taxes
The Company is subject to taxation in the U.S., various state and foreign jurisdictions. We continue to record a full valuation allowance against the Company's U.S. and U.K. net deferred tax assets as it is "not more likely than not," that the Company will realize a benefit from these assets in a future period. In future periods, tax benefits and related deferred tax assets will be recognized when management concludes realization of such amounts is "more likely than not."
2020 compared to 2019
In 2020, a net tax benefit of $3.5 million, was recorded to the income tax provision from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 resulting in an effective tax rate of 10.5% compared to a $3.0 million tax benefit from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 and an effective tax rate of 17.8%. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the income tax benefit primarily represents foreign refunds received and a decrease in the USA valuation allowance as a result of the Reach Construction Group, LLC acquisition. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the income tax benefit primarily represents benefits from losses from continuing operations partially offset by foreign tax rates differing from USA tax rates and an increase in the valuation allowance. As of December 31, 2020, we have federal, state and foreign net operating loss carry forwards of approximately $60.6 million, $60.6 million, and $17.4 million, respectively, and for which the federal and state net operating loss carry-forwards will expire between 2026 and 2037.
During 2019, the Company provided for a partial valuation allowance against the Company’s Canada net deferred tax assets, which were included in assets held for sale, as it was not “more likely than not,” that the Company would realize a benefit from a portion of those assets in a future period.
Loss from Continuing Operations, net of income taxes
2020 compared to 2019
The Company had a loss from continuing operations, net of income taxes of $30.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a loss of $13.6 million in 2019. The increased loss from continuing operations, net of income taxes was attributable to start-up costs at the Company's Orbital Power Services group and projects with lower than normal margins during the period for Orbital Solar Services due to COVID-19- related inefficiencies as well as increased administrative costs from acquisition due diligence and the $4.8 million losses on our VPS investment.
Income from Discontinued Operations, net of income taxes
2020 compared to 2019
The Company had income from discontinued operations, net of income taxes of $2.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $12.5 million in 2019. The decrease is primarily due to the gain on sale of businesses for 2019 compared to less income in 2020 related to final sales at CUI-Canada and tariff refunds.
Consolidated Net Loss
2020 compared to 2019
The Company had a net loss of $27.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a net loss of $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increased consolidated net loss was attributable to start-up costs at the Company's Orbital Power Services group and projects with lower than normal margins during the period for Orbital Solar Services due to COVID-19- related inefficiencies, $4.8 million loss on our VPS investment, as well as increased administrative costs from acquisition due diligence along with a $14.1 million gain on sale of businesses in 2019 that did not recur in 2020.
Effect of Inflation and Changing Prices
The Company believes, that during fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the effect of a hypothetical 100 basis point shift in foreign currency exchange rates applicable to our business would not have had a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Recently Adopted and Recently Issued Accounting Standards
Information on recently adopted and recently issued accounting standards is included in Note 2 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Recent Accounting Pronouncements, to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Part II, Item 8, ‘‘Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.’’