ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the section entitled “Selected Financial Data” in this report and our Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes to this report. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements based on our current expectations, assumptions, estimates and projections. These forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those indicated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, as more fully discussed in Item 1A of this report, entitled “Risk Factors.”
OVERVIEW
We are a leader in the research, development and commercialization of organic light emitting diode (OLED), technologies and materials for use in display applications, such as mobile phones, televisions, wearables, tablets, portable media devices, notebook computers, personal computers and automotive applications, as well as specialty and general lighting products. Since 1994, we have been engaged and expect to continue to be primarily engaged, in funding and performing research and development activities relating to OLED technologies and materials, and commercializing these technologies and materials. We derive our revenue primarily from the following:
•
sales of OLED materials for evaluation, development and commercial manufacturing;
•
intellectual property and technology licensing;
•
technology development and support, including third-party collaboration efforts and providing support to third parties for commercialization of their OLED products; and
•
contract research services in the areas of chemical materials synthesis research, development and commercialization for non-OLED applications.
Material sales relate to our sale of OLED materials for incorporation into our customers’ commercial OLED products or for their OLED development and evaluation activities. Material sales are generally recognized at the time title passes, which is typically at the time of shipment or at the time of delivery, depending upon the contractual agreement between the parties.
We receive license and royalty payments under certain commercial, development and technology evaluation agreements, some of which are non-refundable advances. These payments may include royalty and license fees made pursuant to license agreements and also license fees included as part of certain commercial supply agreements. These payments are included in the estimate of total contract consideration by customer and recognized as revenue over the contract term based on material units sold at the estimated per unit fee over the life of the contract.
In 2018, we entered into a commercial patent license agreement with Samsung Display Co., Ltd. (SDC). This agreement, which covers the manufacture and sale of specified OLED display materials, was effective as of January 1, 2018 and lasts through the end of 2022 with an additional two-year extension option. Under this agreement, we are being paid a license fee, payable in quarterly installments over the agreement term of five years. The agreement conveys to SDC the non-exclusive right to use certain of our intellectual property assets for a limited period of time that is less than the estimated life of the assets.
At the same time that we entered into the current license agreement with SDC, we also entered into a material purchase agreement with SDC. Under the material purchase agreement, SDC agrees to purchase from us a minimum amount of phosphorescent emitter materials for use in the manufacture of licensed products. This minimum commitment is subject to SDC’s requirements for phosphorescent emitter materials and our ability to meet these requirements over the term of the supplemental agreement.
In 2015, we entered into an OLED patent license agreement and an OLED commercial supply agreement with LG Display Co., Ltd. (LG Display), which were effective as of January 1, 2015. The agreements have a term that is set to expire by the end of 2022. The patent license agreement provides LG Display a non-exclusive, royalty bearing portfolio license to make and sell OLED displays under our patent portfolio. The patent license calls for license fees, prepaid royalties and running royalties on licensed products. The agreements include customary provisions relating to warranties, indemnities, confidentiality, assignability and business terms. The agreements provide for certain other minimum obligations relating to the volume of material sales anticipated over the life of the agreements as well as minimum royalty revenue to be generated under the patent license agreement. We generate revenue under these agreements that are predominantly tied to LG Display’s sales of OLED licensed products. The OLED commercial supply agreement provides for the sales of materials for use by LG Display, which may include phosphorescent emitters and host materials.
In 2016, we entered into long-term, multi-year OLED patent license and material purchase agreements with Tianma Micro-electronics Co., Ltd. (Tianma). Under the license agreement, we have granted Tianma non-exclusive license rights under various patents owned or controlled by us to manufacture and sell OLED display products. The license agreement calls for license fees and running royalties on Tianma’s sales of licensed products. Additionally, we supply phosphorescent OLED materials to Tianma for use in its licensed products.
In 2017, we entered into long-term, multi-year agreements with BOE Technology Group Co., Ltd. (BOE). Under these agreements, we have granted BOE non-exclusive license rights under various patents owned or controlled by us to manufacture and sell OLED display products. We also supply phosphorescent OLED materials to BOE for use in its licensed products.
In 2018, we entered into long-term, multi-year OLED patent license and material purchase agreements with Visionox Technology, Inc. (Visionox). Under the license agreement, we have granted Visionox non-exclusive license rights under various patents owned or controlled by us to manufacture and sell OLED display products. The license agreement calls for license fees and running royalties on Visionox’s sales of licensed products. Additionally, we supply phosphorescent OLED materials to Visionox for use in its licensed products.
In 2019, we entered into an evaluation and commercial supply relationship with Wuhan China Star Optoelectronics Semiconductor Display Technology Co., Ltd. (CSOT). In 2020, we entered into long-term, multi-year agreements with CSOT. Under these agreements, we have granted CSOT non-exclusive license rights under various patents owned or controlled by us to manufacture and sell OLED display products. We also supply phosphorescent OLED materials to CSOT for use in licensed products.
In 2016, we acquired Adesis, Inc. (Adesis) with operations in New Castle, Delaware. Adesis is a contract research organization (CRO) that provides support services to the OLED, pharma, biotech, catalysis and other industries. As of December 31, 2020, Adesis employed a team of 100 research scientists, chemists, engineers and laboratory technicians. Prior to our acquisition of Adesis in 2016, we utilized more than 50% of Adesis’ technology service and production output. We continue to utilize a significant portion of its technology research capacity for the benefit of our OLED technology development, and Adesis uses the remaining capacity to operate as a CRO in the above-mentioned industries by providing contract research services for non-OLED applications to those third-party customers. Contract research services revenue is earned by providing chemical materials synthesis research, development and commercialization for non-OLED applications on a contractual basis for those third-party customers.
In June 2020, a wholly-owned subsidiary, OVJP Corporation (OVJP Corp), was formed as a Delaware corporation. Based out of California, OVJP Corp was founded to advance the commercialization of our proprietary Organic Vapor Jet Printing (OVJP) technology. As a direct printing technique, OVJP technology has the potential to offer high deposition rates for large-area OLEDs. In addition, OVJP technology reduces OLED material waste associated with use of a shadow mask (i.e., the waste of material that deposits on the shadow mask itself when fabricating an OLED). By comparison to inkjet printing, an OVJP process does not use liquid solvents and therefore the OLED materials utilized are not limited by their viscosity or solvent solubility. OVJP also avoids generation of solvent wastes and eliminates the additional step of removing residual solvent from the OLED device. We believe the successful implementation of the OVJP technology has the potential to increase the addressable market for large-size OLED panels while also serving another potential growth market for our proprietary PHOLED materials and technologies.
We also generate technology development and support revenue earned from development and technology evaluation agreements and commercialization assistance fees, along with, to a minimal extent, government contracts. Relating to our government contracts, we may receive reimbursements by government entities for all or a portion of the research and development costs we incur. Revenues are recognized as services are performed, proportionally as research and development costs are incurred, or as defined milestones are achieved.
We anticipate fluctuations in our annual and quarterly results of operations due to uncertainty regarding, among other factors:
•
the timing, cost and volume of sales of our OLED materials;
•
the timing of our receipt of license fees and royalties, as well as fees for future technology development and evaluation;
•
the timing and magnitude of expenditures we may incur in connection with our ongoing research and development and patent-related activities; and
•
the timing and financial consequences of our formation of new business relationships and alliances.
Further, we continue to monitor the impact of COVID-19 on our business. Our global operations, and the global nature of our customer base and their respective customers, expose us to risks associated with public health crises, such as pandemics and epidemics. The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic had a substantial impact on our operations and financial results during the year ended December 31, 2020. We expect that as the pandemic continues to evolve, it can potentially have a further adverse impact on the results of our operations due to uncertainties involving the continued disruption of the global economy, uncertainties associated with consumer demand for finished OLED goods, and the potential resulting impact on our customers and their demand for our phosphorescent emitters.
At this time, the crisis has not had a significant impact on our ability to fulfill shipments of commercial materials as required by our customers. However, the sustainability of maintaining our testing and manufacturing operations at levels needed to meet fluctuating customer demand is uncertain and is dependent upon the rapidly evolving situations being encountered by our logistics and supply chain partners. In an effort to protect the health and safety of our employees, we have taken proactive measures to adopt social distancing policies at all of our locations, employing nurses to check everyone entering our buildings, working from home, reducing the number of people in our sites at any one time, and suspending employee travel.
While the ultimate health and economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic is highly uncertain, we expect that our business operations and results of operations, including our revenues, net income and cash flows, will continue to be adversely impacted for at least the first half of 2021, including as a result of:
•
temporary closure of electronics and other retail stores through which our customers sell the products for which they use our technology and materials;
•
consumer confidence and consumer spending habits, including spending for the products that our customers sell and negative trends in consumer purchasing patterns due to consumers’ disposable income, credit availability and debt levels;
•
possible disruption to the supply chain caused by distribution and other logistical issues, which may impact suppliers of our raw materials as well as our ability to ship our materials to customers on a timely basis;
•
decreased productivity due to travel ban, work-from-home policies or shelter-in-place orders;
•
a slowdown in the U.S. economy, and uncertain global economic outlook or a credit crisis; and
•
uncertain trade restrictions amongst jurisdictions seeking to manage their respective exposure to risks, including the COVID-19 pandemic.
We are focused on navigating these recent challenges presented by COVID-19 through preserving our liquidity and managing our cash flow. We continue to actively monitor the COVID-19 situation and may take further actions altering our business operations that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers, partners, suppliers, and stakeholders, or as required by federal, state, or local authorities. It is not clear what the potential effects any such alterations or modifications may have on our business, including the effects on our customers, employees, and on our financial results for the 2021 fiscal year.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect our reported assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses, and other financial information. Actual results may differ significantly from our estimates under other assumptions and conditions.
We believe that our accounting policies related to revenue recognition and deferred revenue and income taxes, as described below, are our “critical accounting policies” as contemplated by the SEC. These policies, which have been reviewed with our Audit Committee, are discussed in greater detail below.
Revenue Recognition and Deferred Revenue
Material sales relate to the sale of our OLED materials for incorporation into our customers’ commercial OLED products or for their OLED development and evaluation activities. Revenue associated with material sales is generally recognized at the time title passes, which is typically at the time of shipment or at the time of delivery, depending upon the contractual agreement between the parties. Revenue may be recognized after control of the material passes in the event the transaction price includes variable consideration. For example, a customer may be provided an extended opportunity to stock materials prior to use in mass production and given a general right of return not conditioned on breaches of warranties associated with the specific product. In such
circumstances, revenue will be recognized at the earlier of the expiration of the customer’s general right of return or once it becomes unlikely that the customer will exercise its right of return.
The rights and benefits to our OLED technologies are conveyed to the customer through technology license agreements and material supply agreements. We believe that the licenses and materials sold under these combined agreements are not distinct from each other for financial reporting purposes and as such, are accounted for as a single performance obligation. Accordingly, total contract consideration, including material, license and royalty fees, is estimated and recognized over the contract term based on material units sold at the estimated per unit fee over the life of the contract.
Various estimates are relied upon to recognize revenue. We estimate total material units to be purchased by our customers over the contract term based on historical trends, industry estimates and our forecast process. Our management uses the expected value method to estimate the material per unit fee. Additionally, our management estimates the total sales-based royalties based on the estimated net sales revenue of our customers over the contract term.
Accounting for Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in both the U.S. and foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgments and estimates are required in evaluating our tax positions for future realization and determining our provision for income taxes. Our income tax expense, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and reserves for unrecognized tax benefits reflect management's best assessment of estimated future taxes to be paid.
In assessing the realizability of deferred tax assets, we consider whether it is more likely than not that some portion or all of our deferred tax assets will not be realized. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent on our ability to generate future taxable income to obtain benefit from the reversal of temporary differences, net operating loss carryforwards and tax credits. As part of our assessment we consider the scheduled reversal of deferred tax assets and liabilities, projected future taxable income, and tax planning strategies.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, based on previous earnings history, a current evaluation of expected future taxable income and other evidence, we determined to retain the valuation allowance that relates to New Jersey research and development credits. Actual results could differ from our assessments if adequate taxable income is generated in future periods. To the extent we establish a new valuation allowance or change a previously established valuation allowance in a future period, income tax expense will be impacted.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
For a discussion of our results of operations comparison for 2019 and 2018, refer to our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 filed on February 20, 2020.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
Our total material sales were $229.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $243.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of 6% with a commensurate decrease in unit material volume of 3%. The decrease in material sales was due to the impact that the COVID-19 pandemic had on the global demand of OLED products utilizing our emitter material primarily during the second quarter of 2020. During the second half of 2020, OLED market conditions improved with our material sales demand returning to levels as those experienced prior to the pandemic as our customers’ demand cycles ramped up in preparation of new generations of mobile phones as well as the continued expansion in the OLED television market. Even though we believe we have experienced the worst effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, we remain uncertain as to the possibility of its re-emergence and corresponding negative impact on OLED market demand.
•
Green emitter sales for the year ended December 31, 2020, which include our yellow-green emitters, were $177.8 million as compared to $189.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 with unit material volumes decreasing by 2%.
•
Red emitter sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $51.0 million as compared to $53.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 with unit material volumes decreasing by 6%.
Revenue from royalty and license fees was $185.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $150.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of 23%, as our customer’s sales of royalty bearing OLED licensed products strengthened in the latter half of 2020.
Contract research services revenue was $14.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $11.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of 20%. Revenue from contract research services consists of revenue earned by our subsidiary, Adesis, which provides support services to the pharma, biotech, catalysis and other industries on a contractual basis for those third-party customers.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $10.1 million as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to an increase in manufacturing costs partially offset by a decrease relating to the lower amount of material sales. The increase in manufacturing costs was primarily due to higher costs incurred during the quarter ended December 31, 2020, associated with increased levels of product development required to meet our customer’s requests as they launched the next wave of new product introductions into the OLED market. We believe this is a temporary condition and manufacturing costs will return to previous trend-levels as the current product introductions are brought to market and begin to mature. Also included in the cost of sales for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was an increase in inventory reserve of $1.1 million and $5.9 million, respectively, due to excess inventory levels in certain products. As a result of the increase in revenue from royalty and license fees partially offset by a decrease in material sales and an increase in manufacturing costs, gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $13.6 million as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, with gross margin as a percentage of revenue decreasing to 80% from 81%.
Research and development
Research and development expenses increased to $83.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $71.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in research and development expenses was primarily due to higher employee-related compensation expenses and operating costs, including increased contract research activity.
Selling, general and administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased to $61.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $59.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in selling, general and administrative expenses was primarily due to higher employee-related compensation expenses.
Amortization of acquired technology and other intangible assets
Amortization of acquired technology and other intangible assets was $22.0 million for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. See Note 7 in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.
Patent costs
Patent costs increased to $7.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $6.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in patent costs reflected higher internal patent prosecution related activities.
Royalty and license expense
Royalty and license expense decreased to $11.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $11.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was due to decreased royalties incurred under our amended license agreement with Princeton, USC, and Michigan, resulting from a decrease in qualifying sales. See Note 10 in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.
Interest and other income, net
Interest income, net was $5.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $10.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in interest income, net, was primarily due to a decrease in bond yields on available-for-sale investments held during the year ended December 31, 2020 over amounts held during 2019. Other income, net primarily consisted of net exchange gains and losses on foreign currency transactions and rental income. We recorded other income, net, of $864,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $767,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Income tax expense
We are subject to income taxes in both the United States and foreign jurisdictions. The effective income tax rate was an expense of 18.4% and 18.6% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and we recorded income tax expense of $30.2 million and $31.6 million, respectively, for those periods. The recorded amounts include deductions for employee share awards in excess of compensation costs (“windfalls”) under Accounting Standards Update (ASU) No. 2016-09. For the year ended December 31, 2020, without the $1.7 million benefit of ASU No. 2016-09, the effective income tax rate and income tax expense would have been 19.5% and $31.9 million, respectively, and for the year ended December 31, 2019, without the $3.0 million benefit of ASU No. 2016-09, the effective income tax rate and income tax expense would have been 20.4% and $34.6 million, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of liquidity are our cash and cash equivalents and our short-term investments. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $630.0 million and short-term investments of $100.0 million, for a total of $730.0 million. This compares to cash and cash equivalents of $131.6 million and short-term investments of $514.5 million, for a total of $646.1 million, as of December 31, 2019.
Cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $148.8 million resulting from $133.4 million of net income and $136.6 million due to changes in our operating assets and liabilities, partially offset by a $121.2 million reduction due to non-cash items including amortization of deferred revenue, amortization of intangibles and stock-based compensation. Changes in our operating assets and liabilities related to an increase in deferred revenue of $192.4 million and an increase in other liabilities of $10.1 million, partially offset by an increase in inventory of $28.8 million, an increase in accounts receivable of $21.8 million, a decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $8.3 million and an increase in other assets of $7.0 million.
Cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $193.9 million resulting from $138.3 million of net income and $139.5 million due to changes in our operating assets and liabilities, partially offset by a $83.9 million reduction due to non-cash items including amortization of deferred revenue, amortization of intangibles and stock-based compensation. Changes in our operating assets and liabilities related to an increase in deferred revenue of $157.3 million, an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $15.5 million, an increase in other liabilities of $12.4 million and a decrease in inventory of $109,000, partially offset by an increase in other assets of $28.5 million and an increase in accounts receivable of $17.3 million.
Cash provided by investing activities was $391.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to cash used in investing activities of $238.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in cash provided by investing activities was due to the timing of maturities and purchases of investments resulting in net sales and maturities of $419.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to net purchases of $208.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, and a decrease in purchases of intangibles and property, plant and equipment of $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in property, plant and equipment purchases during 2020 was primarily due to improvements to our Ewing facilities in New Jersey as part of our plan to expand operations during 2019.
Cash used in financing activities was $41.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $34.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due to an increase in the cash payment of dividends in the current year of $9.6 million, partially offset by a decrease in the payment of withholding taxes related to stock-based compensation to employees of $1.6 million, a decrease in the repurchase of common stock of $649,000 and an increase in proceeds from the issuance of common stock of $287,000.
Working capital was $759.6 million as of December 31, 2020, compared to $630.9 million as of December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increase in cash and cash equivalents, inventory and accounts receivable, partially offset by a decrease in short-term investments.
We anticipate, based on our internal forecasts and assumptions relating to our operations (including, among others, assumptions regarding our working capital requirements, the progress of our research and development efforts, the availability of sources of funding for our research and development work, and the timing and costs associated with the preparation, filing, prosecution, maintenance, defense and enforcement of our patents and patent applications), that we have sufficient cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments to meet our obligations for at least the next twelve months.
We believe that potential additional financing sources for us include long-term and short-term borrowings and public and private sales of our equity and debt securities. It should be noted, however, that additional funding may be required in the future for research, development and commercialization of our OLED technologies and materials, to obtain, maintain and enforce patents respecting these technologies and materials, and for working capital and other purposes, the timing and amount of which are difficult to ascertain. There can be no assurance that additional funds will be available to us when needed, on commercially reasonable terms or at all, particularly in the current economic environment.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, we had the following contractual commitments (in thousands):
(1)
Under the 1997 Amended License Agreement, we are obligated to pay Princeton minimum royalties of $100,000 per year until the agreement is no longer in effect. The agreement has no scheduled expiration date.
(2)
See Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for discussion of obligations upon termination of employment of executive officers as a result of a change in our control.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements in the nature of guarantee contracts, retained or contingent interests in assets transferred to unconsolidated entities (or similar arrangements serving as credit, liquidity or market risk support to unconsolidated entities for any such assets), or obligations (including contingent obligations) arising out of variable interests in unconsolidated entities providing financing, liquidity, market risk or credit risk support to us, or that engage in leasing, hedging or research and development services with us.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Recently issued accounting pronouncements are addressed in Note 2 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.