Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following Management’s discussion and analysis (“MD&A”) of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and notes thereto included as part of this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs and involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results and the timing of certain events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of several factors, including those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” included under Part I, Item 1A and elsewhere in this Annual Report. See “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” in this Annual Report.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on the discovery, development and commercialization of next generation targeted therapies for women’s cancers. Our team has spent the past decade characterizing the structure and function of the ER, a key driver of breast cancer in approximately 75% of patients, in order to develop more potent, oral therapies that completely inactivate this signaling pathway. Our wholly owned lead product candidate, OP-1250, is a novel oral therapy with combined activity as both a CERAN and a SERD, which we believe will drive deeper, more durable responses than existing therapies. OP-1250, both as a monotherapy and in combination with inhibitors of CDK4/6 demonstrated robust tumor shrinkage in several xenograft models, including a breast cancer brain metastasis model. In August 2020, we initiated an ongoing Phase 1/2 dose escalation and expansion trial evaluating OP-1250 for the treatment of recurrent, locally advanced or metastatic ER+, HER2- breast cancer, and expect to report initial data from this trial in the second half of 2021. We own worldwide development and commercialization rights to OP-1250. As summarized in the figure below, our plan is to develop OP-1250 in a number of ER+ breast cancer indications, both as a monotherapy and in combination with approved targeted therapies that have shown improved outcomes with other endocrine therapies. We believe OP-1250’s oral formulation and dual mechanism of action directly address the limitations of current endocrine therapies, such as fulvestrant and tamoxifen, and position OP-1250 as a potential endocrine therapy of choice for the treatment of ER+ breast cancers. Our goal is to transform the standard of care for women living with cancers by developing more effective therapies that apply our deep understanding and collective expertise in endocrine-driven cancers, nuclear receptor activities and mechanisms of acquired resistance.
Since our inception, we have devoted substantially all of our resources to organizing and staffing our company, research and development activities, business planning, raising capital, establishing and maintaining our intellectual property portfolio, conducting nonclinical studies and clinical trials and providing general and administrative support for these operations.
We do not have any product candidates approved for commercial sale, and we have not generated any revenue from product sales. Our ability to generate product revenue sufficient to achieve profitability, if ever, will depend on the successful development and eventual commercialization of one or more of our product candidates which we expect, if it ever occurs, will take a number of years. We also do not own or operate, and currently have no plans to establish, any manufacturing facilities. We rely, and expect to continue to rely, on third parties for the manufacture of our product candidates for nonclinical and clinical testing, as well as for commercial manufacturing if any of our product candidates obtain marketing approval. We believe that this strategy allows us to maintain a more efficient infrastructure by eliminating the need for us to invest in our own manufacturing facilities, equipment and personnel while also enabling us to focus our expertise and resources on the development of our product candidates.
Through December 31, 2020, we had received aggregate gross proceeds of $391.3 million from sales of our common stock, convertible preferred stock and issuance of convertible promissory notes since inception. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $338.5 million. In January 2020, we received proceeds of $3.0 million from the issuance of convertible promissory notes, or the 2020 Notes. From March 2020 through June 2020, we issued 10,801,277 shares of our Series B convertible preferred stock at a price of $4.712 per share for cash proceeds of $50.9 million, and 638,270 shares of our Series B convertible
preferred stock upon conversion of the 2020 Notes (including accrued interest). In September 2020, we issued 7,904,135 shares of our Series C convertible preferred stock at a price of $11.063 per share for cash proceeds of $87.4 million. In November 2020, we completed the initial public offering of our common stock, in which we issued an aggregate of 12,650,000 shares of common stock, including 1,650,000 shares of common stock issued pursuant to the over-allotment option granted to the underwriters, at a price of $19.00 per share, for gross cash proceeds of $240.4 million, before underwriting discounts and commissions. We received approximately $220.6 million in net proceeds, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses. Based on our current operating plan, we believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to fund our planned operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements through the end of 2022.
We have incurred significant operating losses since the commencement of our operations. Our net losses were $22.1 million, $4.3 million, and $2.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, and we expect to incur significant and increasing losses for the foreseeable future as we continue to advance our product candidate, and as we transition to operating as a public company. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from period to period, depending on the timing of expenditures on our research and development activities. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $33.1 million. Our primary use of cash is to fund operating expenses, which consist primarily of research and development expenditures and general and administrative expenditures. Cash used to fund operating expenses is impacted by the timing of when we pay these expenses, as reflected in the change in our outstanding accounts payable and other current liabilities.
We expect to continue to incur net operating losses for at least the next several years, and we expect our research and development expenses, general and administrative expenses, and capital expenditures will continue to increase. We expect our expenses and capital requirements will increase significantly in connection with our ongoing activities as we:
● continue our ongoing and planned research and development of our lead product candidate OP-1250 for the treatment of ER+ positive breast cancer;
● initiate nonclinical studies and clinical trials for any additional product candidates that we may pursue in the future;
● seek to discover and develop additional product candidates and further expand our clinical product pipeline;
● seek regulatory approvals for any product candidates that successfully complete clinical trials;
● continue to scale up external manufacturing capacity with the aim of securing sufficient quantities to meet our capacity requirements for clinical trials and potential commercialization;
● establish a sales, marketing and distribution infrastructure to commercialize any approved product candidates and related additional commercial manufacturing costs;
● develop, maintain, expand, protect and enforce our intellectual property portfolio, including patents, trade secrets and know how;
● acquire or in-license other product candidates and technologies;
● attract, hire and retain additional clinical, scientific, quality control, and manufacturing management and administrative personnel;
● add clinical, operational, financial and management information systems and personnel, including personnel to support our product development and planned future commercialization efforts;
● expand our operations in the United States and to other geographies; and
● incur additional legal, accounting, investor relations and other expenses associated with operating as a public company.
We also expect to increase the size of our administrative function to support the growth of our business. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from quarter-to-quarter and year-to-year, depending on the timing of our clinical trials and our expenditures on other research and development activities.
We will require substantial additional funding to develop our product candidates and support our continuing operations. Until such time that we can generate significant revenue from product sales or other sources, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through the sale of equity, debt financings or other capital sources, which could include income from collaborations, strategic partnerships or marketing, distribution, licensing or other strategic arrangements with third parties, or from grants. We may be unable to raise additional funds or to enter into such agreements or arrangements on favorable terms, or at all. Our ability to raise additional funds may be adversely impacted by potential worsening global economic conditions and the recent disruptions to, and volatility in, the credit and financial markets in the United States and worldwide resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and otherwise. Our failure to obtain sufficient funds on acceptable terms when needed could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations or financial condition, including requiring us to have to delay, reduce or eliminate our product development or future commercialization efforts. Insufficient liquidity may also require us to relinquish rights to product candidates at an earlier stage of development or on less favorable terms than we would otherwise choose. The amount and timing of our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including the pace and results of our development efforts. We cannot provide assurance that we will ever be profitable or generate positive cash flow from operating activities.
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to rapidly evolve. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we experienced some delays in setting up our current Phase 1/2 clinical trial and in clinical site initiation, including delays in recruiting clinical site investigators and clinical site staff, which we may experience again in the future. The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, operations and development timelines and plans remains uncertain, and will depend on certain developments, including the duration of the outbreak and its impact on our development activities, planned clinical trial enrollment, future trial sites, CROs, third-party manufacturers, and other third parties with whom we do business, as well as its impact on regulatory authorities and our key scientific and management personnel. The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic or a similar health epidemic is highly uncertain and subject to change. To the extent possible, we are conducting business as usual, with necessary or advisable modifications to employee travel and with many of our employees working remotely. We continue to actively monitor the rapidly evolving situation related to the COVID-19 pandemic and may take further actions that alter our operations, including those that may be required by federal, state or local authorities, or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees and other third parties with whom we do business. During 2020, although we modified our operations and practices due to the COVID-19 pandemic and to comply with federal, state and local requirements, our business, operations and development timelines were not material adversely affected. However, the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may affect our business, operations and development timelines and plans in the future, including the resulting impact on our expenditures and capital needs, remains uncertain.
Components of our results of operations
Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales and do not expect to generate any revenue from the sale of products for the foreseeable future.
Operating expenses
Research and development
Research and development expenses account for a significant portion of our operating expenses and consist primarily of external and internal expenses incurred in connection with the discovery and development of our product candidates. To date, our research and development expenses have related primarily to discovery efforts and nonclinical and clinical development of our product candidate OP-1250. Research and development expenses are recognized as incurred and payments made prior to the receipt of goods or services to be used in research and development are capitalized until the goods or services are received.
External expenses include:
● expenses incurred in connection with the discovery and nonclinical development of our product candidates, including under agreements with third parties, such as consultants and CROs;
● costs of manufacturing products for use in our nonclinical studies and clinical trials, including payments to CMOs and consultants;
● costs of funding research performed by third parties;
● costs of purchasing lab supplies and non-capital equipment used in designing, developing and manufacturing nonclinical study and clinical trial materials;
● costs associated with consultants for chemistry, manufacturing and controls development, regulatory, statistics and other services;
● expenses related to regulatory activities, including filing fees paid to regulatory agencies; and
● facility costs including rent, depreciation and maintenance expenses.
Internal expenses include employee and personnel-related costs and expenses, including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation expense for employees and personnel engaged in research and development functions.
We expense research and development expenses in the periods in which they are incurred. Costs for certain activities, such as manufacturing and nonclinical studies and clinical trials, are generally recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using information and data provided to us by our vendors and collaborators.
We typically use our employee, consultant and infrastructure resources across our development programs. We track outsourced development costs by product candidate or nonclinical program, but we do not allocate personnel costs, other internal costs or external consultant costs to specific product candidates or nonclinical programs.
Research and development expenses to advance the development of our lead product candidate and nonclinical program were $13.7 million, $3.9 million and $1.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
We expect our research and development expenses to increase substantially in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future as we advance OP-1250 or any other future product candidates we may develop into and through nonclinical studies and clinical trials and pursue regulatory approval of our product candidates. The process of conducting the necessary clinical research to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time-
consuming. The actual probability of success for OP-1250 or any other future product candidates we may develop may be affected by a variety of factors including but not limited to: the safety and efficacy of our product candidates, early clinical data, investment in our clinical program, the ability of collaborators to successfully develop our licensed product candidates, competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval for our product candidates. As a result of the uncertainties discussed above, we are unable to determine the duration and completion costs of our research and development projects or when and to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of our OP-1250 or any other future product candidates we may develop. Clinical and nonclinical development timelines, the probability of success and development costs can differ materially from expectations. We anticipate that we will make determinations as to which product candidates to pursue and how much funding to direct to each product candidate on an ongoing basis in response to the results of ongoing and future nonclinical studies and clinical trials, regulatory developments and our ongoing assessments as to each product candidate’s commercial potential. In addition, we cannot forecast whether OP-1250 or any other future product candidates we may develop may be subject to future collaborations, when such arrangements will be secured, if at all, and to what degree such arrangements would affect our development plans and capital requirements. We are also unable to predict when, if ever, we will generate revenue from our product candidates to offset these expenses. Our expenditures on current and future nonclinical and clinical development programs are subject to numerous uncertainties in timing and cost to completion. The duration, costs and timing of nonclinical studies and clinical trials and development of our product candidates will depend on a variety of factors, including:
● the timing and progress of nonclinical and clinical development activities;
● the number and scope of nonclinical and clinical programs we decide to pursue;
● our ability to maintain our current research and development programs and to establish new ones;
● establishing an appropriate safety profile with investigational new drug-enabling toxicology studies;
● successful patient enrollment in, and the initiation and completion of, clinical trials;
● the successful completion of clinical trials with safety, tolerability and efficacy profiles that are satisfactory to the FDA or any comparable foreign regulatory authority;
● establishing commercial manufacturing capabilities or making arrangements with third-party manufacturers;
● receipt of regulatory approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
● the timing, receipt and terms of any marketing approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
● our ability to establish licensing or collaboration arrangements;
● the performance of our future collaborators, if any;
● development and timely delivery of commercial-grade product formulations that can be used in our planned clinical trials and for commercial launch;
● commercializing the product candidate, if approved, whether alone or in collaboration with others;
● obtaining and maintaining patent and trade secret protection and regulatory exclusivity for our product candidates;
● obtaining, maintaining, defending and enforcing patent claims and other intellectual property rights;
● maintaining a continued acceptable safety profiles of our products following approval; and
● obtaining and retaining key research and development personnel.
Any changes in the outcome of any of these factors could significantly impact the costs, timing and viability associated with the development of our product candidates.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel expenses, including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation expense, for personnel in executive, finance, accounting, business development, legal, human resource and administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses, including corporate facility costs, depreciation and other expenses, which include direct or allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and insurance, and professional fees for legal, patent and consulting services.
We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase substantially in the foreseeable future as we increase our headcount to support the continued research and development of our programs and the growth of our business. We also anticipate incurring additional expenses associated with operating as a public company, including increased expenses related to ongoing financial statement audit and interim-period quarterly reviews, internal control over financial reporting compliance and audit, legal, other regulatory and compliance, director and officer insurance, investor and public relations and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC and standards applicable to companies listed on a national securities exchange, additional insurance expenses, investor relations activities and other administrative and professional services.
Total other income (expense), net
Interest income, interest expense and other income
Interest income primarily consists of interest income on our cash and cash equivalents. Interest expense primarily consists of interest on our convertible promissory notes, and in the year ended December 31, 2020, a non-cash interest charge related to a beneficial conversion feature on a convertible note issued in January 2020. Other income consists of miscellaneous income not related to operating activities.
Loss on extinguishment of convertible notes
Loss on extinguishment of convertible promissory notes consists of the loss recognized from the extinguishment of the unpaid principal and accrued interest on convertible promissory notes issued in 2017. These notes were extinguished in July 2018 and noteholders were issued Series A-1 convertible preferred stock and common stock concurrent with the extinguishment of the notes.
Loss on remeasurement of convertible notes
Loss on remeasurement of convertible promissory notes consists of the loss recognized from the remeasurement of convertible promissory notes issued in 2018. In July 2018, these notes were remeasured to their final fair value, and then settled with the issuance of Series A-1 convertible preferred stock and common stock provided to noteholders.
Results of operations
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $13.7 million, compared to $3.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $9.8 million was primarily due to increased spending in (i) advancing our lead product candidate OP-1250 clinical study and the associated contract manufacturing costs, (ii) other nonclinical research and discovery program costs, and (iii) personnel-related costs due to increased headcount, and an increase in the non-cash stock-based compensation of $2.0 million recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $7.8 million compared to $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $7.4 million was primarily due to increased salary expense associated with the expanded executive team, fees paid to outside consultants in connection with our initial public offering and operating as a public company, and an increase in the non-cash stock-based compensation of $1.1 million recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other (expense) income, net
Other (expense) income, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $(0.6) million, which primarily consisted of a non-cash interest charge incurred in connection with convertible notes issued in January 2020.
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018:
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 were $3.9 million, compared to $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase of $2.2 million was primarily due to the nonclinical research of OP-1250 and included a $0.7 million increase in lab services costs and $1.5 million increase in third-party research and development fees.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses remained relatively unchanged year over year and were $0.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense), net for the year ended December 31, 2019 was less than $0.1 million, compared to $(0.1) million during the year ended December 31, 2018. The change was primarily due to the $0.1 million loss on extinguishment and remeasurement of the convertible promissory notes in 2018.
Liquidity and capital resources
Sources of liquidity
Since our inception, we have not generated any revenue from product sales and have incurred significant operating losses and negative cash flows from our operations. Our net losses were $22.1 million, $4.3 million, and $2.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had $338.5 million in cash and cash equivalents and an accumulated deficit of $33.1 million. We had no debt outstanding as of December 31, 2020. Through December 31, 2020, we had received aggregate gross proceeds of $391.3 million from sales of our common stock, convertible preferred stock and issuance of convertible promissory notes since inception. In January 2020, we received proceeds of $3.0 million from the issuance of convertible promissory notes, or the 2020 Notes. From March 2020 through June 2020, we issued 10,801,277 shares of our Series B convertible preferred stock at a price of $4.712 per share for cash proceeds of $50.9 million, and 638,270 shares of our Series B convertible preferred stock upon conversion of the 2020 Notes (including accrued interest). In September 2020, we issued 7,904,135 shares of our Series C convertible preferred stock at a price of $11.063 per share for gross proceeds of $87.4 million. In November 2020, we completed the initial public offering of our common stock, in which we issued an aggregate of 12,650,000 shares
of common stock, including 1,650,000 shares of common stock issued pursuant to the over-allotment option granted to the underwriters, at a price of $19.00 per share, for gross proceeds of $240.4 million, before underwriting discounts and commissions. We received approximately $220.6 million in net proceeds, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses.
We expect to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future as we advance the nonclinical and clinical development of OP-1250. We expect that our research and development and general and administrative costs will increase in connection with conducting additional nonclinical studies and clinical trials for our current and future research programs and product candidates, contracting with CMOs to support nonclinical studies and clinical trials, expanding our intellectual property portfolio, and providing general and administrative support for our operations. As a result, we will need additional capital to fund our operations, which we may obtain from additional equity or debt financings, collaborations, licensing arrangements or other sources.
Our primary uses of cash are to fund our research and development activities, including with respect to OP-1250 and other nonclinical programs, business planning, establishing and maintaining our intellectual property portfolio, hiring personnel, raising capital and providing general and administrative support for these operations.
We currently have no financing commitments, such as lines of credit or guarantees, that are expected to affect our liquidity over the next five years.
Future funding requirements
To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales. We do not expect to generate any meaningful revenue unless and until we obtain regulatory approval of and commercialize any of our product candidates, and we do not know when, or if at all, that will occur. We expect our expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we continue the research and development of, continue or initiate clinical trials of, and seek marketing approval for, our product candidates. In addition, if we obtain marketing approval for our product candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to program sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution to the extent that such sales, marketing and distribution are not the responsibility of potential collaborators. Furthermore, we have incurred and expect to continue to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company. The amount and timing of our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including the pace and results of our development efforts.
We expect our existing cash and cash equivalents will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements through the end of 2022 at which point we would need to obtain substantial additional funding in connection with our continuing operations. If we are unable to raise capital when needed or on attractive terms, we would be forced to delay, reduce or eliminate our research and development programs or future commercialization efforts. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
● the scope, progress, results and costs of product discovery, nonclinical studies and clinical trials;
● the scope, prioritization and number of our research and development programs;
● the costs, timing and outcome of regulatory review of our product candidate;
● our ability to establish and maintain collaborations on favorable terms, if at all;
● the achievement of milestones or occurrence of other developments that trigger payments under any collaboration agreements we enter into;
● the extent to which we are obligated to reimburse, or entitled to reimbursement of, clinical trial costs under collaboration agreements, if any;
● the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending intellectual property-related claims;
● the extent to which we acquire or in-license other product candidates and technologies;
● the costs of securing manufacturing arrangements for commercial production; and
● the costs of establishing or contracting for sales and marketing capabilities if we obtain regulatory approvals to market our product candidates.
Identifying potential product candidates and conducting nonclinical studies and clinical trials is a time- consuming, expensive and uncertain process that takes many years to complete, and we may never generate the necessary data or results required to obtain marketing approval and achieve product sales. In addition, our product candidate, if approved, may not achieve commercial success. Our commercial revenues, if any, will be derived from sales of a product candidate that we do not expect to be commercially available for many years, if at all. Accordingly, we will need to continue to rely on additional financing to achieve our business objectives. Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenues, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, your ownership interest will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect your rights as a shareholder. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends.
If we raise funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Cash flows
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for each of the periods presented:
Operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of our net loss of $22.1 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $3.8 million and a net change of $1.5 million in net operating assets and liabilities. The net loss consisted primarily of $13.7 million in research and development expenses and $7.8 million in general and administrative expenses. The non-cash charges consisted primarily of stock-based compensation of $3.1 million and non-cash interest expense of $0.6 million related to our 2020 Convertible Notes. The change in operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to an increase of $3.6 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets related to advanced payments for corporate insurance and research and development activities, an increase of $0.5 million in other assets, and a decrease of $0.2 million
in accounts payable, partially offset by an increase of $2.8 million in invoices and accrued liabilities, primarily as a result of timing of invoice payment.
Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted primarily of our net loss of $4.3 million, partially offset by an increase in accounts payable of $1.2 million. The net loss primarily consisted of $3.9 million in research and development expenses and $0.4 million in general and administrative expenses. The increase in accounts payable and other current liabilities was due to the timing of the posting of the invoices and the overall increase in research and development expenses in the year ended 2019.
Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2018 consisted primarily of our net loss of $2.2 million. The net loss consisted of $1.7 million of research and development expenses, $0.4 million of general and administrative expenses and $(0.1) million of other (expenses) income, net.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of nominal purchases of equipment. There were no cash flows from investing activities during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018.
Financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of $220.6 million, $85.8 million, and $50.6 million in net proceeds from our initial public offering, sale and issuance of our Series C and B convertible preferred stock, and $3.0 million in proceeds from the sale and issuance of our convertible promissory notes, respectively. These cash inflows were partially offset by cash outflows of $2.3 million for the repurchase of Series A convertible preferred stock.
There were no cash flows from financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2018 consisted primarily of $4.9 million in proceeds from the sale and issuance of our Series A-1 convertible preferred stock and $0.3 million in proceeds from the sale and issuance of our convertible promissory notes, net of issuance costs.
Contractual obligations and commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2020:
We conduct our research and development programs internally and through third parties that include, among others, arrangements with vendors, consultants, CMOs, and CROs. We have contractual arrangements in the normal course of business with these parties, however, our contracts with them are cancelable generally on reasonable notice within one year and our obligations under these contracts are primarily based on services performed. We included certain contracts that have significant cancellation penalties and are material, which make the continuation of these arrangements reasonable.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Critical accounting policies and significant judgements and estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or U.S. GAAP. The preparation of our financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, expenses and the disclosure of our contingent liabilities in our financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to our financial statements elsewhere in this Annual Report, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our audited financial statements.
Stock-Based Compensation
All stock-based compensation cost, including grants of stock options and restricted stock awards issued under our equity incentive plans and employee stock purchase plan, is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized as an expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period. We recognize stock-based compensation in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation, or ASC 718. ASC 718 requires the recognition of compensation expense, using a fair-value-based method, for costs related to all share-based payments including stock options. ASC 718 requires companies to estimate the fair value of share-based payment awards on the date of grant. Our determination of the fair value of stock options with time-based vesting on the date of grant utilizes the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. We estimate the expected contractual lives using historical data, volatility using stock prices of peer companies, risk-free rates using the implied yield currently available on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with a remaining term equal to the expected term, and dividend yield using our expectations and historical data. We use the simplified method to calculate the expected term of employee stock option grants. Under the simplified method, the expected term is estimated to be the mid-point between the vesting date and the contractual term of the option. For awards with graded vesting, in which specified tranches of the options vest on different dates, we use a single weighted-average expected life to value the entire award, which is equal to the average of the weighted-average vesting period of the award and the contractual term of the award. The fair value of each stock option grant is calculated based upon our common stock valuation on the date of the grant which we had to estimate prior to becoming a public company. Equity instruments issued to nonemployees are recorded at their fair value on the grant date and without subsequent remeasurement. The amount of stock-based compensation expense recognized during a period is based on the value of the portion of the awards that are ultimately expected to vest, including awards with graded vesting. As part of the requirements of ASC 718, we have elected to account for forfeitures of stock option grants as they occur.
Historically, for all periods prior to our initial public offering, the fair value of our common stock was estimated on each grant date by our board of directors. In order to determine the fair value, our board of directors considered, among other things, contemporaneous valuations of our common stock and preferred stock prepared by management with the assistance of unrelated third-party valuation firms in accordance with the guidance provided by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants 2013 Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation, or the Practice Aid.
Prior to our initial public offering, given the absence of a public trading market of our shares of capital stock, our board of directors exercised reasonable judgment and considered a number of objective and subjective factors to determine the best estimate of the fair value of our shares of common stock and preferred stock, which significant changes to the key assumptions underlying the factors used could have resulted in different fair values of common stock at each valuation date.
In determining the fair value of our common stock through December 31, 2018, we estimated the equity value of our business using income and market approaches including recent sales of our convertible preferred stock in arms’-length transactions (the back-solve method). Once an equity value was determined, we utilized the Option-pricing method, or OPM, to allocate the overall value of equity to the various share classes. In accordance with the Practice Aid, the OPM was the most appropriate method for determining the fair value of our common stock based on our stage of development and other relevant factors.
In determining the fair value of our common stock beginning May 2020, we estimated the equity value of our business using the Hybrid Method, which utilizes the Probability-Weighted Expected Return Method, or PWERM, a scenario-based methodology that estimates the fair value of common stock based upon an analysis of future values for us assuming various outcomes.
We performed contemporaneous valuations, with the assistance of a third-party valuation specialist, as of December 31, 2018, May 31, 2020, July 31, 2020 and August 31, 2020, which resulted in valuations of our common stock of $0.725, $2.064, $4.406 and $4.824 per share, respectively. We had initially used an OPM in assessing the fair value of our common stock as of May 31, 2020. For financial reporting purposes in connection with our initial public offering, we retrospectively assessed the fair value of our common stock in connection with our June 2020 stock option grants and restricted stock awards using the Hybrid Method.
Following the closing of our IPO, the fair value of our common stock is determined based on the closing price of our common stock as reported by Nasdaq Global Select Market on the date of grant.
Accrued research and development expenses
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing purchase orders and open contracts, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the services when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed or when contractual milestones are met; however, some require advance payments. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. The significant estimates in our accrued research and development expenses include the costs incurred for services performed by CROs and CMOs among others, in connection with research and development activities for which we have not yet been invoiced.
We contract with CROs and CMOs to conduct clinical and manufacturing and other research and development services on our behalf. We base our expenses related to CROs and CMOs on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with them. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our CROs or CMOs will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the research and development expense. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or amount of prepaid expense accordingly. Non-refundable advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities are expensed when the activity has been performed or when the goods have been received rather than when the payment is made.
Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences between our estimates of such expenses and the amounts actually incurred.
Internal Control over Financial Reporting
During August 2020, in connection with the preparation of our financial statements as of and for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, we identified material weaknesses in our control over financial reporting. The first material weakness identified in our internal control over financial reporting arose because we did not have an effective control environment commensurate with our financial reporting requirements. Specifically, we lacked a sufficient number of professionals with an appropriate level of accounting knowledge, training and experience to appropriately analyze, record and disclose accounting matters timely and accurately. This material weakness contributed to an additional material weakness in that we did not design and therefore did not have formal accounting policies, procedures and controls to achieve complete, accurate and timely financial accounting, reporting and disclosures, including controls over the preparation and review of account reconciliations and journal entries. As of December 31, 2020, we remediated the material weaknesses by hiring additional key finance and accounting personnel, creating formal financial policies and procedures, including month-end close process, and establishing more robust processes supporting internal controls over financial reporting. While we believe that these material weaknesses have now been remediated, we cannot assure you that these measures will be sufficient to prevent future material weaknesses or significant deficiencies in our internal control over financial reporting from occurring. See “Risk Factors- If we fail to maintain an effective system of internal control over financial reporting, we may not be able to accurately report our financial results or prevent fraud. As a result, stockholders could lose confidence in our financial and other public reporting, which would harm our business and the trading price of our common stock.”
Emerging growth company status
The JOBS Act permits an “emerging growth company” such as us to take advantage of an extended transition to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to use this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition provided in the JOBS act. As a result, we will not be subject to the same new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that are not emerging growth companies and our financial statements may not be comparable to other public companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates. We may choose to early adopt any new or revised accounting standards whenever such early adoption is permitted for private companies. The JOBS Act also exempts us from having to provide an auditor attestation of internal control over financial reporting under Sarbanes-Oxley Act Section 404(b).
We will cease to be an “emerging growth company” on the date that is the earliest of (i) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenues of $1.07 billion or more, (ii) December 31, 2025, (iii) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in nonconvertible debt during the previous three years or (iv) the last day of the fiscal year in which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer under the rules of the SEC, which generally is when we have more than $700.0 million in market value of our stock held by non-affiliates as of the last day of the second fiscal quarter and we have been a public company for at least 12 months and have filed one annual report.
Further, even after we no longer qualify as an emerging growth company, we may still qualify as a “smaller reporting company” which would allow us to take advantage of many of the same exceptions from disclosure requirements, including reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements. We cannot predict if investors will find our shares of common stock less attractive because we may rely on these exemptions. If some investors find our shares of common stock less attractive as a result, there may be a less active trading market for shares of our common stock and our share price may be more volatile.
Recently issued accounting pronouncements
See Note 2 to our financial statements contained in this Annual Report for a description of recent accounting pronouncements applicable to our financial statements.