Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our audited financial statements and related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our current plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report, particularly in the section titled “Risk Factors.” Our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for any period in the future.
Overview
Our technology is designed to elevate the dialysis experience for patients, and help providers overcome traditional care delivery challenges. Requiring only an electrical outlet and tap water to operate, Tablo frees patients and providers from the burdensome infrastructure required to operate traditional dialysis machines. The integration of water purification and on-demand dialysate production enables Tablo to serve as a dialysis clinic on wheels and allows providers to standardize to a single technology platform from the hospital to the home. Tablo is also intelligent and connected, with automated documentation and the ability to integrate with electronic medical record reporting, along with streamlined remote machine management to maximize device uptime. We have generated meaningful evidence to demonstrate that providers can realize significant operational efficiencies, including reducing the cost of their dialysis programs by up to 80% in the intensive care unit. In addition, Tablo has been shown to deliver robust clinical care. In studies we have conducted, patients have reported experiencing fewer symptoms and better quality sleep while on Tablo. We believe Tablo empowers patients, who have traditionally been passive recipients of care, to regain agency and ownership of their treatment. Tablo is cleared by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use in the hospital, clinic or home setting.
We designed Tablo from the ground up to be a single enterprise solution that can be utilized across the continuum of care, allowing dialysis to be delivered anytime, anywhere and by anyone. Tablo is comprised of a compact console with integrated water purification, on-demand dialysate production and a simple-to-use touchscreen interface. With Tablo, we are bringing data to dialysis. Tablo is built to live in a connected setting with cloud-based system monitoring, patient analytics, remote treatment monitoring and clinical recordkeeping and the ability to activate new capabilities and enhancements through wireless software updates. Tablo’s data analytics and connectivity also enable predictive preventative maintenance to maximize machine uptime. Unlike existing hemodialysis machines, which have limited clinical versatility across care settings and are generally burdened by specialized and expensive infrastructure, Tablo is a single enterprise solution that can be seamlessly utilized across different care settings and for multiple clinical needs.
Driving adoption of Tablo in the acute care setting has been our primary focus to date. We have invested in growing our economic and clinical evidence, built a veteran sales and clinical support team with significant expertise, and implemented a comprehensive training and customer experience program. Our experience in the acute market has demonstrated Tablo’s clinical flexibility and operational versatility, while also delivering meaningful cost savings to the providers. We plan to continue leveraging our commercial infrastructure to broaden our installed base in the acute care market as well as driving utilization and fleet expansion with our existing customers.
We sell our solution through our direct sales organization, which covers most major metropolitan markets in the United States. As of December 31, 2020, our sales organization is comprised of 32 capital sales team members, responsible for generating new customer demand for Tablo, and 47 clinical sales team members responsible for driving utilization and fleet expansion of Tablo consoles at existing customer sites. In addition, our field service team comprised of 69 members provides maintenance services and product support to Tablo customers. The same sales organization and field service team drive Tablo penetration in both the acute and home markets. We believe the ability to leverage one team to serve both markets will result in significant productivity and cost optimization as we continue to scale our business.
We are executing a well-defined, three-pronged strategy designed to expand gross margins. First, we have insourced our console manufacturing to help lower console cost. Second, we are adding a second-source contract manufacturer for our cartridges to gain higher efficiency and lower material cost. Third, we will continue to utilize our cloud-based data system, as well as enhanced product performance, to help drive down the cost of service.
We generate revenue primarily from the initial sale of Tablo consoles, and recurring sales of per-treatment consumables, including the Tablo cartridge, which generates significant total revenue over the life of the console. We generate additional revenue via annual service contracts and shipping and handling charged to customer. Our total revenue was $49.9 million, $15.1 million and $2.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we incurred net losses of $121.5 million, $68.3 million and $49.8 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $494.1 million.
Initial Public Offering
On September 17, 2020, we completed our IPO, in which we sold 10,293,777 shares of common stock (which included 1,342,666 shares that were offered and sold pursuant to the full exercise of the IPO underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares in connection with the IPO) at a price to the public of $27.00 per share. Including the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares, we received aggregate net proceeds of approximately $254.8 million after deducting offering costs, underwriting discounts and commissions of approximately $23.1 million. Upon the closing of the IPO, all of our outstanding redeemable convertible preferred stock automatically converted into shares of common stock.
Factors Affecting Our Business
•
Market Acceptance of Tablo in Acute Setting. We plan to broaden our installed base by continuing to target IDNs and health systems, the VA and sub-acute LTACH and SNF providers. In addition, we plan to focus on driving utilization and fleet expansion with existing customers by providing an exceptional user experience delivered through our commercial team and a steady release of software enhancements that amplify Tablo’s operational reliability. Our ability to successfully execute on this strategy, and thereby increase our revenue, will in part drive our results of operations and impact on our business.
•
Expansion of Tablo within the Home Setting. We believe a significant growth opportunity exists within the home hemodialysis market. We are partnering with health systems and innovative dialysis clinic providers who are motivated to grow their home hemodialysis population, and who share our vision of creating a seamless and supported transition to the home. We will also invest in market development over the longer term to expand the home hemodialysis market itself. The expansion of the home hemodialysis market and our ability to penetrate this market will be an important factor in driving the future growth of our business.
•
Cost of Revenue. The results of our business will depend in part on our ability to increase our gross margins by more effectively managing our costs to produce Tablo consoles and consumables, as well as subsequently servicing Tablo for our customers. The Tablo cartridge is currently produced by our contract manufacturer based in Thailand, and, until recently, we exclusively relied on our contract manufacturer based in Morgan Hill, California for production of the Tablo console. Utilizing these contract manufacturers has resulted in higher direct console and cartridge costs. As a result, cost of product revenue was $57.0 million, $27.2 million and $7.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. We are currently undertaking a number of initiatives in order to help reduce these costs. We recently established a new manufacturing facility for the production of Tablo consoles in Tijuana, Mexico which we operate in collaboration with our outsourced business administration service provider, Tacna, and have begun manufacturing in the first quarter of 2021. In addition, we are moving production of a majority of Tablo cartridges from our existing contract manufacturing partner to a new contract manufacturer, also located in Tijuana, Mexico. Our ability to grow our business will depend in part on these and other measures to control the costs of producing Tablo being successful. Likewise, it will be important that we effectively manage the costs of generating our service revenue. Our cost of service and other revenue was $5.9 million, $5.7 million and $0.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
•
Impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the global outbreak of COVID-19 to be a pandemic. Since then, COVID-19 has continued to spread throughout much of the United States and the world causing uncertainty and disruption to business activities. We continue to closely monitor the recent developments surrounding the continued spread and potential resurgence of COVID-19. The results of our business may be impacted by developments related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
We believe that the COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the limitations of traditional machines and the benefits of Tablo, driving an increase in demand for Tablo during the second and third quarters of 2020. We also believe the advantages of Tablo highlighted by the pandemic are now embedded as one of the many factors driving our customers’ purchasing decisions and do not expect to experience significant revenue driven solely by COVID-19 in future periods. However, the duration and extent of the COVID-19 pandemic are uncertain, and we cannot predict with certainty the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and related containment measures on our business.
In order to operate in a safe manner, we are following the health and safety guidelines of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, and local and state public health departments where we operate. We have restricted non-essential travel by our employees, and the majority of our employees at our headquarters have been asked to work from home, with only limited access given to employees to work in the office. For roles that require employees to be physically on-site, such as our R&D and manufacturing technical staff, we have and continue to provide protective equipment, practice social distancing, enforce mask wearing, increase sanitizing standards and implement COVID-19 testing at our facilities. In addition, we have created a business continuity plan and incident management team to respond quickly and effectively to changes in order to offer customers uninterrupted products, services and support while safeguarding the best interest of employees, suppliers and stockholders.
Our business may also be impacted by an escalation or a continuation of the COVID-19 pandemic. Operations at our contract manufacturing partners’ facilities and our outsourced business administration service provider, Tacna, for our new facility in Tijuana, Mexico, may be disrupted. Additionally, the COVID-19 pandemic has disrupted the operations of certain of our third-party suppliers, resulting in increased lead-times for our purchase of some components and, in certain cases, requiring us to procure materials from alternative sources or incur higher logistics expenses. We have worked closely with our manufacturing partners and suppliers to enable us to source key components and maintain appropriate inventory levels to meet customer demand and have not experienced disruptions in our supply chain to date. However, we cannot predict how long the pandemic and measures intended to contain the spread of COVID-19 will continue and what effect COVID-19 and the associated containment measures will have on our suppliers and vendors, in particular for any of our suppliers and vendors that may not qualify as essential businesses and suffer more significant disruptions to their business operations. There is no assurance that we will not experience more significant disruptions in our supply chain in the future, particularly if the operations of our contract manufacturing partners, our critical single source component providers, or the facility we operate in Tijuana, Mexico in collaboration with Tacna, are more severely impacted by the pandemic and associated containment measures.
Components of Operating Results
Revenue
We generate our revenue primarily from the sale of products and services. In addition, we enter into console operating lease arrangements that contain lease and non-lease components. Revenue related to lease arrangements is allocated to the lease and non-lease elements based on their relative standalone selling price, with the lease component recorded in product revenue and the non-lease component recorded in service and other revenue.
Product Revenue
We generate product revenue from the sale, and to a lesser extent, leasing of our Tablo consoles and the sale of related consumables, including the Tablo cartridge. Revenue is recognized when control of our Tablo consoles is transferred, generally upon shipment, and excludes the value of the first-year service agreement, which is recognized as service and other revenue. Leases of Tablo consoles are considered operating leases and recognized as revenue over their lease term. Consumables, including the Tablo cartridge, are recognized primarily upon shipment. Our product revenue has been generated by direct sales to customers in the United States.
Service and Other Revenue
We generate service revenue primarily from service agreements for our Tablo consoles and other revenue from shipping and handling charged to customers. Under the service agreements, we provide maintenance, repair and training services, connectivity to our cloud infrastructure, including Tablo Hub, as well as software updates, for Tablo consoles. The service agreements are typically entered into for a one-year term. Revenue from the sale of service agreements, including the revenue associated with the first-year service, is recognized ratably over the service period.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of Product Revenue
Cost of product revenue primarily consists of finished goods, reserves for excess and obsolete inventories, manufacturing overhead and warranty costs. Manufacturing overhead costs include the cost of quality assurance, material procurement, depreciation expense for equipment, facilities and information technology. We currently partner with contract manufacturers to produce Tablo cartridges and some Tablo consoles. As described above, we have also invested in insourcing Tablo console manufacturing at a facility we recently established in Tijuana, Mexico, where we direct the manufacturing of Tablo consoles, as well as the associated warehousing and product distribution. Cost of product revenue in absolute dollars will increase as our sales volume increases.
Cost of Service and Other Revenue
Cost of service and other revenue primarily consists of personnel and material expenses related to our employees performing maintenance and support services, including salaries, benefits, stock-based compensation expense and related expenses such as employer taxes, materials and supplies and allocated costs including facilities and information technology. We anticipate that we will continue to invest in personnel to support the expansion of our Tablo fleet while also utilizing our cloud-based data system, as well as enhanced product performance, to lower the cost of service as a percentage of revenue. Cost of service and other revenue in absolute dollars will increase as our sales volume increases.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
We calculate gross margin as gross profit divided by revenue. Our gross profit has been and will continue to be, affected by a variety of factors, including sales volume of Tablo consoles and related consumables, the success of our cost-reduction strategies, the cost of direct materials, labor and manufacturing overhead, the contribution of console leases and associated services, discounting practices, product yields and headcount. We expect our margin to increase over the long term to the extent we are successful in our ability to lower the costs associated with the production of the Tablo console and consumables, which depends on our ability to drive lower costs with our suppliers, increase our sales volume, and maintain or increase our average selling price, which will enable us to leverage our fixed costs. In addition, sales of our Tablo consumables carry a higher margin than sales of our Tablo consoles. We intend to use our design, engineering and manufacturing capabilities to further advance and improve the efficiency of our manufacturing processes, which, if successful, we believe will lower production costs and enable us to increase our gross margin. While we expect gross margin to increase over the long term, we also anticipate it will likely fluctuate from quarter to quarter.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses primarily consist of costs of developing hardware and software enhancements to improve Tablo performance and lower cost of product revenue, software update releases, yield improvement activities and platform extensions, as well as clinical affairs and related clinical studies. Other research and development costs include personnel and related costs, supplies, testing, contract and other outside service fees, depreciation expense and allocated costs including facilities and information technology. In 2020, we experienced a significant increase in our stock-based compensation expense as a result of the cumulative stock-based compensation expense we recorded for outstanding options with performance and market-based vesting conditions when the performance vesting condition was satisfied upon the closing of our IPO. We expect our stock-based compensation expense to decrease in 2021 as compared to 2020 and then continue to increase in future periods, due primarily to potential increases in the value of our common stock and as we issue additional stock-based awards under our equity incentive plan and employee stock purchase plan to attract and retain employees. We plan to continue to invest in our research and development efforts. As a percentage of revenue, we expect research and development expenses to vary over time, depending on the level and timing of new product development initiatives.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses primarily consist of personnel expenses including salaries, benefits, sales commissions, travel and stock-based compensation expense. Other sales and marketing expenses include marketing and promotional activities, including trade shows and market research, government affairs and costs of outside consultants. In 2020, we experienced a significant increase in our stock-based compensation expense as a result of the cumulative stock-based compensation expense we recorded for outstanding options with performance and market-based vesting conditions when the performance vesting condition was satisfied upon the closing of our IPO. We expect our stock-based compensation expense to decrease in 2021 as compared to 2020 and then continue to increase in future periods, due primarily to potential increases in the value of our common stock and as we issue additional stock-based awards under our equity incentive plan and employee stock purchase plan to attract and retain employees. Shipping and handling costs, as well as the associated personnel expenses, are included in sales and marketing expenses. As we continue to drive the expansion of Tablo, we expect to continue to invest in our sales and support teams, marketing, and shipping and handling costs. As a result, we expect sales and marketing expenses to increase in absolute dollars in future periods. As a percentage of revenue, however, we expect sales and marketing expenses to continue to decrease over the long-term primarily as and to the extent our revenue grows.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses primarily consist of personnel expenses, including salaries, benefits, bonuses, travel and stock-based compensation expense. Other general and administrative expenses include professional services fees, such as legal, audit and tax fees, insurance costs, costs of outside consultants, employee recruiting and training costs. Moreover, we expect to incur additional expenses associated with operating as a public company, including legal, accounting, insurance, exchange listing, SEC compliance and investor relations, and as we expand our headcount to support our growth. In 2020, we experienced a significant increase in our stock-based compensation expense as a result of the cumulative stock-based compensation expense we recorded for outstanding options with performance and market-based vesting conditions when the performance vesting condition was satisfied upon the closing of our IPO. We expect our stock-based compensation expense to decrease in 2021 as compared to 2020 and then continue to increase in future periods, due primarily to potential increases in the value of our common stock and as we issue additional stock-based awards under our equity incentive plan and employee stock purchase plan to attract and retain employees. As a result, we expect general and administrative expenses to increase in absolute dollars in future periods. As a percentage of revenue, we expect general and administrative expenses to decrease over the long-term primarily as, and to the extent, our revenue grows.
Interest Income and Other Income, Net
Interest income and other income, net, primarily consists of interest earned on our cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of interest on our debt and amortization of associated debt discount. In June 2017, we entered into a senior, secured, delayed draw term facility (the Perceptive Term Loan Agreement) with Perceptive Credit Holdings, LP to borrow up to $40.0 million (the Perceptive Term Loan) as described in Note 7 to our audited financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report. We borrowed $30.0 million of the term loan on the closing date of the Perceptive Term Loan Agreement. In July 2020, we used $30.0 million of the proceeds from the SVB Term Loan to repay in full all amounts due under the Perceptive Term Loan Agreement and cash on hand to pay $1.2 million in early prepayment, accrued interest and exit fees.
Change in Fair Value of Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock Warrant Liability
In connection with our prior credit agreements and the Perceptive Term Loan Agreement, we issued warrants to purchase shares of our Series A, Series B and Series C redeemable convertible preferred stock to the respective lenders. We classified these warrants as a liability on our balance sheets that were remeasured to fair value at each reporting date with the corresponding change in fair value recognized in our statements of operations. Upon the completion of our IPO, the redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability was reclassified to additional paid-in capital.
Loss on Extinguishment of Term Loan
Loss on extinguishment of term loan is related to the repayment of the Perceptive Term Loan in July 2020, which included early prepayment and exit fees.
Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes primarily consists of income taxes in certain states in which we conduct business. We have a full valuation allowance for deferred tax assets, including net operating loss carryforwards and tax credits related primarily to research and development.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands, except percentages):
*
Not meaningful
Revenue
Product Revenue
Product revenue increased by $25.9 million, or 188%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to a $21.2 million increase in console revenue driven by new customer adoption, fleet expansion across existing customers, sales that we believe were attributable to COVID-19 driven demand, and increased console leasing revenue ($2.6 million). In addition, sales of Tablo consumables, including cartridges, for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $4.7 million given our larger console installed base as compared to the prior year period.
Service and Other Revenue
Service and other revenue increased by $9.0 million, or 677%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to services associated with our larger Tablo installed base, including leased consoles, as well as COVID-19 driven demand for services associated with leased consoles.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of Product Revenue
Cost of product revenue increased by $29.9 million, or 110%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily due to higher console and consumable volume of $35.4 million, higher manufacturing overhead of $5.5 million, resulting primarily from our investments in our manufacturing facility in Tijuana, Mexico, and a $0.3 million increase in stock-based compensation expense. This was offset by an $11.3 million reduction in product costs.
Cost of Service and Other Revenue
Cost of service and other revenue increased by $0.2 million, or 4%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily due to additional headcount costs in our service department, which were offset by higher absorption of these costs across our larger installed base.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit increased by $4.8 million, or 27%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The gross margin percentage improved by 92 percentage points for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, driven primarily by $18.3 million related to higher margin sales of our products and $7.6 million in higher service revenue as a result of our larger installed base, including leased consoles. This was offset by $15.9 million in increased costs as a result of selling more product and a $5.5 million increase in in higher manufacturing overhead, which was, in turn, driven by a $2.2 million investment in our new manufacturing facility in Tijuana, Mexico, a $1.0 million increase in allocated costs and a $0.8 million increase in compensation and personnel costs.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased by $5.5 million, or 24%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to a $6.1 million increase in compensation and personnel costs, which includes a $4.3 million increase in stock-based compensation expense, and a $0.3 million increase in materials and supplies. These increases were partially offset by a $0.9 million decrease in professional service and consultant service expenses.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $24.8 million, or 122% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to a $22.4 million increase in compensation and personnel costs as a result of increased headcount, which includes a $4.3 million increase in stock-based compensation expense, and a $10.1 million increase in commission expense as a result of higher orders, a $0.9 million increase in supplies, materials and freight expenses related to increased activities in support of driving penetration of Tablo, a $0.9 million increase in facilities and other allocated costs and a $0.6 million increase in professional service and consultant service expenses.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased by $21.6 million, or 242%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to a $17.2 million increase in compensation and personnel costs, which includes a $11.8 million increase in stock-based compensation expense, a $4.5 million increase in professional and consultant services associated with being a public company including legal, accounting, and secondary offering costs, and a $0.3 million increase in depreciation expense. The increases were partially offset by a $0.4 million decrease in facilities and other allocated costs.
Interest Income and Other Income, Net
Interest income and other income, net decreased by $2.0 million, or 79%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was driven by lower interest rates and a lower average balance in money market funds and short-term investment securities during 2020.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased by $1.4 million, or 32%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily due to a lower debt discount amortization expense in the year ended December 31, 2020, the repayment of our Perceptive Term Loan in July 2020 and a lower interest rate under the SVB Term Loan.
Change in Fair Value of Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock Warrant Liability
The change in the fair value of redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability was driven by the changes in assumptions used to value the warrant liability. Upon the closing of our IPO in September 2020, all shares of our outstanding redeemable convertible preferred stock warrants were either exercised into common stock or automatically converted into warrants to purchase common stock. Accordingly, we have ceased to incur the change in fair value of redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability as the entire redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability was reclassified to additional paid-in capital.
Loss on Extinguishment of Term Loan
The loss on extinguishment of term loan of $1.6 million was recognized for the repayment of the Perceptive Term Loan in July 2020, which included early prepayment and exit fees.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 (in thousands, except percentages):
*
Not meaningful
Revenue
Product Revenue
Product revenue increased by $12.0 million, or 686%, for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily due to $10.0 million in higher Tablo console revenue, which was driven by new customer adoption and fleet expansion with existing customers, as well as $0.5 million in increased console leasing revenue and $1.0 million in increased sales of Tablo consumables, including cartridges, given our higher Tablo installed base.
Service and Other Revenue
Service and other revenue increased by $1.1 million, or 415%, for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily due to growth in service contracts as a result of a higher Tablo installed base, as well as services associated with leased consoles.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of Product Revenue
Cost of product revenue increased by $19.4 million, or 248%, for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase was primarily due to higher console and consumable volume of $30.1 million, which was offset by a $10.6 million reduction in product costs and expense associated with upgrading certain prior generation consoles.
Cost of Service and Other Revenue
Cost of service and other revenue increased by $5.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase was primarily due to field service-related expenses resulting from the full rollout of Tablo into the commercial market.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit decreased by $11.7 million, or 191%, for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. Gross margin increased for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 by 187 percentage points. The decline in gross profit was primarily attributable to selling more Tablo consoles and cartridges for less than cost, partially offset by the lower materials cost as a result of our cost reduction efforts.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased by $0.4 million, or 2%, for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase was primarily due to a $1.3 million increase in compensation and personnel costs as a result of increased research and development headcount, a $1.2 million increase in outside service fees to support research and development and a $0.6 million increase in facilities and other allocated costs. Partially offsetting this increase was a decline of $2.2 million in materials and supplies and a $0.6 million decrease in clinical-related and other costs resulting from the completion of development of Tablo in late 2018.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $9.0 million, or 80%, for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase was primarily due to a $5.0 million increase in compensation and personnel costs, including a $1.4 million increase in commission expense as a result of higher product revenue, a $1.6 million increase in promotional and travel expenses related to an increase in activities in support of driving penetration in the acute care market, a $1.2 million increase in facilities and other allocated costs and a $1.1 million increase in outside service fees related to the clinical adoption of our products.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased by $2.7 million, or 43%, for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase was primarily due to a $1.9 million increase in compensation and personnel costs as a result of increased headcount and a $0.7 million increase in outside consultant expenses and professional service expenses.
Interest Income and Other Income, Net
Interest income and other income, net increased by $0.8 million, or 45%, for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to for the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase was primarily due to a higher average balance in money market funds and short-term investment securities during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased by $0.4 million, or 8%, for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, primarily due to lower debt discount amortization expense for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Change in Fair Value of Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock Warrant Liability
The change in fair value of the redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability increased by $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, reflecting a decrease in the redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability that resulted from the amendment and restatement of our certificate of incorporation in September 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
Since our inception, we have incurred net losses and negative cash flows from operations. To date, we have financed our operations and capital expenditures primarily through sales of redeemable convertible preferred stock and common stock, revenue from sales and issuances of debt. In September 2020, we completed our IPO for aggregate net proceeds of approximately $254.8 million (inclusive of the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares), net of offering costs, underwriter discounts and commissions of approximately $23.1 million.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments of $314.9 million, which are available to fund future operations, and restricted cash of $33.3 million, for a total cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash and short-term investments balance of $348.2 million and an accumulated deficit of $494.1 million.
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses for the foreseeable future and to incur operating losses in the near term while we make investments to support our anticipated growth. We may raise additional capital through the issuance of additional equity financing, debt financings or other sources. If this financing is not available to us at adequate levels or on acceptable terms, we may need to reevaluate our operating plans. If we do raise additional capital through public or private equity offerings, the ownership interest of our existing stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect our existing stockholders’ rights. If we raise additional capital through debt financing, we may be subject to covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments, and cash generated from sales of our products, will be sufficient to meet our anticipated needs for at least the next 12 months from the date of this Annual Report.
Cash Flows Summary
The following table summarizes the cash flows for each of the periods indicated (in thousands):
Net Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities of $99.0 million for the year ended December 30, 2020 was due to a net loss of $121.5 million and a net cash outflow from the change in our operating assets and liabilities of $5.8 million, partially offset by non-cash adjustments for stock-based compensation expense of $21.4 million, depreciation and amortization of $3.2 million, loss on extinguishment of term loan of $1.6 million, non-cash interest expense of $0.6 million, non-cash lease expense of $0.6 million, provision for inventories of $0.5 million, loss on disposal of property and equipment of $0.2 million, and change in fair value of redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability of $0.1 million. The net cash outflow from operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to an increase in inventories of $16.3 million due to the timing of inventory purchases including advance purchases of inventory due to anticipated demand, an increase in prepaid expenses and other assets of $6.2 million, an increase in accounts receivable of $2.6 million due to timing of collections, and an increase in accrued interest of $0.2 million for the SVB Term Loan. The net cash outflow from operating assets and liabilities was partially offset by an increase in accrued payroll and related benefits of $9.9 million due to an increase in headcount, an increase in accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $4.8 million consistent with the growth of our business, an increase in deferred revenue of $2.8 million, an increase in accrued warranty liability of $1.2 million, an increase in accounts payable of $0.7 million due to timing of vendor payments, and an increase in operating lease liability of $0.1 million.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $70.3 million, attributable to a net loss of $68.3 million and a net cash outflow from the change in our operating assets and liabilities of $1.6 million and net non-cash adjustment of $0.4 million. Non-cash adjustments primarily consisted of $3.8 million in change in fair value of the redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability and $1.0 million in amortization of premium on investments, partially offset by $1.5 million in depreciation and amortization, $0.9 million in non-cash interest expense, $0.9 million in stock-based compensation expense, $0.5 million in non-cash lease expense, $0.3 million in loss on disposal of property and equipment and $0.3 million in provision for inventory. The net cash outflow from the change in our operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $5.0 million increase in inventory to support the growth in our business, a $2.9 million increase in accounts receivable due to higher revenue, a $0.2 million increase in prepaid expenses and other assets and a $0.5 million decrease in operating lease liability. These changes were partially offset by a $3.1 million increase in accrued payroll and related benefits due to higher headcount, a $1.8 million increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses and other current liabilities attributable to expansion in our operating activities and timing of payment, a $1.4 million increase in accrued warranty liability and a $0.7 million increase in deferred revenue mainly due to the growth of our business.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2018 was $46.4 million, attributable to a net loss of $49.8 million and a net cash outflow from the change in our operating assets and liabilities of $0.2 million, partially offset by non-cash adjustments of $3.6 million. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of $1.3 million amortization of deferred financing costs and fees, $1.1 million in depreciation, $0.4 million in provision for inventory and $0.4 million in non-cash lease expense, partially offset by $0.8 million in amortization of premium on investments. The change in our net operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $3.1 million increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses resulting primarily from expansion in our operating activities and timing of payment and a $0.6 million increase in accrued payroll and related benefits due to increased headcount. These changes were partially offset by a $2.2 million increase in inventories, a $0.6 million increase in accounts receivable due to higher revenue, a $0.5 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets, a $0.5 million decrease in operating lease liability, a $0.4 million decrease in accrued warranty liability and a $0.3 million increase in prepaid expenses and other assets.
Net Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities of $3.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was due primarily to purchases of short-term investments of $32.9 million and purchases of property and equipment of $9.1 million, partially offset by the sales and maturities of short-term investments of $45.9 million.
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $74.3 million and related to the sales and maturities of short-term investments of $169.5 million, partially offset by purchases of short-term investments of $91.9 million and purchases of property and equipment of $3.3 million.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2018 was $68.8 million and related to the purchases of short-term investments of $132.3 million and the purchases of property and equipment of $1.8 million, partially offset by sales and maturities of short-term investments of $65.3 million.
Net Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of $385.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was due primarily to the net proceeds of approximately $254.8 million from the issuance of our common stock in our IPO, net of issuance costs paid to date, the net proceeds of $126.8 million from the issuance of our Series E redeemable convertible preferred stock, the net proceeds of $29.6 million from borrowings on the SVB Loan and Security Agreement, proceeds of $4.3 million from the exercise of the Series C redeemable convertible preferred stock warrants, and proceeds of $1.2 million from the issuance of common stock from exercises of stock options, partially offset by the cash outflow of $31.0 million in repayment of the Perceptive Term Loan which included early prepayment and exit fees.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $0.2 million and related to proceeds of $0.3 million from the exercise of stock options and $0.1 million from the exercise of a common stock warrant, partially offset by $0.2 million in paid issuance costs on our Series D redeemable convertible preferred stock issued in November 2018.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2018 was $134.9 million and related primarily to net proceeds of $134.6 million from the issuance of our Series D redeemable convertible preferred stock and $0.3 million from the exercise of stock options.
Debt Obligations
SVB Loan and Security Agreement
We entered into a senior secured term loan facility with Silicon Valley Bank (SVB) in July 2020 (the SVB Loan and Security Agreement), which provides for a $30.0 million term loan (the SVB Term Loan). We used the SVB Term Loan proceeds to repay in full all amounts due under the Perceptive Term Loan and cash on hand to pay $1.2 million in early prepayment, accrued interest and exit fees.
The SVB Term Loan matures on November 1, 2025. Payments under the SVB Term Loan are for interest only through May 2023, and then 30 monthly principal and interest payments from June 2023 until maturity. The SVB Term Loan bears interest at a rate per annum equal to the greater of (A) 0.50% above the Prime Rate as reported in the Wall Street Journal and (B) 3.75%.
There is also a final payment equal to 6.75% of the original principal amount of the SVB Term Loan, or approximately $2.0 million, due at maturity (or any earlier date of optional pre-payment or acceleration of principal due to an event of default). We may, at our option, prepay the SVB Term Loan in full, subject to an additional prepayment fee ranging between 1% and 3% of the outstanding principal amount of the SVB Term Loan. The prepayment fee would also be due and payable in the event of an acceleration of the principal amount of the supplemental term loan due to an event of default. The SVB Term Loan is secured by substantially all of our assets, including all of the capital stock held by us, if any (subject to a 65% limitation on pledges of capital stock of foreign subsidiaries), subject to certain exceptions.
In the event of default or change in control, all unpaid principal and all accrued and unpaid interest amounts (if any) become immediately due and payable including the prepayment fee. Events of default include, but are not limited to, a payment default, a material adverse change, and insolvency. The SVB Loan and Security Agreement contains customary representations, warranties, affirmative covenants and also contains certain restrictive covenants, including, among others, limitations on: the incurrence of additional debt, liens on property, acquisitions and investments, loans and guarantees, mergers, consolidations, liquidations and dissolutions, asset sales, dividends and other payments in respect of our capital stock, prepayments of certain debt, transactions with affiliates and changes to our type of business, management of the business, control of the business or business locations. We are also obligated to maintain a restricted cash balance greater or equal to the outstanding principal balance of $30.0 million of the SVB Term Loan.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations and other commitments as of December 31, 2020:
(1)
We have entered into leases for office and laboratory space in San Jose, California with contractual lease periods expiring in 2027 and our new manufacturing facility in Tijuana, Mexico with contractual lease periods expiring in 2026.
(2)
Principal payments associated with the SVB Term Loan are included in the above table. Interest expense incurred on the term loan is included in the above table based on the obligations outstanding and the interest rate effective as of December 31, 2020, including a final one-time payment of $0.2 million in 2025.
(3)
We have obligations under non-cancellable purchase commitments primarily related to our contract manufacturers.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
During the periods presented, we did not have, nor do we currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations is based on the financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenues and expenses incurred during the reporting periods. The estimates are based on historical experience and on various other factors that are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions and any such differences may be material.
While the significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to our audited financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report, we believe that the following critical accounting policies are most important to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Revenue Recognition
We consider each product and each service contract to be a distinct performance obligation. Revenue is recognized when a performance obligation is satisfied, which occurs when control of the promised products or services is transferred to the customer in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those products or services. Revenue from product sales is recognized at a point in time when management has determined that control has transferred to the customer, which is generally when legal title has transferred to the customer. Revenue from support and maintenance contracts is recognized as the output of the service is transferred to the customer over time, typically evenly over the contract term. Revenue is recognized net of allowances for returns and any taxes collected from customers, which are subsequently remitted to governmental authorities.
Our contracts with customers often include promises to transfer multiple products and services to a customer. Determining whether products and services are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately versus together may require significant judgment. Judgment is also required to determine the stand-alone selling price (SSP) for each distinct performance obligation. We use an observable price to estimate SSP for items that are sold separately, including customer support agreements. In instances where SSP is not directly observable, such as when we do not sell the product or service separately, we determine the SSP using information that may include market conditions and other observable inputs. We may offer additional goods or services to customers at the inception of customer contracts at prices not at SSP. This is considered a material right and an additional performance obligation of the contract. SSP is assigned based on the estimated value of the material right.
Costs associated with product sales include commissions. We apply the practical expedient to expense the commissions as incurred as the expected amortization period is one year or less. Commissions are recorded as sales and marketing expenses in the statements of operations.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
Our stock-based compensation expense relates to stock options with a service condition, stock options with performance and market-based vesting conditions, stock purchase rights under our Employee Stock Purchase Plan (ESPP), restricted stock units (RSUs) and performance stock units (PSUs). Stock-based compensation expense for our stock-based awards is based on their grant date fair value.
Service-based options initially granted to an optionee generally vest at a rate of 25% on the first anniversary of the original vesting date, with the balance vesting monthly over the remaining three years. Any subsequent follow-on options granted to the optionee generally vest monthly over four years. We estimate the fair value of stock options with a service condition and stock purchase rights under our ESPP on the grant date using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The fair value of these awards is recognized as compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period in which the awards are expected to vest and forfeitures are recognized as they occur.
The Black-Scholes model considers several variables and assumptions in estimating the fair value of service-based stock options and stock purchase rights under our ESPP. These variables include the per share fair value of the underlying common stock, exercise price, expected term, risk-free interest rate, expected annual dividend yield and expected stock price volatility over the expected term. For all stock options granted, we calculate the expected term using the simplified method for “plain vanilla” stock option awards. We had no publicly available stock price information prior to our IPO and limited available stock price information subsequent to our IPO; therefore, we have used the historical volatility of the stock price of similar publicly traded peer companies. The risk-free interest rate is based on the yield available on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues similar in duration to the expected term of the equity-settled award.
For stock options with performance and market-based vesting conditions, stock-based compensation expense is recognized when it is considered probable that the performance vesting condition will be satisfied. Prior to our IPO in September 2020, we had not recognized any stock-based compensation expense as the satisfaction of the performance condition was not considered probable. Upon the closing of our IPO, we recorded a cumulative stock-based compensation expense using the accelerated attribution method as the performance condition was satisfied. Stock-based compensation expense related to these options is not reversed if the achievement of the market condition does not occur. The fair value of these stock options is estimated using the Monte Carlo approach.
RSUs initially granted to an optionee generally vest at a rate of 25% on the first anniversary of the original vesting date, with the balance vesting quarterly over the remaining three years. The fair value of RSUs is based on the market price of our common stock on the date of grant. The determination of fair value of performance stock units requires the use of certain estimates and assumptions that affect the amount of stock-based compensation expense recognized in our statements of operations. At each reported period, we reassess the probability of the achievement of corporate performance goals to estimate the number of shares to be released. Any increase or decrease in stock-based compensation expense resulting from an adjustment in the estimated shares to be released is treated as accumulative catch-up in the period of adjustment. If any of the assumptions or estimates used change significantly, stock-based compensation expense may differ materially from what we have recorded in the current period.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is determined using the standard cost method, which approximates actual costs as determined on a first-in, first-out basis. The carrying value of inventories is reduced for any difference between cost and net realizable value of inventories that is determined to be obsolete or unmarketable, based upon assumptions about future demand and market conditions. We also review our inventory value to determine if it reflects the lower of cost or net realizable value based on factors such as inventory items sold at negative gross margins and non-cancellable purchase commitments. Adjustments to the value of inventory establish a new cost basis and are considered permanent even if circumstances later suggest that increased carrying amounts are recoverable. If demand is higher than expected, we may sell inventory that had previously been written down.
Common Stock Valuations
Prior to our IPO, there was no public market for our common stock. As such, the estimated fair value of our common stock and underlying stock options has been determined at each grant date by our board of directors, with input from management, based on the information known to us on the recent events and their potential impact on the estimated per share fair value of our common stock. As part of these fair value determinations, our board of directors obtained and considered valuation reports prepared by a third-party valuation firm in accordance with the guidance outlined in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Technical Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation.
For valuations after the completion of our IPO, the fair value of each share of underlying common stock is based on the closing price of our common stock as reported on the date of grant.
Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock Warrant Liability
We accounted for our freestanding warrants to purchase shares of our redeemable convertible preferred stock prior to our IPO as liabilities at fair value upon issuance primarily because the shares underlying the warrants contained contingent redemption features outside of our control. The warrants were subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date and any change in fair value was recognized in the statements of operations as the change in fair value of redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability. Upon the completion of our IPO, the liability on the redeemable convertible preferred stock warrants was reclassified to additional paid-in capital.
We estimated the fair value of these liabilities using the Black-Scholes option pricing model and assumptions that were based on the individual characteristics of the warrants on the valuation date, as well as assumptions for future financings, expected volatility, expected life, yield, and risk-free interest rate.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We elected to use this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date that we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with the new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in our audited financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements that may impact us.