Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding our financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward looking statements. When used in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “continue,” “could,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intends,” “may,” “might,” “plan,” “possible,” “potential,” “predict,” “project,” “should,” “would” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions, as they relate to us or our management, identify forward looking statements. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other SEC filings. Such forward looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. No assurance can be given that results in any forward-looking statement will be achieved and actual results could be affected by one or more factors, which could cause them to differ materially. The cautionary statements made in this Annual Report on Form 10-K should be read as being applicable to all forward-looking statements whenever they appear in this Annual Report. For these statements, we claim the protection of the safe harbor for forward-looking statements contained in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on October 26, 2020 as a Cayman Islands exempted company for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We have not selected any business combination target and we have not, nor has anyone on our behalf, initiated any substantive discussions, directly or indirectly, with any business combination target. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our Initial Public Offering and the sale of the private placement shares, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, equity and debt.
The registration statement for our Initial Public Offering was declared effective on January 6, 2021. On January 11, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 13,800,000 Class A ordinary shares at $10.00 per share, generating gross proceeds of $138.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $8.13 million, inclusive of approximately $4.83 million in deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the Private Placement of 501,000 private placement shares at a price of $10.00 per private placement share to the sponsor, generating gross proceeds of approximately $5.01 million.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and Private Placement, $138.0 million ($10.00 per share) of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and certain of the proceeds of the Private Placement were placed in the trust account, located in the United States at J.P. Morgan Chase Bank, N.A., with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and will only be invested in U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 180 days or less or in any open-ended investment company that holds itself out as a money market fund selected by us meeting the conditions of paragraphs (d)(2), (d)(3) and (d)(4) of Rule 2a-7 of the Investment Company Act, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a business combination and (ii) the distribution of the assets held in the trust account. Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the private placement, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied toward consummating a business combination.
If we are unable to complete a business combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or January 11, 2023, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account including interest earned on the funds held in the trust account and not previously released to us to pay for our income taxes (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of the then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining shareholders and our board of directors, proceed to commence a voluntary liquidation and thereby a formal dissolution of our company, subject in each case to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity from inception through December 31, 2020 was related to our formation and our Initial Public Offering. We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. We will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial business combination. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from October 26, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had net loss of approximately $32,000, which consisted solely of general and administrative expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had no cash, and a working capital deficit of approximately $407,000.
Our liquidity needs to date have been satisfied through a contribution of $25,000 from our sponsor to cover certain expenses in exchange for our issuance of the founder shares, a loan of approximately $98,000 through December 31, 2020 and approximately $145,000 in total prior to the Initial Public Offering from our sponsor pursuant to a promissory note (the “Note”), and since the Initial Public Offering, the proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the trust account. We fully repaid the Note on January 13, 2021. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor, or our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us working capital loans. To date, there were no amounts outstanding under any working capital loan.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity from our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor, or our officers and directors to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of a business combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial business combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the business combination.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
On November 2, 2020, our sponsor paid $25,000 to cover certain expenses on our behalf in consideration of 3,593,750 Class B ordinary shares, par value $0.0001, (the “Founder Shares”). On November 13, 2020, our sponsor contributed 718,750 Founder Shares back to us. On December 29, 2020, our sponsor transferred 42,000 Founder Shares to each of our non-employee directors, such number reflecting the adjustment by the share sub-division described below. On January 7, 2021, we effected a share sub-division, resulting in an aggregate of 3,450,000 Founder Shares issued and outstanding. All shares and associated amounts have been adjusted and retroactively restated to reflect the share surrender and the share sub-division. Our sponsor agreed to forfeit up to 450,000 Founder Shares to the extent that the over-allotment option was not exercised in full by the underwriters, so that the Founder Shares would represent 20.0% of our issued and outstanding ordinary shares (excluding the private placement shares) after our Initial Public Offering. The underwriters fully exercised the over-allotment option on January 7, 2021; thus, these 450,000 Founder Shares are no longer subject to forfeiture.
The initial shareholders agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of their Founder Shares until the earlier to occur of: (A) one year after the completion of the initial business combination and (B) subsequent to the initial business combination, (x) if the closing price of our Class A ordinary shares equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for share splits, share capitalizations, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after the initial business combination, or (y) the date on which we complete a liquidation, merger, share exchange, reorganization or other similar transaction that results in all of the public shareholders having the right to exchange their ordinary shares for cash, securities or other property.
Private Placement Shares
Simultaneously with the closing of our Initial Public Offering, we consummated the Private Placement of 501,000 private placement shares, at a price of $10.00 per private placement shares to our sponsor, generating gross proceeds of approximately $5.0 million. A portion of the proceeds from the private placement shares was added to the proceeds from our Initial Public Offering held in the trust account.
If we do not complete a business combination within 24 months from the closing of our Initial Public Offering, the proceeds from the sale of the private placement shares held in the trust account will be used to fund the redemption of the public shares (subject to the requirements of applicable law) and the private placement shares will be worthless. The private placement shares will not be transferable or salable until 30 days after the completion of the initial business combination. Our sponsor and our officers and directors agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of their private placement shares until 30 days after the completion of the initial business combination.
Related Party Loans
On November 2, 2020, our sponsor agreed to loan us an aggregate of up to $300,000 to cover expenses related to our Initial Public Offering pursuant to the Note. This loan was non-interest bearing and payable upon the completion of our Initial Public Offering. We borrowed approximately $98,000 through December 31, 2020 and approximately $145,000 in total prior to the Initial Public Offering under the Note. On January 13, 2021, we repaid the Note in full.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor, or our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us working capital loans. If we complete a business combination, we may repay the working capital loans out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. Otherwise, the working capital loans may be repaid only out of funds held outside the trust account. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the proceeds held outside the trust account to repay the working capital loans but no proceeds held in the trust account would be used to repay the working capital loans. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such working capital loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. The working capital loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a business combination, without interest, or, at the lenders’ discretion, up to $1.5 million of such working capital loans may be convertible into shares of the post Business Combination entity at a price of $10.00 per share. The shares would be identical to the private placement shares. To date, we had no outstanding borrowings under the working capital loans.
Forward Purchase Arrangement
Our Sponsor has indicated an interest to purchase up to an aggregate of $25 million of our ordinary shares in a private placement that would occur concurrently with the consummation of the initial business combination. However, because indications of interest are not binding agreements or commitments to purchase, our sponsor may determine not to purchase any such shares, or to purchase fewer shares than it has indicated an interest in purchasing. Furthermore, we are not under any obligation to sell any such shares.
Contractual Obligations
Registration and Shareholder Rights
The holders of Founder Shares, private placement shares and the private placement shares that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans were entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration and shareholder rights agreement signed upon consummation of our Initial Public Offering. The holders of these securities were entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to our completion of the business combination. However, the registration and shareholder rights agreement provides that we will not permit any registration statement filed under the Securities Act to become effective until termination of the applicable lock-up period, which occurs (i) in the case of the Founder Shares, in accordance with the letter agreement our initial shareholders entered into and (ii) in the case of the private placement shares, 30 days after the completion of our business combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the final prospectus relating to our Initial Public Offering to purchase up to 1,800,000 additional public shares to cover over-allotments, if any, at our Initial Public Offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. The underwriters fully exercised the over-allotment option on January 7, 2021.
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per public shares, or approximately $2.8 million, paid upon the closing of our Initial Public Offering. In addition, $0.35 per public shares, or approximately $4.8 million in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Risks and Uncertainties
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the industry and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on our financial position, results of our operations and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of these financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the JOBS Act and are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We elected to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
As an “emerging growth company”, we are not required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our initial public offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.