ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion summarizes the financial position of OMNIQ, Corp. and its consolidated subsidiaries as of December 31, 2020, and its consolidated results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020, and should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion contains, in addition to historical information, forward-looking statements that include risks and uncertainties (see discussion of “Forward-Looking Statements” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K). Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including those factors set forth under Item 1A - Risk Factors of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic continues to affect the United States of America and the world, including in the primary regions we operate. Many State Governors issued temporary Executive Orders in 2020, which continue to remain effective in many states that, among other stipulations, effectively limit in-person work activities for most industries and businesses having the effect of suspending or severely curtailing operations. Many of these orders are in the process of being lifted. To date, we have not incurred any significant interruptions to our day-to-day operations or supply chain, except some of our employees have or are working remotely. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we proactively implemented certain measures to strengthen cash flow, manage costs, strengthen liquidity and enhance employee safety. These measures included the reduction of payroll costs, a reduction in capital expenditures and other discretionary spending, the elimination of most business travel and restriction of visitors to our corporate office, enhanced cleaning and disinfection procedures at our corporate office and branch locations, promotion of social distancing and the wearing of face coverings (masks) at our corporate office and branch locations, and requirements for employees to work from home where possible.
As the impact of COVID-19 became more widespread in March 2020, our sales volumes began to decline from previous years. Our total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020, were 3.48% lower than those of the year ended December 31, 2019. COVID-19 had a more significant impact on our gross margin. Total gross margin percentage dropped 5% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The timing and the extent of any continued recovery, or subsequent contraction, in our sales volumes cannot be reasonably estimated at this time. As such, the extent of the ultimate impact of the pandemic on the Company’s operational and financial performance will depend on various developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak, the impact on capital and financial markets, governmental limitations on business operations generally, and its and their impact on potential customers, employees, vendors and distribution partners, all of which cannot be reasonably predicted at this time.
The Company’s consolidated revenue from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $55.2 million, representing a decrease of $2.0 million from 2019’s amount of $57.2 million. Revenues in 2020 and 2019 are presented in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606).
The loss from continuing operations for common stockholders was $11.5 million in 2020, an increase of $6 million from the prior year loss of $5.5 million. Basic and Diluted loss per share from continuing operations was $2.46 and $2.66 in 2020 compared to $1.37 per share in 2019.
In February 2020, OMNIQ entered in an asset purchase agreement with EyepaxIT Consulting LLC, a California limited liability company, (“Eyepax”) and its principal owners (collectively the “Sellers”), effective September 30, 2019, pursuant to which the Company purchased certain assets from the Sellers at a cash purchase price of $245,000. As additional consideration, the Company issued to the Sellers 80,000 shares of the Company’s common stock and an option to purchase 20,000 shares of the Company’s common stock at an exercise price of $5.00 per share, subject to adjustment, which shall vest quarterly in four (4) equal installments and expire on February 28, 2023. The Company entered into an employment agreement with Mr. Lalith Caldera, a principal owner of Eyepax, agreeing to pay Mr. Caldera an annual salary of $100,000.
In May 2020, we entered into a Loan Agreement with Zions Bank corporation, NA (“Zions”) whereby the Company borrowed $887,500 from Zions under the Small Business Administration’s (the “SBA”) Paycheck Protection Program. In October 2020, OMNIQ applied for and was granted forgiveness of the full amount owed (including accrued interest) by Zions on behalf of the SBA.
In August 2020, we filed an Amendment to the Certificate of Designation of the Rights and Preferences of its Series C Preferred Stock (the “Amendment”) clarifying that the conversion price and voting rights of the Series C Preferred Stock were amended to equitably reflect the reverse stock split of November 1, 2019. The holders of a majority of the Series Preferred Stock consented to such Amendment.
In August 2020, OMNIQ adopted an Equity Incentive Plan (the “Plan”), as an incentive to retain in the employ of and attract new employees, directors, officers, consultants, advisors and employees to the Company. Pursuant to the Plan, one million (1,000,000) shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.001 (the “Shares”), were set aside and reserved for issuance. The Plan was approved by the Company’s stockholders in September 2020.
In September 2020 and pursuant to the 2020 Equity Incentive Plan, the Company granted options to purchase an aggregate of 440,000 shares of the Company’s common stock to certain of its employees, officers and directors, including options to purchase 230,000 shares of its common stock to Mr. Shai Lustgarten, the Company’s Chief Executive Officer, options to purchase 40,000 shares of its common stock to Mr. Neev Nissenson, its Chief Financial Officer, options to purchase 150,000 shares of its common stock to Mr. Carlos J. Nissensohn, a consultant and principal stockholder, and options to purchase 10,000 shares of its common stock to Company Directors Andy MacMillan and Yaron Shalem, respectively. The exercise price of all of the options granted was $4.40 per share, which was the closing price of the Company’s common stock on September 29, 2020, the day prior to the grant, except for the options granted to Shai Lustgarten and Carlos J. Nissensohn, which have an exercise price of $4.84 per share. The options granted to Shai Lustgarten and Carlos J. Nissensohn have a term of five (5) years and the balance of the options have a term of ten (10) years.
In September 2020, the Company filed an amendment to its Certificate of Incorporation, as amended (the “Amendment”), with the Secretary of State of Delaware, pursuant to which the Company reduced the amount of its authorized common stock to 15,000,000 and reduced the amount of its authorized preferred stock to 5,000,000, of which 3,000,000 shares shall be designated as Series C Preferred Stock.
In May 2019, the Company, Campbeltown and Walefar entered into an Amendment to the HTS Purchase Agreement which provided for an adjustment to the number of shares of common stock issued to Walefar and Campbeltown in the acquisition of HTS. Pursuant to the Amendment, Campbeltown and Walefar agreed to return for cancelation 277,166 and 277,116 shares of common stock, respectively. This Amendment reduced the number of shares issued in the acquisition to 568,415 shares from 1,122,648 shares and the amount of share consideration to approximately $2.7 million from approximately $5.3 million. This adjustment was made as a result of a correction in the calculation of working capital and other share give back provisions of the HTS Purchase Agreement.
In April 2019, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “Securities Purchase Agreement”) with accredited investors (the “Purchasers”). Pursuant to the Securities Purchase Agreement, in April, 2019, the Company sold an aggregate, with the Conversions included, of $5.0 million of units (the “Units”) resulting in gross proceeds of $5.0 million (the individual Unit price purchase price was $6.00), before deducting placement agent fees and offering expenses (the “Offering”). Each Unit was comprised of one share of the Company’s common stock, $0.001 par value per share (the “Common Stock”), and a warrant to purchase one share of Common Stock, and, as a result of the Offering, the Company issued 833,333 shares of Common Stock (the “Shares”) and warrants (the “Warrants”) to purchase 833,333 shares of Common Stock (the “Warrant Shares”) at an exercise price equal to $7.00 per Warrant Share, which Warrants are exercisable for a period of five and one-half years from the issuance date. Both Mr. Shai Lustgarten, the Company’s Chief Executive Officer, and Mr. Carlos J. Nissensohn, a consultant to and principal stockholder of the Company, participated in the offering by each converting $200 thousand of unpaid principal owed to them from the HTS acquisition (the “Conversions”), by the Company in exchange for Shares and Warrants on the same terms as all other Purchasers. With the Conversions included, the Offering resulted in gross proceeds of $5.0 million. As a result of the Conversions, a principal amount of $150 thousand is owed to each Walefar and Campbeltown respectively under the note issued to them as partial consideration in the sale of HTS Image Processing to the Company on October 2018.
GOING CONCERN
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming the Company will continue as a going concern. As of December 31, 2020, we had a working capital deficit of $ 25.3 million. These facts and others raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. The Company’s continuation as a going concern is dependent upon its ability to generate sufficient cash flow to meet its obligations on a timely basis.
Management’s plan to eliminate the going concern situation includes, but is not limited to, the following:
● The continuation of improving cash flow by implementing and maintaining moderate cost reductions;
● Increasing the accounts receivable factoring line of credit;
● Negotiating lower interest rates on outstanding debt;
● Potential issuances of additional common stock;
● The creation of additional sales and profits across product lines, and obtaining sufficient financing to restructure current debt in a manner more in line with the Company’s improving cash flow and cost reduction successes;
● In our portfolio of products, we have a computer vision technology that is based on AI and machine learning concepts. These solutions have a higher gross profit that will provide an increase in cashflow on a consolidated basis going forward. We have an operating facility with the ability for light manufacturing and assembling components, which helps reduce the cost of goods and increase profit margins;
● In April 2019, the Company raised approximately $5.0 million in gross proceeds from the sale of 833,333 shares of the Company’s common stock.
The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts or the amounts and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
Overview - Results of Operations
The following table sets forth certain selected condensed statement of operations data for the periods indicated in dollars. In addition, we note that the period-to-period comparison may not be indicative of future performance.
Revenues
Revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were generated from the sales of hardware, service contracts, software, labels and ribbons and related services provided by the Company to its customers. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company recognized $55.2 million and $57.2 million in net revenues, respectively. This represents a decrease of 3.48%.
Cost of Goods Sold
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company recognized a total of $44.3 million and $43.2 million respectively, of cost of goods sold. Cost of goods sold was 80% of net revenues for 2020 and 75.5% for 2019. Our gross margin percentage has remained relatively stable in an industry that which is experiencing gross margin pressure.
Operating expenses
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, operating expenses related to continuing operations were $19.9 million and $16.9 million, respectively. This represents an increase of $3.0 million, or 17.76%, which is due to a general increase in business operations, including the addition of HTS in October 2018. The following explains in detail the change in operating expenses.
Research & Development - Research and development for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $1.8 million, compared to $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing an increase of $.7 million, or 70%. The increase in research and development was due to development on the HTS proprietary products.
Selling, General and Administrative - Selling, General and Administrative expenses were $15.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $13.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing an increase of $2.1 million, or 15%. The increase was due primarily to the inclusion of HTS general and administrative expenses.
Depreciation - Depreciation for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $178 thousand compared to $151 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2019. This represents an increase of $27 thousand, or 6% attributable to growth in fixed assets.
Intangible Amortization - Intangible amortization expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $2.1 million, compared to $2.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Other income and expenses
The Company incurred $2.6 million in interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $2.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The interest expense in 2020 is comprised of interest incurred on promissory notes payable, the company’s line of credit, and vendor payables.
Foreign currency transactions
Our subsidiary, HTS Image Processing, Inc., has operations in Israel, therefore had foreign currency transactions conducted in 2020 and 2019. Foreign transaction gains and losses are reported on the consolidated statement of operations and were included in the amount of loss from comprehensive income.
Provision for income taxes
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had $5 thousand in state income tax expenses for states in which the Company recently began operations and for which past net operating losses may not apply.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company had $14 thousand in state income tax expenses for states in which the Company recently began operations and for which past net operating losses may not apply.
Net loss from continuing operations
The Company realized a net loss from continuing operations of $11.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a net loss from continuing operations of $5.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increased loss in 2020 is due primarily to an increase in Selling, General and Administrative expenses, and cost of goods.
Liquidity and capital resources
At December 31, 2020, the Company had cash in the amount of $5.1 million of which $.5 million is on deposit and restricted, and a working capital deficit of $25.3 million, compared to cash in the amount of $2.1 million of which $0.5 million was on deposit and restricted, and a working capital deficit of $20.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The Company had stockholders’ deficit of $(5) million and stockholders’ equity of $1.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. This decrease in our stockholders’ equity was primarily due to the book net loss for 2020.
The Company’s accumulated deficit was $56.7 million and $45.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The Company’s operations used net cash of $420 thousand and provided $4.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in cash from operations of $4.7 million is primarily a result of a decrease in gross margin.
The Company’s cash provided by investing activities was $94 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to cash used in investing activities of $251 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The Company’s financing activities used $3.4 million of cash during the year ended December 31, 2020, and used $2.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company made payments of $1.3 million on its notes payable, including its Supplier Secured Promissory note and related party notes payable, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, when the Company made payments of $3.4 million on its notes payable, including notes payable, related party, and its Supplier Secured Promissory note. Additionally, the Company borrowed $3.5 million on the Company’s line of credit, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, when $866 thousand was borrowed from the Company’s line of credit.
The Company’s results of operations have not been affected by inflation and management does not expect inflation to have a material impact on the Company’s operations in the future.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company currently does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). The application of many accounting principles requires us to make assumptions, estimates and/or judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses in our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. These assumptions, estimates and/or judgments, however, are often subjective and they and our actual results may change based on changing circumstances or changes in our analyses. If actual amounts are ultimately different from our estimates, the revisions are included in our results of operations for the period in which the actual amounts first become known. We believe the following critical accounting policies could potentially produce materially different results if we were to change underlying assumptions, estimates and/or judgments. See also note 2 to our consolidated financial statements for a summary of our significant accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition.
When entering into contracts with our customers, we review follow the five steps outline in Accounting Standards Codification Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606):
i. Identify the contract with our customer.
ii. Identify the performance obligations in the contract.
iii. Determine the transaction price.
iv. Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations. And
v. Evaluate the satisfaction of the performance obligations,
We account for contracts, with our customers, when we have approval and commitment from both parties, the rights of the parties are identified, payment terms are established, the contract has commercial substance and collectability of consideration is probable.
We evaluate, in accordance with Topic 606, whether or not we meet the criteria to be a principal or an agent and record the revenue on a gross or net basis. We are considered a principal if we obtain control of any one of the following:
i. A good or another asset from another party that we then transfer to our customer.
ii. A right to a service to be performed by another party, which gives the us the ability to direct that party to provide the service to the customer on our behalf, and
iii. A good or service from another party that we then combine with other goods or services in providing the specified good or service to our customer.
We have certain relationships with manufacturers and suppliers to sell us products or provide services. Our contracts may transfer to our customer a right to a future service or product to be provided by our manufacturer or supplier. When a specified good or service is a right to a good or service is provided by a manufacturer or supplier, we evaluate whether we control the right to the goods or services before that right is transferred to the customer rather than whether we control the underlying goods or services.
Indicators that we control the specified good or service before it is transferred to the customer (and we are therefore a principal) include, but are not limited to, the following:
i. We are responsible for fulfilling the promise to provide the specified good or service. This typically includes responsibility for the acceptability of the specified good or service. If we are primarily responsible for fulfilling the promise to provide the specified good or service, this may indicate that the other party involved in providing the specified good or service is acting on our behalf. Often, we provide value added services (combining hardware, integrating hardware to software, etc.) to the products and services purchased from our manufacturers and suppliers.
ii. We have inventory risk before the specified good or service has been transferred to a customer. Our purchases of products or services from our manufactures and suppliers is evidenced by our issuing a binding purchase order contract with the negotiated terms including specifications, pricing, delivery among other things. Our obligation for purchased products and services is mutually exclusive of our customers’ performance (failure to take acceptance, make payment, etc.)
iii. We have sole discretion in establishing our price for the specified good or service. Establishing the price our customer pays for a specified good or service may indicate we have the ability to direct the use of that good or service and obtain substantially all of the remaining benefits. We control and set the pricing for the product or services to be provided to our customers.
If the terms of a transaction do not indicate we are acting as a principal in the transaction, we are then considered acting as an agent and the associated revenues would be recognized on a net basis.
As principal, when (or as) we satisfy a performance obligation, we recognize revenue in the gross amount of consideration which we expect to be entitled in exchange for the specified good or service transferred. We are an agent if our performance obligation is to arrange for the provision of the specified good or service by another party. As an agent, we do not control the specified good or service provided by another party before that good or service is transferred to our customer. As an agent, when (or as) we satisfy a performance obligation, we recognize revenue in the amount of any fee or commission which we expect to be entitled in exchange for arranging for the specified goods or services to be provided by another party to our customer.
Under Topic 606, we recognize revenue (on either a gross or net basis previously discussed) only when we satisfy a performance obligation by transferring a promised good or service to our customer. A good or service is considered to be transferred when the customer obtains control. The standard defines control as an entity’s ability to direct the use of, and obtain substantially all of the remaining benefits from, an asset. We recognize revenue (either gross or net) once control has passed to the customer. The following indicators are evaluated in determining when control has passed to the customer:
i. We have a right to payment for the product or service,
ii. The customer has legal title to the product,
iii. We have transferred physical possession of the product to the customer,
iv. The customer has the risk and rewards of ownership of the product, and
v. The customer has accepted the product.
Revenue Recognition for Hardware. Revenues from sales of hardware products are recognized on a gross basis as we are acting as a principal in these transactions, with the selling price to the customer recorded as sales and the acquisition cost of the product recorded as cost of sales. We recognize revenue from these transactions when control has passed to the customer.
Manufacturers and suppliers, from whom we purchase hardware, often provide their warranties only providing assurance the products and services will conform to their specifications. These assurance type warranties are not sold separately and are not considered separate performance obligations. In some transactions, a third-party will provide the customer with an extended warranty. These extended warranties are sold separately and provide the customer with a service in addition to assurance that the product will function as expected. We consider these warranties to be separate performance obligations from the underlying product. For warranties, where we are arranging those services be provided by a third-party, we are acting as an agent in the transaction and records revenue on a net basis at the point of sale.
Revenue Recognition for Software. Sales of software licenses are generally considered a single performance obligation. When we are considered to be the principal, we recognize revenues on a gross basis at the point the software is delivered to and accepted by our customer. Generally, software licenses are sold with accompanying third-party delivered software assurance, which is a product that allows customers to upgrade, at no additional cost, to the latest technology if new capabilities are introduced during the period that the software assurance is in effect.
As explained above, we evaluate whether the software assurance is a separate performance obligation by assessing if the third-party delivered software assurance is critical or essential to the core functionality of the software itself. This involves considering:
i. If the software provides its original intended functionality to the customer without the updates,
ii. If the customer would ascribe a higher value to the upgrades versus the up-front deliverable,
iii. If the customer would expect frequent intelligence updates to the software (such as updates that maintain the original functionality), and
iv. If the customer chooses to not delay or always install upgrades.
If we determine the accompanying third-party delivered software assurance is critical or essential to the core functionality of the software license, the software license and the accompanying third-party delivered software assurance are recognized as a single performance obligation.
In some transactions, a third-party will provide the customer with an extended warranty. These extended warranties are sold separately and provide the customer with a service in addition to assurance that the product will function as expected. We consider these warranties to be separate performance obligations from the underlying product. For warranties, where we are arranging those services be provided by a third-party, we are acting as an agent in the transaction and records revenue on a net basis at the point of sale.
Revenue Recognition for Services. We provide professional services, which include project managers and consultants recommending, designing and implementing IT solutions. Revenue from professional services is recognized either on a time and materials basis or proportionally, as costs are incurred for fixed fee project work. Revenue is recognized on a gross basis each month as work is performed and we transfers those services.
Revenues from the sale of professional and support services, provided by us, are recognized over the period the service is provided. As the customer receives the benefit of the service each month, we recognize the respective revenue on a gross basis as we are acting as a principal in the transaction. Additionally, we manage services team provides project support to customers that are billed on a fixed fee basis. We are acting as the principal in the transaction and recognize revenue on a gross basis based on the total number of hours incurred for the period over the total expected hours for the project. Total expected hours to complete the project is updated for each period and best represents the transfer of control of the service to the customer.
Freight Costs. We record both the freight billed to its customers and the related freight costs as cost of sales when the underlying product revenue is recognized. For freight not billed to its customers, we record the freight costs as cost of sales. The Company considers shipping to be a fulfillment activity and not a separate performance obligation.
Evaluation of Goodwill Impairment.
We have made acquisitions in the past that resulted in the recognition of goodwill. Goodwill is the excess of the consideration transferred plus the fair value of any non-controlling interest in the acquiree at the acquisition date over the fair values of the identifiable net assets acquired. We evaluate goodwill for impairment annually or more frequently, if triggering events occur or other impairment indicators arise which might impair recoverability.
Application of the goodwill impairment test requires judgment. We performed a Step 1 quantitative assessment of goodwill impairment as of December 31, 2020, our annual impairment test date. We compared the carrying value inclusive of goodwill and definite-lived intangible assets, to its fair value. We estimated the fair value of these reporting units by weighting results from the income approach and the market approach, as further described below. Based on this quantitative test, we determined there was no impairment as of the December 31, 2020.
For purposes of performing the quantitative impairment test described above, we estimate the fair value by utilizing fair value techniques consistent with the income approach and market approach. When performing the income approach for each reporting unit, we use a discounted cash flow analysis based on our internal projected results of operations, weighted average cost of capital (“WACC”) and terminal value assumptions. Our cash flow projections are based on five-year financial forecasts developed by management that include revenue projections, capital spending trends, and investment in working capital to support anticipated revenue growth. The WACC is an estimate of the overall after-tax rate of return required by equity and debt holders of a business enterprise and represents the expected cost of new capital likely to be used by market participants. The WACC is used to discount our combined future cash flows. The inputs and variables used in determining the fair value of a reporting unit require management to make certain assumptions regarding the impact of operating and macroeconomic changes, as well as estimates of future cash flows. Our estimates regarding future cash flows are based on historical experience and projections of future operating performance, including revenues, margins and operating expenses. We also make certain forecasts about future economic conditions, interest rates and other market data. Many of the factors used in assessing fair value are outside the control of management, and these assumptions and estimates may change in future periods. Changes in assumptions or estimates could materially affect the estimate of a reporting unit’s fair value, and therefore could affect the likelihood and amount of potential impairment. Under the market approach, we compare the reporting units to selected reasonably similar (or “guideline”) publicly traded companies. Under this method, valuation multiples are: (i) derived from the operating data of selected guideline companies; (ii) evaluated and adjusted based on the strengths and weaknesses of our reporting unit relative to the selected guideline companies; and (iii) applied to the operating data of our reporting unit to arrive at an indication of value. The application of the market approach results in an estimate of the price reasonably expected to be realized from a sale of the Company.
Stock Based Compensation
We periodically issue stock options and warrants to employees and non-employees in non-capital raising transactions for services and for financing costs. We account for stock option and warrant grants issued and vesting to employees based on the authoritative guidance provided by Financial Accounting Standards Board (the “FASB”) where the value of the award is measured on the date of grant and recognized as compensation expense on the straight-line basis over the vesting period.
We record stock-based compensation expense according to the provisions of ASC Topic 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation. ASC Topic 718 requires all share-based payments to employees, including grants of employee stock options, to be recognized in the financial statements based on their fair values. Under the provisions of ASC Topic 718, the Company determines the appropriate fair value model to be used for valuing share-based payments and the amortization method for compensation cost.
The fair value of each stock option grant is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The Company estimates the expected volatility and expected option life assumption consistent with ASC Topic 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation. The expected volatility of the Company’s common stock at the date of grant is estimated based on a historic volatility rate and the expected option life is calculated based on historical stock option experience as the best estimate of future exercise patterns. The dividend yield assumption is based on historical and anticipated dividend payouts. The risk-free interest rate assumption is based on observed interest rates consistent with the expected life of each stock option grant. The Company uses historical data to estimate pre-vesting option forfeitures and records stock-based compensation expense only for those awards that are expected to vest. Compensation expense is recorded for all stock options expected to vest based on the amortization of the fair value at the date of grant on a straightline basis primarily over the vesting period of the options.
Additional accounting policies can be found in Note 2 to our Audited Consolidated Financial Statements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted
In December 2019, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes (“ASU 2019-12”). The guidance removes the following exceptions: 1) exception to the incremental approach for intraperiod tax allocation when there is a loss from continuing operations and income or a gain from other items, 2) exception to the requirement to recognize a deferred tax liability for equity method investments when a foreign subsidiary becomes an equity method investment, 3) exception to the ability not to recognize a deferred tax liability for a foreign subsidiary when a foreign equity method investment becomes a subsidiary and 4) exception to the general methodology for calculating income taxes in an interim period when a year-to-date loss exceeds the anticipated loss for the year. Additionally, the guidance simplifies the accounting for income taxes by: 1) requiring that an entity recognize a franchise tax (or similar tax) that is partially based on income as an income-based tax and account for any incremental amount incurred as a non-income-based tax, 2) requiring that an entity evaluate when a step up in the tax basis of goodwill should be considered part of the business combination in which the book goodwill was originally recognized and when it should be considered a separate transaction, 3) specifying that an entity is not required to allocate the consolidated amount of current and deferred tax expense to a legal entity that is not subject to tax in its separate financial statements (although the entity may elect to do so (on an entity-by-entity basis) for a legal entity that is both not subject to tax and disregarded by the taxing authority), 4) requiring that an entity reflect the effect of an enacted change in tax laws or rates in the annual effective tax rate computation in the interim period that includes the enactment date and 5) making minor improvements for income tax accounting related to employee stock ownership plans and investments in qualified affordable housing projects accounted for using the equity method. ASU 2019-12 became effective on January 1, 2021 and is not expected to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
On January 1, 2020, we adopted Accounting Standards Codification Topic 326, Credit Losses (Topic 326). This standard establishes an impairment model (known as the current expected credit loss (“CECL”) model) that is based on expected losses rather than incurred losses. Under the new guidance, we recognize an allowance for our estimate of expected credit losses over the entire contractual term of our receivables from the date of initial recognition of the financial instrument. Measurement of expected credit losses are based on relevant forecasts that affect collectability. Topic 326 applies to trade receivables from certain revenue transactions including receivables from equipment sales, parts and service sales. Under Topic 606 revenue is recognized when, among other criteria, it is probable that the entity will collect the consideration to which it is entitled for goods or services transferred to a customer. At the point that these trade receivables are recorded, they become subject to the CECL model and estimates of expected credit losses over their contractual life are recorded at inception based on historical information, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts. The adoption of Topic 326 did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures or our existing internal controls because accounts receivable are of short duration and there is not a material difference between incurred losses and expected losses.
On January 1, 2020, we adopted ASU No. 2018-13, Fair Value Measurement - Disclosure Framework. ASU 2018-13 modifies the disclosure requirements for fair value measurements. Entities are no longer required to disclose the amount of and reasons for transfers between Level 1 and Level 2 of the fair value hierarchy, but public companies are required to disclose the range and weighted average used to develop significant unobservable inputs for Level 3 fair value measurements. The adoption of ASU 2018-13 did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements and footnotes.