ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Exchange Act relating to future events or our future performance. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes to our financial statements included elsewhere in this report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that relate to future events or our future performance. Although management believes that the assumptions made and expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, we cannot assure that the underlying assumptions will, in fact, prove to be correct or that actual results will not be different from expectations expressed in this report.
Results of Operations
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues were $875,997 for 2020 compared with $964,409 in 2019, a decrease of $88,412, or 9%. The decrease in revenues is primarily attributable to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Our total cost of goods sold decreased to $588,944 in 2020 from $796,947 in 2019, a decrease of $208,003. For both 2020 and 2019, our total cost of goods sold consisted of two line items: cost of goods sold on revenues and a non-cash inventory reserve adjustment. Our cost of goods sold on revenues decreased to $519,527 in 2020 (resulting in adjusted gross margin of 41%) from $554,101 in 2019 (resulting in adjusted gross margin of 42%), a decrease of $34,574. Our non-cash inventory reserve adjustment decreased to $69,417 in 2020 from $242,846 in 2019, a decrease of $173,429. The decrease in the adjusted gross margin between 2020 and 2019 is attributable to product mix.
Our operating expenses for 2020 were $754,267 compared with $867,089 in 2019, a decrease of $112,822, or 13%. General and administrative expense for 2020 was $671,672 compared with $759,606 in 2019. The decrease is due primarily to salaries and wages of $225,485 in 2020 compared with $262,822 in 2019. Major components of general and administrative expenses in 2020 were insurance expense of $97,080, rent expense of $137,616 and salary and wages of $225,485. This compares with insurance expense of $123,102, rent expense of $145,109, and salary and wages of $262,822 during 2019. Research and development outlays were $82,052 in 2020 compared with $106,916 in 2019.
Our net loss in 2020 was $489,712, or $(0.02) per share, compared with a net loss of $720,422, or $(0.04) per share, in 2019. The decreased loss was primarily the result of a decrease in operating expenses combined with a decrease in the inventory reserve adjustment in 2020. Additionally, operating loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $467,214 compared with $699,627 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decreased operating loss was primarily the result of a decrease in the inventory reserve adjustment in 2020.
Results for the year ended December 31, 2020 reflect non-cash expenses, including the value of options and warrants granted in the amount of $15,456, depreciation and amortization of $543 and the inventory reserve adjustment of $69,417. For the year ended December 31, 2019, non-cash expenses included the value of options and warrants granted of $49,786, depreciation and amortization of $567 and the inventory reserve adjustment of $242,846.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash provided by financing activities and available working capital. Additionally, from time to time we may raise funds from the equity capital markets to fund our research and development programs, expansion of our business and general operations.
At December 31, 2020, our current liabilities totaled $1,621,456 and our current assets totaled $961,226, resulting in negative working capital of $660,230.
We have no firm commitments or obligations for capital expenditures. Substantial discretionary expenditures may be required to enable us to conduct product research, development, manufacturing, marketing and distribution activities. We may need to raise additional capital to facilitate growth and support our long-term product development, manufacturing, and marketing programs. The Company has no established bank-financing arrangements, and it is not anticipated that we will secure any bank financing in the near future. Therefore, it is likely that we may need to seek additional financing through subsequent future public or private sales of our securities, including equity securities. We may also seek funding for the development, manufacturing, and marketing of our products through strategic partnerships and other arrangements with corporate partners. There can be no assurance, however, that such collaborative arrangements or additional funds will be available when needed, or on terms acceptable to us, if at all. If adequate funds are not available, we may be required to curtail one or more of our research and development programs.
We have historically incurred significant losses, which have resulted in a total accumulated deficit of $21,465,641 at December 31, 2020, of which $5,604,135 is a direct result of derivative expense and change in fair value of derivative liability and is unrelated to, and has had no effect on, our operations or cash flow. The derivative expense and change in fair value of derivative liability was a one-time charge reflected on the Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2013.
Operating Activities
We realized negative cash flow from operations of $247,507 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with negative cash flow of $83,824 during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Included in the net loss of $489,712 for the year ended December 31, 2020 are non-cash expenses, which are not a drain on our capital resources. During 2020, these non-cash expenses include the value of options and warrants granted in the amount of $15,456, depreciation and amortization of $543 and the inventory reserve adjustment of $69,417.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Accounting Method and Use of Estimates
Omnitek’s financial statements are prepared using the accrual method of accounting. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent
assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Areas where significant estimates are required include the following:
Accounts Receivable
Trade receivables are carried at original invoice amount less an estimate made for doubtful receivables based on a review of all outstanding amounts on a monthly basis. Management determines the allowance for doubtful accounts by identifying troubled accounts and by using historical experience applied to an aging of accounts. Trade receivables are written off when deemed uncollectible. Recoveries of trade receivables previously written off are recorded when received.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market, cost determined on an average cost basis. Market value for raw materials is based on replacement costs. Inventory costs include material, labor and manufacturing overhead. The Company reviews inventories on hand at least annually and records provisions for estimated excess, slow moving and obsolete inventory, as well as inventory with a carrying value in excess of net realizable value. The regular and systematic inventory valuation reviews include a current assessment of future product demand, historical experience and product expiration.
Long-lived assets
Omnitek assesses the recoverability of its long-lived assets annually and whether circumstances would indicate that there may be an impairment. Omnitek compares the estimated undiscounted future cash flows to the carrying value of the long-lived assets to determine if an impairment has occurred. In the event that an impairment has occurred, Omnitek recognizes the impairment immediately.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment are recorded at cost. Depreciation and amortization are calculated on the straight-line method over the shorter of the lease term or the estimated useful lives of the assets ranging from three to five years.
Contract assets and liabilities
The timing of revenue recognition, billings and cash collections results in billed accounts receivable and costs and estimated earnings in excess of billings on uncompleted contracts (contract assets) on the balance sheet. For Omnitek’s long-term contracts, amounts are generally billed as work progresses in accordance with agreed-upon contractual terms, either at periodic intervals or upon achievement of contractual milestones. Generally, billing occurs subsequent to revenue recognition, resulting in contract assets. However, Omnitek sometimes receives advances or deposits from its customers, before revenue is recognized, resulting in billings in excess of costs and estimated earnings on uncompleted contracts (contract liabilities).
Income Taxes
Omnitek accounts for income taxes in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification Topic 740, which requires the recognition of deferred tax liabilities and assets at currently enacted tax rates for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements or tax returns. A valuation allowance is recognized to reduce the net deferred tax asset to an amount that is more likely than not to be realized. Omnitek uses historical experience to determine the likelihood of realization of deferred tax liabilities and assets.
Revenue Recognition
In general, revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for the goods or services. In order to achieve that core principle, a five-step approach is applied: (1) identify the contract with a customer, (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (3) determine the transaction price, (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract, and (5) recognize revenue allocated to each performance obligation when we satisfy the performance obligation. A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer and is the unit of account for revenue recognition.
We recognize revenue on various products and services as follows:
Products - The Company recognizes revenue from the sale of products (e.g., filters and engine components) as performance obligations are satisfied. This type of revenue is primarily generated from the sale of finished product to customers. Those sales predominantly contain a single delivery element and revenue is recognized at a single point in time when ownership, risks and rewards transfer (i.e., the performance obligation has been satisfied). Control passes FOB shipping point.
Contracts - Revenues are recognized as performance obligations are satisfied over time (also known as percentage-of-completion method), measured by either achievement of milestones or the ratio of costs incurred up to a given date to estimated total costs for each contract. Contract costs include all direct material, labor, subcontract and other costs. Provisions for estimated losses on uncompleted contracts are made in the period in which such losses are determined. Changes in job performance, job conditions, estimated profitability and associated change orders and claims, including those changes arising from contract penalty provisions and final contract settlements, may result in revisions to costs and income and are recognized in the period in which the revisions are determined.
Performance Obligations
A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to a customer and is the unit of account in the new revenue standard. The contract transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance obligation and recognized as revenue when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied. The majority of Omnitek’s contracts have a single performance obligation as the promise to transfer the individual goods or services is not separately identifiable from other promises in the contracts and, therefore, not distinct.
Performance Obligations Satisfied Over Time
Revenues for Omnitek’s long-term contracts that satisfy the criteria for over time recognition (formerly known as percentage-of-completion method) is recognized as the work progresses. The majority of the revenue is derived from long-term engine development agreements that typically span between 12 to 24 months. Omnitek’s long-term contracts will continue to be recognized over time because our typical contract is for a customized asset with no alternative use and generally the Company has a right to payment for work completed to date. Under the new revenue standard, the cost-to-cost measure of progress continues to best depict the transfer of control of assets to the customer, which occurs as the Company incurs costs. Contract costs include labor and material. Revenue from products and services transferred to customers over time accounted for 0% and 5% of revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Performance Obligations Satisfied at a Point in Time
Revenue from product sales is recognized at a point in time. These sales predominantly contain a single delivery element and revenue is recognized at a single point in time when ownership, risk and rewards transfer Upon fulfilment of the performance obligation, the customer is provided an invoice demonstrating transfer of control to the customer. Revenue from goods and services transferred to customers at a point in time accounted for 100% and 95% of revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Assurance-type warranties are the only warranties provided by the Company and, as such, Omnitek does not recognize revenue on warranty-related work. Omnitek generally provides a one-year warranty for products that it sells. Warranty claims historically have been insignificant.
Pre-contract costs are generally not incurred by the Company.
Contract Estimates
Accounting for long-term contracts involves the use of various techniques to estimate total contract revenue and costs. For long-term contracts, Omnitek estimates the profit on a contract as the difference between the total estimated revenue and expected costs to complete a contract and recognizes that profit over the life of the contract.
Variable Consideration
The transaction price for contracts may include variable consideration, which includes increases to transaction price for approved and unapproved change orders, claims and incentives, and reductions to transaction price for liquidated damages. Variable consideration historically has been insignificant.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
The Company has evaluated recent accounting pronouncements and their adoption has not had or is expected to have a material impact on the Company’s financial position, or statements.