Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations of the Company together with our financial statements and the related notes included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Forward Looking Statements
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in this MD&A includes “forward-looking statements.” Statements which are not historical reflect our current expectations and projections about our future results, performance, liquidity, financial condition and results of operations, prospects and opportunities and are based upon information currently available to us and our management and their interpretation of what is believed to be significant factors affecting our existing and proposed business, including many assumptions regarding future events. Actual results, performance, liquidity, financial condition and results of operations, prospects and opportunities could differ materially and perhaps substantially from those expressed in, or implied by, these forward-looking statements as a result of various risks, uncertainties and other factors, including those risks described in detail in the section entitled “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Forward-looking statements, which involve assumptions and describe our future plans, strategies, and expectations, are generally identifiable by use of the words “may,” “should,” “would,” “will,” “could,” “scheduled,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “believe,” “intend,” “seek,” or “project” or the negative of these words or other variations on these words or comparable terminology.
In light of these risks and uncertainties, and especially given the nature of our existing and proposed business, there can be no assurance that the forward-looking statements contained in this section and elsewhere in this circular will in fact occur. Potential investors should not place undue reliance on any forward-looking statements. Except as expressly required by the federal securities laws, there is no undertaking to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events, changed circumstances or any other reason.
Overview
On April 17, 2020, we entered into the Exchange Agreement with Omnia Corp. and the beneficial stockholders of Omnia Corp. to acquire 100% of the issued and outstanding shares of capital stock of Omnia Corp. The transactions contemplated by the Exchange Agreement were consummated on January 5, 2021 and, pursuant to the terms of the Exchange Agreement, among other things, all outstanding Omnia Corp. Shares were exchanged for shares of our common stock, par value $0.001 per share, based on the exchange ratio of one share of our common stock for every one Omnia Corp. Share. Accordingly, we acquired 100% of Omnia Corp. in exchange for the issuance of 10,000,000 shares of our common stock and Omnia Corp. became our wholly-owned subsidiary. As of the Closing, Mr. Amer Samad, formerly our sole director and executive officer, agreed to cancel 52,656,888 (pre-stock split) shares of our common stock owned beneficially and of record by him as part of the conditions to Closing, which were cancelled immediately after the Closing. The Company also issued an aggregate of 1,269,665 shares of common stock on January 5, 2021 as a result of the conversion in accordance with their terms of outstanding convertible promissory notes in the aggregate principal amount of approximately $539,000.
As of immediately prior to the closing of the Acquisition, we entered into an Assignment and Assumption Agreement with RZI Consulting LLC (the “Assignment Agreement”), pursuant to which RZI Consulting LLC assumed substantially all of our remaining assets and liabilities through the closing of the Acquisition. Accordingly, as of the closing of the Acquisition, we had no assets or liabilities (other than relating to general and administrative expenses).
Our sole business is the business of Omnia Corp. Our management’s discussion and analysis below is based on the financial results of the combined company for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020. Except as otherwise indicated herein, all share and per share information in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” section gives retroactive effect to the exchange of Omnia Corp. Shares for shares of our common stock in the Acquisition. The following discussion and analysis provides information which we believe to be relevant to an assessment and understanding of the results of operations and financial condition of the Company.
We develop and market products for wellness and physical therapy markets, using patented dry-hydro therapy equipment that the Company plans to offer and sell in medical and fitness markets.
Significant Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations are based upon the financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of any contingent liabilities at the financial statement date and reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. On an on-going basis we review our estimates and assumptions. The estimates were based on historical experience and other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results are likely to differ from those estimates under different assumptions or conditions, but we do not believe such differences will materially affect our financial position or results of operations.
Results of Operations
We have incurred recurring losses to date. Our financial statements have been prepared assuming that we will continue as a going concern and, accordingly, do not include adjustments relating to the recoverability and realization of assets and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue in operation.
We expect we will require additional capital to meet our long-term operating requirements. We expect to raise additional capital through, among other things, the sale of equity or debt securities.
Fiscal Year Ended March 31, 2021 Compared to the Fiscal Year Ended March 31, 2020
Revenues
Total revenue was $218,874 for the year ended March 31, 2021, compared to $-0- for the year ended March 31, 2020. The increased revenue during 2021 is due to a targeted marketing program to gyms and medical facilities.
Cost of Goods Sold
Total cost of goods sold was $120,253 for the year ended March 31, 2021, compared to $-0- for the year ended March 31, 2020. The increase in cost of goods sold in 2020 was mainly due to the Company reviewing the value of obsolete items in inventory in 2020 and writing this down by charging to cost of goods sold.
Operating expenses
Total operating expenses was $1,722,161 for the year ended March 31, 2021, compared to $33,680 for the year ended March 31, 2020. There was increased depreciation and amortization, legal and professional fees, payroll expenses and general and administrative expenses in 2021 as Omnia Corp. continued to build its business, offset by lower selling and marketing expenses, related party, consulting fees, related party and impairment expense as compared to 2020 in 2021.
Interest expenses
Interest expense was $611,536 for the year ended March 31, 2021, compared to $-0- for the year ended March 31, 2020. The increase in interest expense is due to the issuance of additional promissory notes to investors in 2021.
Net Loss
The net loss for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 was $(2,235,075), resulting in loss per share of $(0.17), compared to net loss for the period ending March 31, 2020 of $(33,680) resulting in loss per share of $(0.00).
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have historically funded operations through the issuance of loans, evidenced by convertible and non-convertible promissory notes. Since inception, we have raised an aggregate of $6,231,000 through the sale of such promissory notes, of which approximately $4,746,000 principal amount remains outstanding and either is currently due and continuing to accrue default interest, or will be due in 2021. Additionally, in 2020 we received funding of $294,066 pursuant to the federal Paycheck Protection Program under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (CARES) Act, all of which was forgiven in May 2021.
Based on our current burn rate, we need to raise additional capital in the short term to fund operations and meet expected future liquidity requirements, as well as to repay our remaining existing total indebtedness of approximately $5,570,294, if not converted to equity, or we will be required to curtail or terminate some or all of our product lines or our operations. We are continuously in discussions to raise additional capital, which may include or be a combination of convertible or term loans and equity which, if successful, will enable us to continue operations based on our current burn rate, for the next 12 months; however, we cannot give any assurance at this time that we will successfully raise all or some of such capital or any other capital. Furthermore, at this time, we do not have an established source of funds sufficient to cover operating costs after May 2021. Funds raised, if any, during 2021, are anticipated to fund not just repayment of existing obligations, but our ongoing operations including validating the business model for Relaxation Centers, hiring additional personnel, and expanding the revenue share model with additional facilities.
We do not currently have available funds to repay currently-due liabilities of approximately $4,296,812 or to repay indebtedness that is expected to become due in 2021, and are exploring refinancing, extending the maturity date and/or converting some or all of such indebtedness into equity.
There can be no assurance that necessary debt or equity financing will be available, or will be available on terms acceptable to us, in which case we may be unable to meet our obligations or fully implement our business plan, if at all. These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The accompanying condensed consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on recoverability and reclassification of assets or the amounts and classification of liabilities that may result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Additionally, we will need additional funds to respond to business opportunities including potential acquisitions of complementary technologies, protect our intellectual property, develop new lines of business, and enhance our operating infrastructure. While we may need to seek additional funding for any such purposes, we may not be able to obtain financing on acceptable terms, or at all. In addition, the terms of our financings may be dilutive to, or otherwise adversely affect, holders of our common stock. However, the recent COVID-19 pandemic has presented unprecedented challenges to businesses and the investing landscape around the world. Therefore, there can be no assurance that management’s plans will be successful. We may not be able to negotiate any such arrangements on acceptable terms, if at all. If we are unable to obtain additional funding on a timely basis, we may be required to curtail or terminate some or all of our product lines or our operations.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and actions taken to slow its spread, the global credit and financial markets have experienced extreme volatility, including diminished liquidity and credit availability, declines in consumer confidence, declines in economic growth, increases in unemployment rates and uncertainty about economic stability. There can be no assurance that further deterioration in credit and financial markets and confidence in economic conditions will not occur. If equity and credit markets deteriorate, it may make any necessary debt or equity financing more difficult to obtain, more costly and/or more dilutive. Any of these actions could materially harm our business, results of operations and future prospects.
Going Concern
The Company is commencing operations to generate sufficient revenue; however, the Company’s cash position is not currently and, in the future, may not be sufficient to support the Company’s daily operations. Management intends to raise additional funds by way of a private or public offering but can give no assurance of success. While the Company believes in the viability of its strategy to commence operations and generate sufficient revenue and in its ability to raise additional funds, there can be no assurances to that effect. The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent upon the Company’s ability to further implement its business plan and generate sufficient revenue and its ability to raise additional funds by way of private offering. The financial statements do not include any adjustments related to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts or the amounts and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We had no off-balance sheet transactions.