ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Conditions and Results of Operations and other portions of this report contain forward-looking information that involves risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated by the forward-looking information. Factors that may cause such differences include, but are not limited to, availability and cost of financial resources, product demand, market acceptance and other factors discussed in this report under the heading “Risk Factors”. This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this report.
Overview
We are a late-stage immuno-oncology company focused on designing, developing and commercializing innovative, proprietary, intra-tumoral DNA-based therapeutics to stimulate and to augment anti-tumor immune responses for the treatment of cancers. Our core technology platform ImmunoPulse® is a drug-device therapeutic modality platform comprised of proprietary intratumoral electroporation (“EP”) delivery devices (the “OncoSec Medical System (“OMS”) Electroporation Device” or “OMS EP Device”) and a proprietary DNA plasmid that triggers transient expression of target protein in cells. The OMS EP Device is designed to deliver plasmid DNA-encoded drugs directly into a solid tumor and promote an immunological response against cancer. The OMS EP Device can be adapted to treat different tumor types, and consists of an electrical pulse generator, a reusable handle and disposable applicators. Our lead product candidate is a DNA-encoded interleukin-12 (“IL-12”) called tavokinogene telseplasmid (“TAVO”). The OMS EP Device is used to deliver TAVO intratumorally, with the aim of reversing the immunosuppressive microenvironment in the treated tumor. The activation of the appropriate inflammatory response can drive a systemic anti-tumor response against untreated tumors in other parts of the body. In 2017, we received Fast Track Designation and Orphan Drug Designation from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for TAVO in metastatic melanoma, which could qualify TAVO for expedited FDA review, a rolling Biologics License Application review and certain other benefits.
Our current focus is to pursue our study of TAVO in combination with KEYTRUDA® (pembrolizumab) in melanoma and triple negative breast cancer.
Performance Outlook
We expect to use our available working capital in the near term primarily for the advancement of our existing and planned clinical programs, including performance of the KEYNOTE-695 and KEYNOTE-890 studies and, to a lesser extent, the continuation of our other clinical trials and studies. We anticipate our spending on clinical programs and the development of our next-generation OMS EP Device will continue throughout our current fiscal year, primarily in support of the KEYNOTE-695 and KEYNOTE-890 studies, while our spending on research and development programs will be prioritized, based on our focus on the KEYNOTE-695 and KEYNOTE-890 studies. We expect our cash-based general and administrative expenses to remain relatively flat in the near term, as we seek to continue to leverage internal resources and automate processes to decrease our outside services expenses. See “Results of Operations” below for more information.
Our operational and financial performance have already been affected by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Our clinical trials have experienced delays in patient enrollment, potentially due to prioritization of hospital resources toward the COVID-19 pandemic or concerns among patients about participating in clinical trials during a public health emergency. The COVID-19 pandemic is also affecting the operations of government entities, such as the FDA, as well as contract research organizations, third-party manufacturers, and other third-parties upon whom we rely. The extent of the impact on our operations cannot be ascertained at this time.
Results of Operations for the Year Ended July 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended July 31, 2020
The financial data for the years ended July 31, 2021 and July 31, 2020 is presented in the following table and the results of these two periods are included in the discussion thereafter.
Revenue
We have not generated any revenue since our inception, and we do not anticipate generating meaningful revenue in the near term.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses increased by approximately $9.0 million, from $25.1 million during the year ended July 31, 2020 to $34.1 million during the year ended July 31, 2021. This increase was primarily due to the following approximate increases: (i) $5.4 million in clinical trial-related costs to support our various clinical studies and costs for discovery research and product development (ii) $2.2 million increase in payroll and related benefits expenses, primarily due to additional headcount and merit increases, and (iii) $1.2 million increases in stock-based compensation expense for employees and consultants.
General and Administrative
Our general and administrative expenses decreased by approximately $4.0 million, from $18.3 million during the year ended July 31, 2020, to $14.3 million during the year ended July 31, 2021. This decrease was largely due to the following: (i) $5.3 million decrease in legal costs primarily related to the Alpha Holdings litigation and the contested proxy in prior year and $1.0 million in insurance recoveries from the Alpha Holdings litigation in the current period; (ii) $1.0 million in consulting costs, primarily related to business development and public relations in the prior period and (iii) $0.9 million in proxy costs related to the Company’s special meeting to approve the CGP transaction in the prior period. The decrease was offset by a $2.0 million increase in payroll and related benefits expenses primarily due to a severance payment of $1,795,500 to the former CEO of the Company.
Gain on Extinguishment of Debt
Gain on Extinguishment of Debt increased by approximately $1.0 million from $0 for the year ended July 31, 2020 to $1.0 million for the year ended July 31, 2021. During the year ended July 31, 2021, the PPP loan was forgiven, which resulted in a gain on extinguishment of debt of approximately $1.0 million.
Other (Loss) Income, Net
Other (loss) income, net, decreased by approximately $0.2 million from $0.2 million other income for the year ended July 31, 2020 to $0.01 million other loss for the year ended July 31, 2021. This decrease was primarily due to reduced interest income as a result of a lower return on our investments during the current period.
Foreign Currency Exchange Gain/(Loss), Net
Foreign currency exchange gain/(loss), net, decreased by approximately $0.2 million from a gain of $0.1 million for the year ended July 31, 2020 to a loss of $0.1 million for the year ended July 31, 2021. The decrease was primarily due to unrealized foreign currency transaction losses recognized in connection with the Australian subsidiary’s intercompany loan.
Income Tax expense (benefit)
In June 2021, the Company received $2.4 million in net proceeds from the sale of its New Jersey Net Operating Losses (“NOL”) under the State of New Jersey NOL Transfer Program. In May 2020, the Company received $0.9 million in net proceeds from the sale of its New Jersey Net Operating Losses under the State of New Jersey NOL Transfer Program.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Working Capital
The following table and subsequent discussion summarize our working capital as of each of the periods presented:
Current Assets
Current assets as of July 31, 2021 increased by $26.4 million to $49.2 million, from $22.8 million as of July 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to the $52.6 million net proceeds received from the August 2020 and January 2021 offerings, $5.0 million received from the co-promotion agreement with Sirtex, $5.4 million received from warrant and option exercises and $5.8 million from the purchase of shares under the CGP and Sirtex stock purchase agreements originally entered into on October 10, 2019. The increase was partially offset by cash used to support our operations during the year ended July 31, 2021.
Current Liabilities
Current liabilities as of July 31, 2021 decreased by $1.7 million to $8.0 million, from $9.7 million as of July 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily due to a decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses pertaining to our legal costs and our manufacturing and clinical research activities. In addition, the PPP loan was forgiven.
Cash Flow
Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended July 31, 2021 was $41.8 million, as compared to $33.1 million for the year ended July 31, 2020. The $8.7 million increase in cash used in operating activities was primarily attributable to an increase in cash used to support our operating activities, including but not limited to, our clinical trials, an increase in R&D activities and general working capital requirements.
Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for year ended July 31, 2021 was $0.8 million, as compared to $0 for the year ended July 31, 2020. During the year ended July 31, 2021, the Company licensed generator technology and purchased property and equipment for use in its clinical trials and other research and development efforts.
Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $68.2 million for the year ended July 31, 2021, as compared to $28.4 million provided by financing activities for the year ended July 31, 2020. Net proceeds during the year ended July 31, 2021 was primarily attributable to the $52.6 million net proceeds received from the August 2020 and January 2021 offerings, $5.0 million received from the co-promotion agreement with Sirtex, $5.4 million received from warrant and option exercises and $5.8 million from the purchase of shares under the CGP and Sirtex stock purchase agreements originally entered into on October 10, 2019 (see “Sources of Capital” below). Net proceeds during the year ended July 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to the $28.0 million received from the CGP and Sirtex offering (see “Sources of Capital” below).
Uses of Cash and Cash Requirements
Our primary uses of cash have been to finance clinical and research and development activities focused on the identification and discovery of new potential product candidates, the development of innovative and proprietary medical approaches for the treatment of cancer, and the design and advancement of pre-clinical and clinical trials and studies related to our pipeline of product candidates. We have also used our capital resources on general and administrative activities and building and strengthening our corporate infrastructure, programs and procedures to enable compliance with applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations.
Our primary objectives for the next 12 months are to continue the advancement of our KEYNOTE-695 and KEYNOTE-890 studies and, to a lesser extent, our other ongoing clinical trials and studies, and to continue our research and development activities for our next-generation EP device and drug discovery efforts. In addition, we expect to pursue capital-raising transactions, which could include equity or debt financings, in the near term to fund our existing and planned operations and acquire and develop additional assets and technology consistent with our business objectives as opportunities arise.
Going Concern and Management’s Plans
The Company has sustained losses in all reporting periods since inception, with an accumulated deficit of approximately $252 million as of July 31, 2021. These losses are expected to continue for an extended period of time. Further, the Company has never generated any cash from its operations and does not expect to generate such cash in the near term. The aforementioned factors raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern within one year from the issuance date of the consolidated financial statements. The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of asset amounts or the classification of liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern within one year after the date the consolidated financial statements are issued.
As of October 12, 2021, the Company had cash and cash equivalents of $37.5 million. Since inception, cash flows from financing activities has been the primary source of the Company’s liquidity. Based on its current cash levels, the Company believes its cash resources are insufficient to meet the Company’s anticipated needs for the 12 months following the date the consolidated financial statements are issued.
The Company recognizes it will need to raise additional capital to continue operating its business and fund its planned operations, including research and development, clinical trials and, if regulatory approval is obtained, commercialization of its product candidates. In addition, the Company will require additional financing if it desires to in-license or acquire new assets, research and develop new compounds or new technologies and pursue related patent protection, or obtain any other intellectual property rights or other assets. There is no assurance that additional financing will be available to the Company when needed, that management will be able to obtain financing on terms acceptable to the Company, or whether the Company will become profitable and generate positive operating cash flow. The source, timing and availability of any future financing will depend principally upon market conditions, and, more specifically, on the progress of our clinical development programs. The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has also caused volatility in the global financial markets and threatened a slowdown in the global economy, which may negatively affect our ability to raise additional capital on attractive terms or at all. If the Company is unable to raise sufficient additional funds when needed, on favorable terms or at all, the Company will not be able to continue the development of its product candidates as currently planned or at all, will need to reevaluate its planned operations and may need to delay, scale back or eliminate some or all of its development programs, reduce expenses or cease operations, any of which would have a significant negative impact on its prospects and financial condition.
Sources of Capital
We have not generated any revenue since our inception, and we do not anticipate generating meaningful revenue in the near term. Historically, we have raised the majority of the funding for our business through offerings of our common stock and warrants to purchase our common stock. If we issue equity or convertible debt securities to raise additional funds, our existing stockholders would experience further dilution, and the new equity or debt securities may have rights, preferences and privileges senior to those of our existing stockholders. If we incur debt, our fixed payment obligations, liabilities and leverage relative to our equity capitalization would increase, which could increase the cost of future capital. Further, the terms of any debt securities we issue or borrowings we incur, if available, could impose significant restrictions on our operations, such as limitations on our ability to incur additional debt or issue additional equity or other operating restrictions that could adversely affect our ability to conduct our business, and any such debt could be secured by any or all of our assets pledged as collateral. Additionally, we may incur substantial costs in pursuing future capital, including investment banking, legal and accounting fees, printing and distribution expenses and other costs.
Public Offering
On January 25, 2021, the Company completed the offer and sale of an aggregate of 7,711,284 shares of its common stock at a purchase price of $5.45 per share in a public offering. The gross proceeds from the offering were approximately $42.0 million, and the net proceeds, after deducting the placement agent’s fee and other offering fees and expenses paid by the Company, were approximately $39.1 million. In connection with the offering, the Company paid the placement agent and other financial advisors an aggregate cash fee equal to 6.0% of the gross proceeds of the offering, as well as legal and other expenses equal to approximately $0.4 million.
Registered Direct Offering
On August 19, 2020, the Company completed the offer and sale of an aggregate of 4,608,589 shares of its common stock at a purchase price of $3.25 per share in a registered direct offering. The gross proceeds of the offering were approximately $15.0 million, and the net proceeds, after deducting the placement agent’s fee and other offering fees and expenses paid by the Company, were approximately $13.5 million. In connection with the offering, the Company paid the placement agent and other financial advisors an aggregate cash fee equal to 8.0% of the gross proceeds of the offering, as well as legal and other expenses equal to approximately $0.3 million.
Common Stock Option Exercise
During the year ended July 31, 2021, shares of common stock issued related to option exercises totaled 377,361. The Company realized proceeds of approximately $0.6 million from the stock option exercises.
Common Stock Warrant Exercise
During the year ended July 31, 2021, shares of common stock issued related to warrant exercises totaled 1,389,261. The Company realized proceeds of approximately $4.8 million from the warrant exercises.
Sale of New Jersey Net Operating Losses (NOLs)
In June 2021, the Company received $2.4 million in net proceeds from the sale of its New Jersey NOL under the State of New Jersey NOL Transfer Program for the period ended July 31, 2020. In May 2020, the Company received $0.9 million in net proceeds from the sale of its New Jersey NOL under the State of New Jersey NOL Transfer Program for the period ended July 31, 2019.
Small Business Administration Loan
On April 27, 2020, the Company was granted a loan from the Banc of California in the aggregate amount of $952,744, pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program under the CARES Act, which was enacted March 27, 2020. The term of the loan is two years. Monthly payments will be due beginning August 15, 2021 if the Loan is not forgiven. Interest accrues at 1% per year, effective on the date of initial disbursement. The Company submitted its application for full loan forgiveness on January 6, 2021.
On February 12, 2021, the Company received notice that the full Loan amount of $952,744 and $8,046 of accrued interest had been forgiven.
CGP and Sirtex
On February 7, 2020, the Company closed a strategic transaction with CGP and its affiliate, Sirtex. On October 10, 2019, the Company, CGP and Sirtex entered into Stock Purchase Agreements, as amended, pursuant to which the Company agreed to sell and issue to CGP and Sirtex 10,000,000 shares and 2,000,000 shares, respectively, of the Company’s common stock for an aggregate purchase price of $30.0 million. The net proceeds, after deducting offering fees and expenses paid by us, were approximately $28.0 million.
In January 2021, the Company entered into a co-promotion agreement with Sirtex, pursuant to which the Company granted Sirtex the option to co-promote TAVO for the treatment of anti-PD-1 refractory locally advanced or metastatic melanoma in the U.S., including its territories and possessions. In consideration for the option, the Company received an upfront, non-refundable payment of $5.0 million from Sirtex.
During the year ended July 31, 2021, shares of common stock issued to third party investors related to warrant exercises totaled 1,389,261. On April 16, 2021, in accordance with their respective stock purchase agreements originally entered into on October 10, 2019, CGP and Sirtex, related parties of the Company, exercised their rights to purchase additional shares of common stock at a purchase price equal to the same exercise price paid by each warrant holder in order to maintain their respective ownership percentages of the outstanding shares of common stock of the Company as of October 10, 2019. These significant related party relationships are based on Sirtex’s approximate 8% ownership of the outstanding shares of the Company’s common stock, and that of its significant equity holder, CGP (which owns 49% of Sirtex), which owns approximately 42% of the outstanding shares of the Company’s common stock. The Company issued 1,409,838 shares of common stock to CGP at an exercise price of $3.45 per share, resulting in gross proceeds of approximately $4.8 million. The Company issued 281,968 shares of common stock to Sirtex at an exercise price of $3.45 per share, resulting in gross proceeds of approximately $1.0 million.
Critical Accounting Policies
Use of Estimates
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”), which requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. Such estimates include going concern, stock-based compensation, the accrual of research, product development and clinical obligations, impairment of long-lived assets, determining the Incremental Borrowing Rate for calculating Right-Of-Use (“ROU”) assets and lease liabilities and accounting for income taxes, including the related valuation allowance on the deferred tax asset and uncertain tax positions. The Company bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that it believes are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. On an ongoing basis, the Company reviews its estimates to ensure that they appropriately reflect changes in the business or as new information becomes available. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
The Company periodically assesses the carrying value of intangible and other long-lived assets, and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset might not be recoverable. The assets are considered to be impaired if the Company determines that the carrying value may not be recoverable based upon its assessment, which includes consideration of the following events or changes in circumstances:
● the asset’s ability to continue to generate income from operations and positive cash flow in future periods;
● loss of legal ownership or title to the asset(s);
● significant changes in the Company’s strategic business objectives and utilization of the asset(s); and
● the impact of significant negative industry or economic trends.
If the assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment recognized is the amount by which the carrying value of the assets exceeds the fair value of the assets. Fair value is determined by the application of discounted cash flow models to project cash flows from the assets. In addition, the Company bases estimates of the useful lives and related amortization or depreciation expense on its subjective estimate of the period the assets will generate revenue or otherwise be used by it. Assets to be disposed of are reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value, less selling costs. The Company also periodically reviews the lives assigned to long-lived assets to ensure that the initial estimates do not exceed any revised estimated periods from which the Company expects to realize cash flows from its assets.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist of costs incurred for internal projects, as well as partner-funded collaborative research and development activities. These costs include direct and research-related overhead expenses, which include salaries, stock-based compensation and other personnel-related expenses, facility costs, supplies, depreciation of facilities and laboratory equipment, as well as research consultants and the cost of funding research at universities and other research institutions, and are expensed as incurred. Costs to acquire technologies that are utilized in research and development that have no alternative future use, are expensed when incurred. In accordance with ASC 730-20, the Company accounts for upfront, non-refundable research and development payments received from a related party as a long-term liability as there has not been a substantive and genuine transfer of risk and there is a presumption that the Company is obligated to repay the related party.
Accruals for Research and Development Expenses and Clinical Trials
The Company is required to estimate its expenses resulting from its obligations under contracts with vendors, clinical research organizations and consultants and under clinical site agreements in connection with conducting clinical trials. The financial terms of these contracts vary from contract to contract and may result in payment terms that do not match the periods over which materials or services are provided under such contracts. The Company accounts for these expenses in its financial statements by matching those expenses with the period in which services are performed and efforts are expended. The Company determines accrual estimates through financial models and takes into account discussion with applicable personnel and outside service providers as to the progress of clinical trials, or the services completed. The Company makes estimates of its accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date based on the facts and circumstances known to it at that time. The Company’s clinical trial accruals are dependent upon the timely and accurate reporting of contract research organizations and other third-party vendors. During the course of a clinical trial, the Company adjusts its clinical expense recognition if actual results differ from its estimates.
Equity-Based Awards
The Company grants equity-based awards (typically stock options or restricted stock units) under our stock-based compensation plan and outside of our stock-based compensation plan, with terms generally similar to the terms under our stock-based compensation plan. The Company estimates the fair value of stock option awards using the Black-Scholes option valuation model. For employees, directors and consultants, the fair value of the award is measured on the grant date. The fair value amount is then recognized over the period during which services are required to be provided in exchange for the award, usually the vesting period. The Black-Scholes option valuation model requires the input of subjective assumptions, including price volatility of the underlying stock, risk-free interest rate, dividend yield, and expected life of the option. The Company estimates the fair value of restricted stock unit awards based on the closing price of the Company’s common stock on the date of issuance.
Australia Research and Development Tax Credit
Our Australian, wholly-owned, subsidiary incurs research and development expenses, primarily in the course of conducting clinical trials. The Australian research and development activities qualify for the Australian government’s tax credit program, which provides a 43.5% credit for qualifying research and development expenses. The tax credit does not depend on our generation of future taxable income or ongoing tax status or position. Accordingly, the credit is not considered an element of income tax accounting under ASC 740 and is recorded against qualifying research and development expenses in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations.
Leases
The Company determines if an arrangement is a lease at inception. Operating lease right of use (“ROU”) assets represent the Company’s right to use an underlying asset during the lease term, and operating lease liabilities represent the Company’s obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Operating leases are included in ROU assets, current operating lease liabilities, and long-term operating lease liabilities on the Company’s consolidated balance sheets.
Lease ROU assets and lease liabilities are initially recognized based on the present value of the future minimum lease payments over the lease term at commencement date calculated using our incremental borrowing rate applicable to the lease asset, unless the implicit rate is readily determinable. ROU assets also include any lease payments made at or before lease commencement and exclude any lease incentives received. The Company’s lease terms may include options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain that the Company will exercise that option. Leases with a term of 12 months or less are not recognized on the consolidated balance sheet. The Company’s leases do not contain any residual value guarantees. Lease expense for minimum lease payments is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. The Company accounts for lease and non-lease components as a single lease component for all its leases.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Information regarding recent accounting pronouncements is contained in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in this report.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We are not party to any off-balance sheet transactions. We have no guarantees or obligations other than those which arise out of normal business operations.