Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and future financial performance, includes forward-looking statements that are based upon current beliefs, plans and expectations and involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. You should review the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report for a discussion of important factors that could cause our actual results and the timing of selected events to differ materially from those described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. Please also see the section within Part I of this Annual Report entitled “Forward-Looking Statements.”
Unless otherwise indicated or as the context otherwise requires, the historical financial information included in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is that of Private Oncternal prior to the Merger because Private Oncternal was deemed to be the accounting acquirer in the Merger for financial reporting purposes.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on the development of novel oncology therapies for cancers with critical unmet medical need. Our development efforts are focused on promising, yet untapped, biological pathways implicated in cancer generation or progression. Our pipeline includes cirmtuzumab, an investigational monoclonal antibody that is designed to inhibit Receptor tyrosine kinase-like Orphan Receptor 1, or ROR1, a growth factor receptor that is widely expressed on many tumors and that activates pathways leading to increased tumor proliferation, invasiveness and drug resistance. Cirmtuzumab is being evaluated in a Phase 1/2 clinical trial in combination with ibrutinib (Imbruvica®) (Cirmtuzumab and Ibrutinib targeting ROR1 for Leukemia and Lymphoma, or CIRLL), for the treatment of patients with B-cell lymphoid malignancies, including mantle cell lymphoma, or MCL, and chronic lymphocytic leukemia, or CLL, and in an investigator-sponsored, Phase 1b clinical trial in combination with paclitaxel for the treatment of women with HER2-negative metastatic or locally advanced, unresectable breast cancer. We are developing a chimeric antigen receptor T cell, or CAR-T, therapy candidate that targets ROR1, which is currently in preclinical development as a potential treatment for hematologic cancers and solid tumors. In addition, we are developing TK216, an investigational small molecule that is designed to inhibit the ETS, or E26 Transformation Specific, family of oncoproteins, which have been shown in preclinical studies to alter gene transcription and RNA processing and lead to increased cell proliferation and invasion. TK216 is being evaluated in a Phase 1 clinical trial as a single agent and in combination with vincristine in patients with relapsed or refractory Ewing sarcoma, a rare pediatric cancer.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, has granted orphan drug designations for cirmtuzumab for the treatment of MCL and for the treatment of CLL/small lymphocytic lymphoma, and has granted rare pediatric disease designation, as well as orphan drug and fast track designations for TK216 for the treatment of Ewing Sarcoma.
In June 2020, we announced an updated clinical strategy for cirmtuzumab that prioritizes development in MCL, based on encouraging interim clinical results from the CIRLL Phase 1/2 clinical trial that were presented at the ASCO 2020 annual meeting. As a result, we amended the CIRLL study to increase the number of patients with relapsed/refractory MCL to be enrolled in the Phase 2 expansion cohort to at least 20 patients and to allow the enrollment of patients with a broader range of prior BTK inhibitor treatments. In addition, we limited the total enrollment of CLL patients in the randomized Phase 2 CLL cohort of the CIRLL study to 28 patients, in order to focus resources on the MCL portion of the study. In September 2020, we met with the FDA and are in dialogue with the FDA regarding potential accelerated approval pathways for cirmtuzumab plus ibrutinib in patients with relapsed/refractory MCL. Additionally, we are supporting a new, investigator-sponsored Phase 2 clinical trial of cirmtuzumab in combination with venetoclax, a Bcl-2 inhibitor, in patients with relapsed/refractory CLL in collaboration with the UC San Diego School of Medicine, or UC San Diego.
Since Private Oncternal’s inception in 2013, we have devoted most of our resources to organizing and staffing, business planning, raising capital, acquiring product candidates and securing related intellectual property rights and advancing our cirmtuzumab and TK216 clinical development programs. Under research subaward agreements between us and UC San Diego, we are eligible to receive approximately $14.0 million in development milestones throughout the award project period, estimated to be from October 1, 2017 to March 31, 2022. Through December 31, 2020, we have funded our operations primarily through: (i) gross proceeds of $125.0 million from the issuance of common stock, (ii) gross proceeds of $49.0 million from the issuance of convertible preferred stock, (iii) receipt of $11.6 million in subaward grant payments received from UC San Diego, and (iv) cash proceeds of $18.3 million received in connection with the closing of the Merger described in Part I, Item 1, “Merger” of this Annual Report. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $116.7 million.
We have incurred net losses in each year since inception. Our ability to generate product revenue sufficient to achieve profitability will depend heavily on the successful development and eventual commercialization of one or more of our current or future product candidates. Our net losses were $17.2 million and $34.2 million (including $18.1 million related to nonrecurring merger costs) for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $82.8 million. Substantially all of our net losses have resulted from costs incurred in connection with: (i) advancing our research and development programs, (ii) general and administrative costs associated with our operations, including the costs associated with operating as a public company, and (iii) in-process research and development costs associated with the Merger. We expect to continue to incur significant and increasing operating losses for at least the next several years. We expect that our expenses and capital funding requirements will increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly if and as we:
•
advance cirmtuzumab through clinical development in multiple indications, with a primary focus in MCL;
•
generate clinical proof-of-concept data with TK216 in Ewing sarcoma, an orphan pediatric cancer indication;
•
advance our ROR1-targeting CAR-T therapy candidate to clinical development, initially in hematological cancers and then in solid tumors;
•
respond to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, which has slowed enrollment into our clinical trials;
•
evaluate cirmtuzumab in additional ROR1-positive solid tumors;
•
evaluate TK216 in additional tumors with ETS fusion proteins or overexpression;
•
continue to develop additional product candidates;
•
acquire or in-license other product candidates and technologies;
•
maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
•
establish a commercial manufacturing source and secure supply chain capacity sufficient to provide commercial quantities of any product candidates for which we may obtain regulatory approval;
•
seek regulatory approvals for any product candidates that successfully complete clinical trials;
•
establish a sales, marketing and distribution infrastructure to commercialize any products for which we may obtain regulatory approval; and
•
add operational, financial and management information systems and personnel, including personnel to support our planned product development and future commercialization efforts, as well as to support our transition to a public reporting company.
We will not generate product sales revenue unless and until we successfully complete clinical development and obtain regulatory approval for our product candidates. If we obtain regulatory approval for any of our product candidates and do not enter into a commercialization partnership, we expect to incur significant expenses related to developing our internal commercialization capability to support product sales, marketing and distribution. In addition, we expect to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company.
As a result, we believe we will need substantial additional funding to support our continuing operations and pursue our business strategy. Until such time as we can generate significant product sales revenue, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, government funding, or other sources, including potentially collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements. We may not be able to raise additional funds or enter into such other agreements or arrangements when needed on favorable terms, or at all. If we fail to raise capital or enter into such agreements as and when needed, we may have to significantly delay, reduce or eliminate the development and commercialization of one or more of our product candidates or delay our pursuit of potential in licenses or acquisitions.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development, we are unable to predict the timing or amount of increased expenses or when or if we will be able to achieve or maintain profitability. Even if we are able to generate product sales, we may not become profitable. If we fail to become profitable or are unable to sustain profitability on a continuing basis, then we may be unable to continue our operations at planned levels and be forced to reduce or terminate our operations.
We expect that our existing cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next twelve months. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could exhaust our available capital resources sooner than we expect. Beyond that point, we will need to raise additional capital to finance our operations, which cannot be assured.
Business Update Regarding COVID-19
The COVID-19 worldwide pandemic has presented substantial public health and economic challenges and is affecting economies, financial markets and business operations around the world. International and U.S. governmental authorities in impacted regions have taken actions in an effort to slow the spread of COVID-19, including issuing and modifying varying forms of “stay-at-home” orders, and restricting business functions outside of one’s home. In response, we have put restrictions on employee travel and working from our executive offices, with many employees continuing their work remotely. To date, we have been able to continue to supply cirmtuzumab and TK216 clinical trial sites for patients enrolled in our ongoing clinical trials and do not currently anticipate any interruptions in the supply of cirmtuzumab or TK216. While we are continuing the clinical trials we have underway in sites across the U.S., we expect that COVID-19 precautions may directly or indirectly impact the timeline for some of our clinical trials. For example, some of our clinical trial sites, including those located in areas severely impacted by the pandemic, have placed new patient enrollment into clinical trials on hold or, for patients travelling from out-of-state, have implemented a 14-day self-quarantine before appointments. For our existing patients, we are actively working with all of our clinical trial sites to minimize disruptions and address concerns on an individual site or patient basis in order to allow participating patients to continue to receive treatment at home or in alternative healthcare settings while minimizing their potential exposure to the virus that causes COVID-19. If restrictions related to the COVID-19 outbreak continue for a prolonged period of time or if additional clinical trial sites pause patient enrollment or treatments, our clinical trial milestones would be negatively impacted. Additionally, our expectations for the timing of first-in-human dosing of our ROR1 CAR-T therapy in China has been delayed. Any delays in the completion of our clinical trials and any disruption in our supply chain could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition. The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition, will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain, including as a result of new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19 and the actions taken to contain or treat it, the success or failure of vaccination programs, the emergence of new variants of COVID-19, as well as the economic impact on local, regional, national and international markets.
Components of Results of Operations
Grant Revenue
We have not and do not expect to generate any product sales revenue in the foreseeable future. If our development efforts for our product candidates are successful and result in regulatory approval, we may generate product sales revenue in the future. We cannot predict if, when, or to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of our product candidates. We may never succeed in obtaining regulatory approval for any of our product candidates. Our grant revenue has been derived from a California Institute for Regenerative Medicine, or CIRM, grant subaward with UC San Diego.
In August 2017, CIRM awarded an $18.3 million grant to researchers at UC San Diego to advance our Phase 1/2 clinical trial evaluating cirmtuzumab in combination with ibrutinib for the treatment of patients with B-cell lymphoid malignancies, including MCL and CLL. Oncternal is conducting this study in collaboration with UC San Diego and estimates it will receive approximately $14.0 million in development milestones under research subaward agreements throughout the award project period, estimated to be from October 1, 2017 to March 31, 2022. In addition, we are committed to certain co-funding requirements and are required to provide UC San Diego progress and financial update reports throughout the award project period. We received subaward payments of $1.4 million and $6.2 million in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we believe we have met our obligations under the CIRM award and UC San Diego subawards.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for the preclinical and clinical development of our product candidates, cirmtuzumab, TK216 and our ROR1-targeting CAR-T therapy candidate, which include:
•
expenses under agreements with third-party contract organizations, investigative clinical trial sites that conduct research and development activities on our behalf;
•
costs related to develop and manufacture preclinical study and clinical trial material;
•
salaries and employee-related costs, including stock-based compensation;
•
costs incurred under our collaboration and third-party licensing agreements; and
•
laboratory and vendor expenses related to the execution of preclinical and clinical trials.
We accrue all research and development costs in the period for which they are incurred. Costs for certain development activities are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using information and data provided to us by our vendors, collaborators and third-party service providers. Advance payments for goods or services to be received in future periods for use in research and development activities are deferred and then expensed as the related goods are delivered and as services are performed. Any unearned advances would be refunded when known.
We expect our research and development expenses to increase substantially for the foreseeable future as we: (i) invest in additional operational personnel to support our planned product development efforts, and (ii) continue to invest in developing our product candidates preclinically, advance them into later stages of clinical development, and as we begin to conduct larger clinical trials. Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials.
Our direct research and development expenses are tracked by product candidate and consist primarily of external costs, such as fees paid under third-party license agreements and to outside consultants, contract research organizations, or CROs, contract manufacturing organizations and research laboratories in connection with our preclinical development, process development, manufacturing and clinical development activities. We do not allocate employee costs and costs associated with our discovery efforts, laboratory supplies and facilities, including
other indirect costs, to specific product candidates because these costs are deployed across multiple programs and, as such, are not separately classified. We use internal resources primarily to conduct our research as well as for managing our preclinical development, process development, manufacturing and clinical development activities. These employees work across multiple programs and, therefore, we do not track our costs by product candidate unless we can include them as subaward costs.
We cannot determine with certainty the timing of initiation, the duration or the completion costs of current or future preclinical studies and clinical trials of our product candidates due to the inherently unpredictable nature of preclinical and clinical development, including any potential expanded dosing beyond the original protocols based in part on ongoing clinical success and the potential effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. Clinical and preclinical development timelines, the probability of success and development costs can differ materially from expectations. We anticipate that we will make determinations as to which product candidates to pursue and how much funding to direct to each product candidate on an ongoing basis in response to the results of ongoing and future preclinical studies and clinical trials, regulatory developments and our ongoing assessments of each product candidate’s commercial potential. We will need to raise substantial additional capital in the future. In addition, we cannot forecast which product candidates may be subject to future collaborations, when such arrangements will be secured, if at all, and to what degree such arrangements would affect our development plans and capital requirements.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs, insurance costs, facility costs and professional fees for legal, patent, consulting, investor and public relations, accounting and audit services. Personnel-related costs consist of salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation. We expect our general and administrative expenses will increase substantially as we: (i) incur additional costs associated with being a public company, including audit, legal, regulatory, and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with exchange listing and SEC requirements, director and officer insurance premiums, and investor relations costs, (ii) hire additional personnel, and (iii) protect our intellectual property.
Other Income (Expense)
Change in Fair Value of Preferred Stock Warrant Liability
In connection with Private Oncternal’s Series B-2 preferred stock financing in 2017, Private Oncternal issued warrants to purchase shares of its Series B-2 preferred stock. We classified these warrants as a liability on our consolidated balance sheets and remeasured them to fair value at each reporting date, and we recognized changes in the fair value of the warrant liability as a component of other income (expense), net in our consolidated statements of operations.
Upon the closing of the Merger, all outstanding warrants to purchase Private Oncternal Series B-2 preferred stock were converted into warrants to purchase our common stock. As a result, such warrants no longer require liability accounting and the fair value of the warrant liability has been reclassified to stockholders’ equity.
Paycheck Protection Program Loan
We received a loan under the Paycheck Protection Program, or PPP, a program implemented by the U.S. Small Business Administration, or SBA, under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or the CARES Act. In December 2020, the underlying principal and interest were fully forgiven by the SBA and the Company has no further obligations thereunder. The loan forgiveness was recorded as other income in the consolidated statement of operations.
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest earned on our cash equivalents, which consist of money market funds. Our interest income has not been significant due to low interest earned on invested balances.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Grant Revenue
Grant revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $3.4 million, compared to $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $1.0 million was primarily due to an increase in the revenue recognition rate.
Research and Development Expenses
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $12.5 million and $10.2 million, respectively, an increase of $2.4 million. The increase was primarily due to: (i) a $1.3 million net increase in direct product candidate costs, and (ii) a $1.0 million increase in unallocated research and development expenses.
Direct expenses for cirmtuzumab increased $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to the following partially offsetting factors: (i) a $0.2 million increase in preclinical study costs, (ii) a $0.7 million increase in manufacturing development costs, and (iii) a $0.7 million decrease in license and milestone fees under the Regents License Agreement, as defined below.
Direct expenses for TK216 increased $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to an increase in clinical trial costs related to our ongoing Phase 1 clinical trial of TK216 in refractory Ewing sarcoma.
Unallocated expenses increased $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to higher personnel costs, including higher share-based compensation expense of $0.3 million.
In-Process Research and Development Expenses
In-process research and development expenses decreased $18.1 million for year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, due solely to the completion of the Merger in 2019.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $8.4 million and $7.3 million, respectively, an increase of $1.1 million. The increase is primarily due to the following partially offsetting factors: (i) higher personnel and professional related costs of $1.3 million, including higher share-based compensation expense of $0.7 million, (ii) higher director’s and officer’s insurance costs of $0.6 million, (iii) lower patent costs of $0.3 million, and (iv) lower public company and other expenses of $0.5 million.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income of $0.3 million in 2020 was primarily related to the forgiveness of the PPP loan. Other expense of $1.3 million in 2019 was primarily related to the change in fair value of warrant liability.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have incurred losses and negative cash flows from operations since inception. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $82.8 million and anticipate that we will continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future. As of December 31, 2020, we had $116.7 million in cash and cash equivalents. We believe we have sufficient cash to fund our projected operating requirements into 2023.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our net cash flow activity for each of the periods presented (in thousands):
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, operating activities used $17.5 million, resulting from our net loss of $17.2 million, which included net non-cash charges of $1.4 million related to stock-based compensation, lease expense, and forgiveness of the paycheck protection program loan, offset by a $1.7 million change in our operating assets and liabilities. The $1.7 million change in operating assets and liabilities primarily consisted of the following partially offsetting activities: (i) a $2.0 million decrease in deferred revenue, (ii) a $0.7 million increase in prepaid and other assets and operating lease liability, and (iii) a $1.0 million increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, operating activities used $16.7 million of cash, resulting from our net loss of $34.2 million, which included non-cash charges of: (i) $18.1 million related to the acquisition of in-process research and development in connection with the Merger, (ii) $1.3 million related to the change in fair value of warrant liability, and (iii) $0.5 million related to stock-based compensation charges; partially offset by a $2.4 million change in operating assets and liabilities. The net $2.4 million change in operating assets and liabilities primarily consisted of a $6.0 million decrease in accounts payable and accrued liabilities and a $3.6 million increase in deferred revenue.
Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was none for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net cash provided by investing activities was $16.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily resulting from cash received in connection with the Merger.
Financing Activities
Financing activities provided cash of $114.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which primarily consisted of $113.9 million in net proceeds received from various public offerings. Financing activities provided cash of $15,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019, consisting of option and warrant exercises.
On May 21, 2020, we completed a registered direct offering pursuant to which we concurrently sold: (i) 1,943,636 shares of our common stock, and (ii) warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 971,818 shares of common stock, at a combined price of $2.5725 per share. The net proceeds to us from this offering were $4.4 million, after deducting placement agent’s cash commissions and other offering expenses, and excluding the proceeds, if any, from the exercise of the warrants.
On July 21, 2020, we completed a registered direct offering pursuant to which we concurrently sold: (i) 2,581,867 shares of our common stock, and (ii) warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 1,290,933 shares of common stock, at a combined price of $2.3825 per share. The net proceeds to us from this offering were $5.7 million, after deducting the placement agent’s cash commissions and other offering expenses, and excluding the proceeds, if any, from the exercise of the warrants.
On September 1, 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering pursuant to which we sold 2,428,886 shares of our common stock at a price to the public of $2.10 per share. The net proceeds to us from this offering were $4.4 million, after deducting the underwriter’s discounts and commissions and other offering expenses, and excluding the proceeds, if any, from the exercise of the underwriter’s warrants.
On November 20, 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering pursuant to which we sold 7,725,065 shares of our common stock at a price to the public of $3.10 per share. The net proceeds to us from this offering were $20.4 million, after deducting the underwriter’s discounts and commissions and other offering expenses, and excluding the proceeds, if any, from the exercise of the underwriter’s warrants.
On December 14, 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering pursuant to which we sold 19,161,667 shares of our common stock at a price to the public of $4.50 per share. The net proceeds to us from this offering were $79.0 million, after deducting the underwriter’s discounts and commissions and other offering expenses, and excluding the proceeds, if any, from the exercise of the underwriter’s warrants.
Operating Capital Requirements
We anticipate that we will continue to incur losses for the foreseeable future, and we expect the losses to increase as we continue the research and development of, and seek regulatory approvals for, our product candidates and conduct additional research and development activities. Our product candidates have not yet achieved regulatory approval and we may not be successful in achieving commercialization of our product candidates.
We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents as of March 11, 2021 will be sufficient to fund our projected operating requirements into 2023. However, our forecast of the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support our planned operations is a forward-looking statement that involves risks and uncertainties, and actual results could vary materially. For example, the FDA or other regulatory authorities may require us to generate additional data or conduct additional preclinical studies or clinical trials, or may impose other requirements beyond those that we currently anticipate. Additionally, it is possible for a product candidate to show promising results in preclinical studies or in clinical trials, but fail to establish sufficient safety and efficacy data necessary to obtain regulatory approvals. As a result of these and other risks and uncertainties and the probability of success, the duration and the cost of our research and development activities required to advance a product candidate cannot be accurately estimated and are subject to considerable variation. We may encounter difficulties, complications, delays and other unknown factors and unforeseen expenses in the course of our research and development activities, any of which may significantly increase our capital requirements and could adversely affect our liquidity.
We will require additional capital for the research and development of our product candidates and to perform our research and development obligations under our collaboration agreement with UC San Diego, and we may be forced to seek additional funds sooner than expected to pursue our research and development activities. We expect to finance our capital requirements in the foreseeable future through a combination of the sale of public or private equity or debt securities, government funding, or other sources, including potentially collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements. There can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain any sources of financing on acceptable terms, or at all. To the extent that we can raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, our stockholders may experience significant dilution. Any debt financing, if available, may involve restrictive covenants that may impact our ability to conduct our business. Any of these events could significantly harm our business, operations, financial condition and prospects.
Our forecast of the period of time through which our existing cash and cash equivalents and investments will be adequate to support our operations is a forward-looking statement and involves significant risks and uncertainties. We have based this forecast on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and actual results could vary materially from our expectations, which may adversely affect our capital resources and liquidity. We could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. The amount and timing of future funding requirements, both near- and long-term, will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to:
•
the type, number, scope, progress, expansions, results, costs and timing of our preclinical studies and clinical trials of our product candidates which we are pursuing or may choose to pursue in the future;
•
the costs incurred as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, including clinical trial delays; the costs and timing of manufacturing for our product candidates, including commercial manufacturing if any product candidate is approved;
•
the costs of obtaining ibrutinib, for which we currently obtain supply at no cost under our clinical supply agreement with Pharmacyclics LLC, and vincristine to conduct our clinical trials of cirmtuzumab and TK216, respectively;
•
the costs, timing and outcome of seeking and obtaining regulatory approvals our product candidates;
•
the costs of obtaining, maintaining and enforcing our patents and other intellectual property rights;
•
the costs associated with hiring additional personnel and consultants as our preclinical and clinical activities increase;
•
the costs and timing of establishing or securing sales and marketing capabilities if any product candidate is approved;
•
our ability to achieve sufficient market acceptance, adequate coverage and reimbursement from third-party payors and adequate market share and revenue for any approved products;
•
the terms and timing of establishing and maintaining collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements, including milestone or other payments under our existing in-license agreements and any in-license agreements that we may enter into in the future;
•
costs associated with any products or technologies that we may in-license or acquire; and
•
the cost of establishing sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution capabilities for, and the pricing and reimbursement of, any products for which we may receive regulatory approval.
If we cannot continue or expand our research and development operations, or otherwise capitalize on our business opportunities, because we lack sufficient capital, our business, operations, financial condition and prospects could be materially adversely affected.
In February 2018, we entered into the ATM Sales Agreement, pursuant to which we were able to offer and sell, from time to time, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $50.0 million. In August 2020, we terminated the ATM Sales Agreement and can no longer offer and sell shares under the ATM Sales Agreement. In connection with our sale of common stock and common stock warrants in July 2020, we agreed not to enter into other variable rate transactions prior to July 21, 2021, other than pursuant to an at-the-market offering facility with the placement agent. We do not currently have an active at-the-market facility available to us.
Under current SEC regulations, if at any time our public float is less than $75.0 million, and for so long as our public float remains less than $75.0 million, the amount we can raise through primary public offerings of securities in any twelve-month period using shelf registration statements is limited to an aggregate of one-third of our public float, which is referred to as the baby shelf rules. As of December 31, 2020, our calculated public float exceeded $75.0 million. In January 2021, our Form S-3 registration statement expired and we no longer have an effective Form S-3 shelf registration statement available. Future sales of our common stock, if any, will depend on a variety of factors including, but not limited to, the expected timing for achieving key milestones, including completing and announcing results of clinical trials of cirmtuzumab and TK216 and announcing the first-in-human dosing of our CAR-T product candidate targeting ROR-1, currently in preclinical development, prevailing market conditions, the trading price of our common stock and our capital needs. There can be no assurance that we will be successful in consummating future sales of our securities based on prevailing market conditions or in the quantities or at the prices that we deem appropriate or that we will enter into a new at-the-market offering facility.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
We are party to a number of license agreements, pursuant to which we have payment obligations that are contingent upon future events such as our achievement of specified development, regulatory and commercial milestones and are required to make royalty payments in connection with the sale of products developed under those agreements. As of December 31, 2020, we were unable to estimate the timing or likelihood of achieving the milestones or making future product sales. See Note 4 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for a description of these agreements.
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with clinical trial sites and clinical supply manufacturers and with vendors for preclinical studies, research supplies and other services and products for operating purposes. These contracts generally provide for termination after a notice period, and, therefore, are cancelable contracts.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of the financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods.
Our estimates are based on our historical trends and other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 1, “Description of Business, Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 and for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. However, we believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical for fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Research and Development Expenses and Accruals
Research and development expenses consist of costs incurred for our own and for sponsored and collaborative research and development activities. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred and include manufacturing process development costs, manufacturing costs, costs associated with preclinical studies and clinical trials, regulatory and medical affairs activities, quality assurance activities, salaries and benefits, including stock-based compensation, fees paid to third-party consultants, license fees and overhead.
We have entered into various research and development contracts with research institutions, clinical research organizations, clinical manufacturing organizations and other companies. Payments for these activities are based on the terms of the individual agreements, which may differ from the pattern of costs incurred, and payments made in advance of performance are reflected in the consolidated balance sheets as prepaid expenses and other assets or accrued liabilities. We record accruals for estimated costs incurred for ongoing research and development activities. When evaluating the adequacy of the accrued liabilities, we analyze progress of the services, including the phase or completion of events, invoices received and contracted costs. Significant judgments and estimates may be made in determining the prepaid or accrued balances at the end of any reporting period. Actual results could differ from our estimates.
Valuation of Warrants to Purchase Convertible Preferred Stock
Prior to the Merger, we classified outstanding warrants to purchase shares of our Series B-2 convertible preferred stock as a liability on our consolidated balance sheets as these warrants were free-standing financial instruments exercisable into contingently redeemable shares. The warrants were initially recorded at fair value on the date of grant, and were subsequently remeasured to fair value at each balance sheet date while the instrument was outstanding. Changes in the fair value of these warrants were recognized as a component of other income (expense) in our consolidated statements of operations. Upon the completion of the Merger, the Series B-2 warrants were amended such that they were converted into warrants to purchase our common stock. As amended, warrant liability accounting is no longer required and the fair value of the warrant liability has been reclassified into stockholders’ equity.
Revenue Recognition
We currently generate revenue from a research subaward agreement with UC San Diego, which provides us with payments for certain types of expenditures in return for research and development activities over a contractually defined period. Revenue from such subaward is recognized in the period during which the related qualifying costs are incurred and services are rendered, provided that the applicable conditions under the subaward agreement have been met.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
Stock-based compensation expense represents the estimated grant date fair value of stock option awards and employee stock purchase plan rights amortized over the requisite service period of the awards (usually the vesting period) primarily on a straight-line basis. We estimate the fair value of all stock option grants using the Black-Scholes option pricing model and recognize forfeitures as they occur.
Estimating the fair value of equity awards as of the grant date using valuation models, such as the Black-Scholes option pricing model, is affected by assumptions regarding a number of complex variables, including the expected stock price volatility, the risk-free interest rate, the expected term of stock options, the expected dividend yield and the fair value of the underlying common stock on the date of grant. Changes in the assumptions can materially affect the fair value and ultimately how much stock-based compensation expense is recognized. These inputs are subjective and generally require significant analysis and judgment to develop.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under SEC rules.