Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the notes to those financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. See “Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Information.” Our actual results may differ materially from those contained in or implied by any forward-looking statements.
Overview
On September 28, 2018, we consummated a reverse acquisition transaction to acquire a privately-held company, Ondas Networks Inc., and changed our name from “Zev Ventures Incorporated” to “Ondas Holdings Inc.” As a result, Ondas Networks Inc. (“Ondas Networks”) became our wholly owned subsidiary. We refer to this transaction as the “Acquisition.” In connection with the closing of the Acquisition, we discontinued the prior business of Zev Ventures as a reseller of sporting and concert tickets and our sole business became that of Ondas Networks.
Ondas Networks provides wireless connectivity solutions enabling mission-critical Industrial Internet applications and services. We refer to these applications as the Mission-Critical Internet of Things (“MC-IoT”). The Company’s wireless networking products are applicable to a wide range of MC-IoT applications which are most often located at the very edge of large industrial networks. We design, develop, manufacture, sell and support FullMAX, our patented, Software Defined Radio (“SDR”) platform for secure, licensed, private, wide-area broadband networks. Our customers install FullMAX systems in order to upgrade and expand their legacy wide-area network (“WAN”) infrastructure. Our MC-IoT intellectual property has been adopted by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (“IEEE”), the leading worldwide standards body in data networking protocols, and forms the core of the IEEE 802.16s standard. Ondas has taken a leadership position in IEEE as it relates to wireless networking for industrial markets given that standards-based communications solutions are preferred by our mission-critical customers and ecosystem partners. As such, management believes this standards-based approach supports the adoption of the Company’s technology across a burgeoning ecosystem of partners and end markets.
We sell our products and services globally through a direct sales force and value-added sales partners to critical infrastructure providers including major rail operators, commercial and industrial drone operators, electric and gas utilities, water and wastewater utilities, oil and gas producers and pipeline operators, and for other critical infrastructure applications in areas such as homeland security and defense, and transportation.
We have incurred significant net losses since inception. As of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, our accumulated deficit was approximately $65 and $52 million, respectively. We expect to continue incurring substantial losses for the next several years as we continue to develop, manufacture and market our technologies. Our operating expenses are comprised of research and development expenses, general and administrative expenses, and sales and marketing expenses.
Our future capital requirements will depend upon many factors, including progress with developing, manufacturing and marketing our technologies, the time and costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining and enforcing patent claims and other proprietary rights, our ability to establish collaborative arrangements, marketing activities and competing technological and market developments, including regulatory changes and overall economic conditions in our target markets.
Our business consists of a single segment of products and services, all of which are sold and provided in the United States and certain international markets.
COVID-19
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus (“COVID-19”) was identified in Wuhan, China, and has subsequently spread to other regions of the world, and has resulted in increased travel restrictions, business disruptions and emergency quarantine measures across the world including the United States.
The Company’s business, financial condition and results of operations were impacted from the COVID-19 pandemic for the year ended December 31, 2020 as follows:
● sales and marketing efforts were disrupted as our business development team was unable to travel to visit customers and customers were unable to receive visitors for on-location meetings;
● field activity for testing and deploying our wireless systems was delayed due to the inability for our field service team to install and test equipment for our customers;
● supply chain disruptions led to component shortages and inefficiencies in and delays in producing and delivering equipment for certain purchase orders; and
● delays in fulfilling purchase orders reduced our cash flow from operations.
In the first quarter of 2020, we reduced our business activity to critical operations only, and furloughed 80% of our workforce. Per orders issued by the Health Officer of the County of Santa Clara, our corporate offices and facilities were closed, except for functions related to the support of remote workers and product support related to the essential transportation sector. On May 13, 2020, we reopened our corporate offices and facilities and as of December 31, 2020 we have no employees remaining on furlough. Of the 18 employees previously furloughed, 14 are currently employed by us.
During 2020, in response to COVID-19 employee furloughs, Eric A. Brock, the Company’s Chief Executive Officer and Stewart G. Kantor, the Company’s Chief Financial Officer, accepted a pay reduction of 90% for the period from March 21 to May 19, 2020 and a 35% pay reduction from May 20 to December 15, 2020. Mr. Brock’s salary was returned to 100% effective December 16, 2020.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) was enacted. The CARES Act is an approximately $2 trillion emergency economic stimulus package in response to the Coronavirus outbreak, which among other things contains numerous income tax provisions. Some of these tax provisions are expected to be effective retroactively for years ending before the date of enactment. The Company applied for, and received, funds under the Paycheck Protection Program in the amount of $666,091. The application for these funds requires the Company to, in good faith, certify that the current economic uncertainty made the loan request necessary to support operations of the Company. This certification further requires the Company to consider its current business activity and ability to access other sources of liquidity sufficient to support ongoing operations in a manner that is not significantly detrimental to the business. The receipt of these funds, and the forgiveness of the loan related to these funds, is dependent on the Company having initially qualified for the loan and qualifying for the forgiveness of such loan based on our future adherence to the forgiveness criteria. The Company is in discussion with the lender regarding the forgiveness of the loan, however no determination has been made at the time of the filing of this Form 10-K.
The Company expects its business, financial condition and results of operations will be impacted from the COVID-19 pandemic during 2021, primarily due to the slowdown of customer activity during 2020 and 2021. Further, the COVID-19 pandemic is ongoing and remains an unknown risk for the foreseeable future. The extent to which the coronavirus may impact our business will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information which may emerge concerning the severity of the coronavirus. As a result, the Company is unable to reasonably estimate the full extent of the impact from the COVID-19 pandemic on its future business, financial condition and results of operations. In addition, if the Company were to experience any new impact to its operations or incur additional unanticipated costs and expenses as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, such operational delays and unanticipated costs and expenses there could be a further adverse impact on the Company’s business, financial condition and results of operations during 2021.
Key Components of Our Results of Operations and Financial Condition
Revenues
Our revenues are derived principally from the sale of our multi-patented FullMAX wireless radio system. We also provide a warranty/maintenance program through an annual contract. The warranty/maintenance contract requires payment in full at the time of execution of the contract. Revenue from the warranty/maintenance contract is initially recorded as deferred revenue and is subsequently recorded as income spread equitably over the term of the contract. Due to the ongoing development and commercialization process of our FullMAX solutions, our revenues have historically been generated by equipment trial and pilot programs and related services, in addition to a modest number of full network deployments. We have historically had limited sales and customer service resources to support higher sales volumes. In 2020 and 2019, we expanded our sales and marketing effort across multiple industries which dramatically increased our sales pipeline and the number of customers and projects we are targeting. We expect this increased customer engagement to lead to a larger number of sales opportunities and revenue in 2021.
Cost of Sales
Our cost of sales is comprised primarily of the cost of components included in our FullMAX system and other costs associated with the assembly and delivery thereto. We expect our investment in expanding our customer sales and service efforts to lead to increased volume of FullMAX equipment sales in future periods, which will lead to higher costs of sales. Cost of sales as a percentage of revenue has historically been volatile due to low levels of revenue and can be skewed higher or lower due to the mix of high margin base station units relative to remote units sold. Higher unit sales volume will provide scale manufacturing opportunities which could lead to a decline in the cost of sales as a percentage of revenue in future periods.
General and Administration
General and administration expenses primarily include salary and benefit expense, legal and accounting services, professional services, rent and facilities costs, general liability insurances, and travel expenses. We expect these expenses to increase as a result of continued growth in headcount and support of our business and operations.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses primarily include salary and benefit expense, trade shows, marketing programs and promotional material, travel expenses, and the allocation of certain facility costs. We expect these expenses to increase as a result of continued growth in headcount and support of our business and operations.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses primarily include salary and benefit expense and costs for contractors engaged in research, design and development activities including intellectual property, travel expenses, and the allocation of certain facility costs. We expect our research and development costs to increase as we continue making investments in developing new products in addition to new versions of FullMAX.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) primarily includes interest expense, amortization of debt discount, changes in fair value of derivative liability, gains on the conversion of debt and other miscellaneous income and expenses.
Results of Operations
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019
Revenue
Revenue increased to approximately $2,164,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 from approximately $320,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Revenues during year ended December 31, 2020 included $1,151,557 for products, $62,410 for maintenance/service contracts, $943,357 for development services and $6,395 for other revenues. Revenues during the same period in 2019 included $212,905 for products and $107,478 for maintenance/service contracts.
Cost of sales
Cost of sales increased to approximately $1,236,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 from approximately $79,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in cost of sales was primarily a result of increased costs related to products of approximately $302,000 and development services of approximately $886,000, partially offset by a decrease in maintenance/service contracts and other revenues approximately $31,000.
Gross profit
Our gross profit increased to approximately $928,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 from approximately $241,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019 based on the changes in revenue and cost of sales as discussed above. Gross margin for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was 43% and 75%, respectively, primarily resulting from increases in cost related to the addition of development services in 2020.
Operating Expenses
Our principal operating costs include the following items as a percentage of total expense.
Operating expenses decreased by approximately $3,161,000 (20%) as a result of the following items:
Operating Loss
As a result of the foregoing, our operating loss decreased approximately $3,848,000, or 25%, to approximately $11,524,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with approximately $15,372,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily as a result of reduced operating expenses and the increase in gross profit as discussed above.
Other Income (Expense)
Other expense, net decreased by approximately $2,064,000, or 52%, to approximately $1,954,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with approximately $4,018,000 for the comparable period in 2019.
Net Loss
Because of the net effects of the foregoing, net loss decreased approximately $5,912,000, or 30%, to approximately $13,478,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with approximately $19,390,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net loss per share of common stock, basic and fully diluted was $(0.66) for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with basic and fully diluted of ($1.10) per share of common stock for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Summary of Sources and (Uses) of Cash
The principal use of cash in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was to fund the Company’s current expenses primarily related to sales and marketing and research and development activities necessary to allow us to service and support a higher level of business activity as we expanded into new industry and geographic markets. The decrease in cash flows used in operating activities of approximately $7,130,000 is primarily a result of the reduction of personnel, both employees and third-party consulting services and reduction in travel expenses. The decrease in cash flows used in investing activities of approximately $339,000 is primarily a result of a decrease in the purchase of equipment and wireless spectrum licenses. Cash provided by financing activities during 2020 is a result of (i) the Company’s public offering of its common stock totaling approximately $31,254,000, net of closing fees, (ii) the Company’s private placement of its preferred stock totaling approximately $4,218,000, net of closing costs, and (iii) a Payroll Protection Program loan totaling approximately $666,000, partially offset by a payment of approximately $4,680,000 on its outstanding secured promissory note (see NOTES 7 and 9, respectively, in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further details).
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have incurred losses since inception and have funded our operations primarily through debt and the sale of capital stock. On December 31, 2020, we had a stockholders’ equity of approximately $15,084,000. On December 31, 2020, we had net short and long-term borrowings outstanding of approximately $7,063,000 and $907,000, respectively. On December 31, 2020, we had cash of approximately $26,061,000 and working capital of approximately $15,404,000.
In December 2020, the Company completed a registered public offering of its common stock, generating net proceeds of approximately $31,254,000. We believe the funds raised in the December 2020 equity offering, in addition to growth in revenue and profitability expected as the Company executes its business plan, will fund its operations for at least the next twelve months from the issuance date of these financial statements.
Our future capital requirements will depend upon many factors, including progress with developing, manufacturing and marketing our technologies, the time and costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining and enforcing patent claims and other proprietary rights, our ability to establish collaborative arrangements, marketing activities and competing technological and market developments, including regulatory changes and overall economic conditions in our target markets. Our ability to generate revenue and achieve profitability requires us to successfully market and secure purchase orders for our products from customers currently identified in our sales pipeline as well as new customers. We also will be required to efficiently manufacturer and deliver equipment on those purchase orders. These activities, including our planned research and development efforts, will require significant uses of working capital. There can be no assurances that we will generate revenue and cash flow as expected in our current business plan. We may seek additional funds through equity or debt offerings and/or borrowings under additional notes payable, lines of credit or other sources. We do not know whether additional financing will be available on commercially acceptable terms or at all, when needed. If adequate funds are not available or are not available on commercially acceptable terms, our ability to fund our operations, support the growth of our business or otherwise respond to competitive pressures could be significantly delayed or limited, which could materially adversely affect our business, financial condition or results of operations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Contractual Obligations
We are a smaller reporting company as defined by Rule 229.10(f)(1) and are not required to provide information under this item.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect reported amounts and related disclosures in the financial statements. Management considers an accounting estimate to be critical if:
● requires assumptions to be made that were uncertain at the time the estimate was made, and
● changes in the estimate or different estimates that could have been selected could have a material impact on our results of operations or financial condition.
We base our estimates and judgments on our experience, our current knowledge, our beliefs of what could occur in the future, our observation of trends in the industry, information provided by our customers and information available from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We have identified the following accounting policies and estimates as those that we believe are most critical to our financial condition and results of operations and that require management’s most subjective and complex judgments in estimating the effect of inherent uncertainties: share-based compensation expense, income taxes, complex derivative financial instruments and impairment of long-lived assets.
Share-Based Compensation Expense. We calculate share-based compensation expense for option awards and certain warrant issuances (“Share-based Award(s)”) based on the estimated grant/issue date fair value using the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model (“Black-Sholes Model”) and recognize the expense on a straight-line basis over the vesting period. We account for forfeitures as they occur. We have not included an estimate for forfeitures due to our limited history and we revise based on actual forfeitures each period. The Black-Scholes Model requires the use of a number of assumptions including volatility of the stock price, the weighted average risk-free interest rate, and the vesting period of the Share-based Award in determining the fair value of Share-based Awards. Although we believe our assumptions used to calculate share-based compensation expense are reasonable, these assumptions can involve complex judgments about future events, which are open to interpretation and inherent uncertainty. In addition, significant changes to our assumptions could significantly impact the amount of expense recorded in a given period.
Income Taxes. As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate income taxes in each of the jurisdictions in which we operate. Our provision for income taxes is determined using the asset and liability approach to account for income taxes. A current liability is recorded for the estimated taxes payable for the current year. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recorded for the estimated future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the timing differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of changes in tax rates or tax laws are recognized in the provision for income taxes in the period that includes the enactment date. Valuation allowances are established, when necessary, to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount more-likely-than-not to be realized. Changes in valuation allowances will flow through the statement of operations unless related to deferred tax assets that expire unutilized or are modified through translation, in which case both the deferred tax asset and related valuation allowance are similarly adjusted. Where a valuation allowance was established through purchase accounting for acquired deferred tax assets, any future change will be credited or charged to income tax expense. See NOTE 10 in the accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for discussion related to Tax Reform.
The determination of our provision for income taxes requires significant judgment, the use of estimates, and the interpretation and application of complex tax laws. In the ordinary course of our business, there are transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax determination is uncertain. In spite of our belief that we have appropriate support for all the positions taken on our tax returns, we acknowledge that certain positions may be successfully challenged by the taxing authorities. We determine the tax benefits more likely than not to be recognized with respect to uncertain tax positions. Although we believe our recorded tax assets and liabilities are reasonable, tax laws and regulations are subject to interpretation and inherent uncertainty; therefore, our assessments can involve both a series of complex judgments about future events and rely on estimates and assumptions. Although we believe these estimates and assumptions are reasonable, the final determination could be materially different than that which is reflected in our provision for income taxes and recorded tax assets and liabilities.
Complex Derivative Financial Instruments. From time to time we sell common stock and we issue convertible debt, both with common stock purchase warrants, which may include terms requiring conversion price or exercise price adjustments based on subsequent issuance of securities at prices lower than those in the agreements of such securities. In these situations, the instruments may be accounted for as liabilities and recorded at fair value each reporting period. Due to the complexity of the agreement, we use an outside expert to assist in providing the mark to market fair valuation of the liabilities over the reporting periods in which the original agreement was in effect. It was determined that a Binomial Lattice option pricing model using a Monte Carlo simulation would provide the most accuracy given all the potential variables encompassing a future dilutive event. This model incorporated transaction assumptions such as our stock price, contractual terms, maturity, risk free rates, as well as estimates about future financings, volatility, and holder behavior. Although we believe our estimates and assumptions used to calculate the fair valuation liabilities and related expense were reasonable, these assumptions involved complex judgments about future events, which are open to interpretation and inherent uncertainty. In addition, significant changes to our assumptions could significantly impact the amount of expense recorded in a given period.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets. Carrying values of property and equipment and finite-lived intangible assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that their carrying values may not be recoverable. If impairment indicators are present, we determine whether an impairment loss should be recognized by testing the applicable asset or asset group’s carrying value for recoverability. This assessment requires the exercise of judgment in assessing the future use of and projected value to be derived from the eventual disposal of the assets to be held and used. Assessments also consider changes in asset utilization, including the temporary idling of capacity and the expected timing for placing this capacity back into production. If the carrying value of the assets are not recoverable, then a loss is recorded for the difference between the assets’ fair value and respective carrying value. The fair value of the assets is determined using an “income approach” based upon a forecast of all the expected discounted future net cash flows associated with the subject assets. Some of the more significant estimates and assumptions include: market size and growth, market share, projected selling prices, manufacturing cost and discount rate. Our estimates are based upon historical experience, commercial relationships, market conditions and available external information about future trends.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
In November 2018, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update No. 2018-18 “Collaborative Arrangements (Topic 808): Clarifying the Interaction between Topic 808 and Topic 606” (“ASU 2018-18”). ASU 2018-18 clarifies that certain transactions between participants in a collaborative arrangement should be accounted for under Topic 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers” when the counterparty is a customer. In addition, the update precludes an entity from presenting consideration from a transaction in a collaborative arrangement as customer revenue if the counterparty is not a customer for that transaction. On January 1, 2020, we adopted this standard and applied it retrospectively to January 1, 2018 when we initially adopted Topic 606. The adoption did not have an impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In August 2018, the FASB, issued ASU, 2018-13 that eliminates certain disclosure requirements for fair value measurements for all entities, requires public entities to disclose certain new information and modifies some disclosure requirements. The FASB developed the amendments to ASC 820 as part of its broader disclosure framework project, which aims to improve the effectiveness of disclosures in the notes to financial statements by focusing on requirements that clearly communicate the most important information to users of the financial statements. The new guidance is effective for all entities for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019 and for interim periods within those fiscal years. An entity is permitted to early adopt either the entire standard or only the provisions that eliminate or modify requirements. The adoption of this pronouncement had no impact on our accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies an issuer’s accounting for convertible instruments by reducing the number of accounting models that require separate accounting for embedded conversion features. ASU 2020-06 also simplifies the settlement assessment that entities are required to perform to determine whether a contract qualifies for equity classification and makes targeted improvements to the disclosures for convertible instruments and earnings-per-share (EPS) guidance. This update will be effective for the Company’s fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, and interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, and interim periods within those fiscal years. Entities can elect to adopt the new guidance through either a modified retrospective method of transition or a fully retrospective method of transition. The Company is currently evaluating the impact of the pending adoption of the new standard on its financial statements and intends to adopt the standard as of January 1, 2024.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes, which removes certain exceptions for recognizing deferred taxes for investments, performing intraperiod tax allocation and calculating income taxes in interim periods. ASU 2019-12 is applicable to all entities subject to income taxes. ASU 2019-12 provides guidance to minimize complexity in certain areas by introducing a policy election to not allocate consolidated income taxes when a member of a consolidated tax return is not subject to income tax and guides whether to relate a step-up tax basis to a business combination or separate transaction. ASU 2019-12 changes the current guidance of making an intraperiod allocation, determining when a tax liability is recognized after a foreign entity investor transitions to or from equity method of accounting, accounting for tax law changes and year-to-date losses in interim periods, and determining how to apply income tax guidance to franchise taxes. The amendments ASU 2019-12 are effective for all public business entities for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020 and include interim periods. The guidance is effective for all other entities for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021 and for interim periods beginning after December 15, 2022. Early adoption is permitted. The Company is evaluating the impact on our accompanying consolidated financial statements.
In November 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-11, Codification Improvements to Topic 326, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses, which amends certain aspects of the Board’s new credit loss standard (ASC 326). ASU 2019-11 is applicable to companies that hold financial assets in the scope of the credit losses standard. FASB permits to include the following in estimate if expected credit losses: expected recoveries of financial assets previously written off and expected recoveries of financial assets with credit deterioration. The scope of guidance related to expected recoveries includes purchased financial assets with credit deterioration. ASU 2019-11 permits entities to record negative allowance when measuring expected credit losses for a purchased credit deteriorated financial asset and expected recoveries cannot exceed the aggregate amount previously written off or expected to be written off. When discounted cash flow method is not being used to estimate expected credit losses, expected recoveries cannot include any amounts in an acceleration of the noncredit discount. An entity may include increases in expected cash flows after acquisition. Early adoption is not permitted. The Company is evaluating the impact on our accompanying consolidated financial statements.
In June 2016, FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, which replaces the incurred loss methodology with an expected loss methodology that is referred to as the current expected credit loss (“CECL”) methodology. The CECL model utilizes a lifetime expected credit loss measurement objective for the recognition of credit losses for loans and other receivables at the time the financial asset is originated or acquired. The expected credit losses are adjusted each period for changes in expected lifetime credit losses. This model replaces the multiple existing impairment models previously used under U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, which generally require that a loss be incurred before it is recognized. The new standard also applies to financial assets arising from revenue transactions such as contract assets and accounts receivables. The Company is evaluating the impact on our accompanying consolidated financial statements.