Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion includes both historical information and forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risk, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from management’s expectations and those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including, but not limited to, the continuing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and societal and governmental responses as well as those discussed in “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Our vision is to delight millions of members with better health and better care while reducing the total cost of care. Our mission is to transform health care for all through our human-centered, technology-powered model. We are a membership-based primary care platform with seamless digital health and inviting in-office care, convenient to where people work, shop, live and click. We are disrupting health care from within the existing ecosystem by simultaneously addressing the frustrations and unmet needs of key stakeholders, which include consumers, employers, providers, and health networks. As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately 549,000 members in 13 markets in the United States and greater than 8,000 enterprise clients.
We have developed a modernized healthcare membership model based on direct consumer enrollment as well as employer sponsorship. Our annual membership model includes seamless access to 24/7 digital health services paired with inviting in-office care routinely covered under health insurance programs. Our technology drives high monthly active usage within our membership, promoting ongoing and longitudinal patient relationships for better health outcomes and high member retention. Our technology also helps our service-minded team in building trust and rapport with our members by facilitating proactive digital health outreach as well as responsive on-demand virtual and in-office care. Our digital health services and our well-appointed offices, which tend to be located in highly convenient locations, are staffed by a team of clinicians who are not paid on a fee-for-service basis, and therefore free of misaligned compensation incentives prevalent in health care. Additionally, we have developed clinically integrated partnerships with health networks, better coordinating more timely access to specialty care when needed by members, while advancing value-based care for employers through clinical and digital integration.
Together, these components of our human-centered and technology-powered model allow us to deliver better results for key stakeholders.
Our focus on simultaneously addressing the unfulfilled needs and frustrations of key stakeholders has allowed us to consistently grow the number of members we serve. Since 2007, we have grown to 549,000 members and 107 medical offices in 13 markets across the United States as of December 31, 2020. From December 31, 2015 through December 31, 2020, we grew our membership by 339%. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2015, our net revenue grew 247%, our digital interactions with our members grew 533%, and the number of in-office visits by our members grew 145%.
Impact of Covid-19 on Our Business
The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted and may continue to impact our operations, and net revenues, expenses, collectability of accounts receivables and other money owed, capital expenditures, liquidity, and overall financial condition.
During the first half of 2020, we believe the COVID-19 pandemic negatively impacted our business, as many of the communities we serve promoted self-isolation practices, and as shelter-in-place requirements were enacted. These measures and practices reduced in-office visits, and also resulted in temporary closures of certain offices and delays in openings of some of our new medical offices which negatively affected our net revenue. Correspondingly, our cost of care as a percentage of net revenue and loss from operations also increased.
During the second half of 2020, we believe the COVID-19 pandemic helped drive an increase in membership and increase in total revenue due to new and expanded service offerings and increase in aggregate billable services.
For example, we believe COVID-19 caused our value proposition to resonate with an even broader audience of consumers seeking access to primary care, as well as with an even broader audience of employers as they focus on safely reopening their workplaces and managing the ongoing health and well-being of employees and their families. As a result, we experienced increased demand for our memberships during the second half of 2020, adding more new members than in any other six-month period in our history.
In addition, we expanded our service offering in part as a response to COVID-19 and launched several new billable services, including:
•
COVID-19 testing, and counseling across all of our markets, including in our offices and in several mobile COVID-19 testing sites;
•
COVID-19 vaccinations in select geographies;
•
Healthy Together, our COVID-19 screening and testing program for employers, schools and universities;
•
Mindset by One Medical, our behavioral health service integrated within primary care;
•
One Medical Now, an expansion of our 24/7 on-demand digital health solutions to employees of enterprise clients located in geographies where we are not yet physically present; and,
•
Remote Visits, where our providers perform typical primary care visits with our members remotely from either one of our offices or from a provider’s home.
During the second half of 2020, our expanded service offering, particularly the increased demand for COVID-19 screening together with routine and preventative care deferred from the first half of the year, and increased demand for flu vaccines, helped us deliver total billable services in excess of pre-COVID-19 levels.
While the average reimbursement for these billable services remains below pre-COVID-19 levels, total aggregate reimbursement exceeded pre-COVID-19 levels.
We believe the precautionary measures and challenges resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic will likely continue for the duration of the pandemic, which is uncertain, and may present additional challenges to our business, financial condition and results of operations while the pandemic continues. As a result, we cannot assure you that our recent increase in membership, aggregate reimbursement and revenue are indicative of future results or will be sustained, including following the COVID-19 pandemic, or that we will not experience additional impacts associated with COVID-19, which could be significant.
The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) was enacted on March 27, 2020. Intended to provide economic relief to those impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, the CARES Act includes various tax and lending provisions, among others. Under the CARES Act, we received an income grant of $2.6 million from the Provider Relief Fund administered by the Department of Health and Human Services (“HHS”), which was recognized as Grant income during the year ended December 31, 2020. Please see Note 5, Revenue Recognition, to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
COVID-19 has also disrupted or delayed delivery of materials and products in the supply chain for our offices, including protective equipment for healthcare providers, caused staffing shortages, and increased capital expenditures due to the need to buy incremental hardware.
Given the uncertainty around the duration and extent of the COVID-19 pandemic, we cannot accurately predict at this time the future potential impact on our business, results of operations, financial condition or liquidity. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities of $683.0 million and $316.3 million principal amount of debt outstanding.
Our Business Model
We have developed a modernized healthcare membership model based on direct consumer enrollment as well as employer sponsorship. Our annual membership model includes seamless access to 24/7 digital health paired with inviting in-office care routinely covered under health insurance programs. Our members join either individually as consumers by paying an annual membership fee or are sponsored by an enterprise client who purchases a subscription for their employees and, increasingly, their dependents. All members have actively registered with us. Digital health services are delivered via our mobile app and website, through such modalities as video and voice encounters, chat and messaging, and our in-office care is delivered at any of our medical offices. As of December 31, 2020, we had 107 medical offices, including some on-site medical offices at certain enterprise clients which are closed as a result of the current COVID-19 pandemic.
We derive net revenue from multiple stakeholders, including consumers, employers, and health networks. We recognize net revenue as (i) membership revenue from employer and consumer subscription fees, including fees paid for our One Medical Now service offering (ii) partnership revenue predominantly on a PMPM basis from health networks, largely fixed payments from enterprise clients for on-site medical services, COVID-19 on-site testing services for enterprise clients, schools and universities where we typically bill such customers directly for the services we perform, and capitation payments from IPAs and (iii) net patient service revenue on a per visit basis from health insurers and patients, including COVID-19 testing services for members that are being billed to health insurers or patients. We are in-network with most health insurance plans in all of our markets.
We generate a portion of our revenue through membership fees charged to either consumer members or enterprise clients. As of December 31, 2020, our list price for new members for an annual consumer membership was $199. Our enterprise clients typically pay a discounted fee collected in advance, based on a rate per employee per month.
We have entered into clinically integrated care partnerships with health networks, which generate revenue either through fee-for-service reimbursements for member in-office visits under the health network’s contracts or as PMPM payments. For our health network arrangements that provide for PMPM payments, when our medical offices provide professional clinical services to covered members, we, as administrator, perform billing and collection services on behalf of the health network, and the health network receives the fees for services provided, including those paid by members’ insurance plans. In those circumstances, we earn PMPM payments in lieu of per visit fees for services from member office visits. See “Business-Our Health Network Partnerships.”
We generate partnership revenue from (i) our health network partners on a PMPM basis, (ii) largely fixed price or fixed price per employee contracts with enterprise clients for on-site medical services, (iii) COVID-19 on-site testing services for enterprise clients, schools and universities where we typically bill such customers a fixed price per service performed or (iv) capitation payments from IPAs that contract with health maintenance organizations (“HMOs”) for medical services provided to covered participants.
Our membership fee revenue and partnership revenue are contractual and, with the exception of our COVID-19 on-site testing services, generally recurring in nature. Membership revenue and partnership revenue as a percentage of total net revenue was 60%, 47% and 32% for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The increased percentage of revenue is, among other factors, due to new and expanded partnership with health networks since 2019, and COVID-19 on-site testing services since 2020.
The remainder of our net revenue is primarily received on a per visit fee-for-service basis from member health insurance plans or patients with billing rates based on our agreements with health network partners. We call this net patient service revenue. We use historical patient visit rates, our historical mix of services performed, and current reimbursement rates to help us analyze and explain historical net patient service revenue from this part of our business.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
•
Acquisition of Net New Members and Enterprise Clients. We believe that our ability to increase our membership will enable us to drive financial growth as members drive our membership revenue, partnership revenue and net patient service revenue. We continue to have significant opportunities to increase members in our existing markets through (i) new sales to consumers and enterprise clients, (ii) expansion of the number of enrolled members, including dependents, within our enterprise clients,
and (iii) adding other potential services. Our ability to enroll new members either as consumer members or through enterprise clients will impact our results of operations. We define estimated activation rate for any enterprise client at a given time as the percentage of eligible lives enrolled as members. Some of our enterprise clients offer membership benefits to the dependents of their employees, for which we assume eligible lives include one dependent per employee. The levels of activation rates at our enterprise clients may also affect the renewal rates of our enterprise clients. While we do not regularly monitor activation rates and related metrics across enterprise clients, we may use these metrics to compare member activation across different enterprise clients and to look for opportunities for additional membership activation within existing enterprise clients. We also intend to acquire members by expanding into new markets. In 2020, we have expanded into four new markets by partnering with new and existing health networks.
•
Components of Revenue. Our ability to maintain or improve pricing levels for our memberships and the pricing under our contracts with health networks will impact our results of operations. As of December 31, 2020, our list price for new members for an annual consumer membership was $199. Our enterprise clients typically pay a discounted fee collected in advance, based on a rate per employee per month. As of December 31, 2020, all of our members were covered by health network partnerships. In geographies where our health network partners pay us on a PMPM basis, to the extent that the PMPM rate changes, our partnership revenue will change. Similarly, if the fixed price or number of employees covered by fixed price per employee arrangements change, the number of COVID-19 on-site tests or vaccinations change, or capitation payments from IPAs change, our net partnership revenue will also change. Our net patient service revenue is dependent on (i) our billing rates and third-party payer contracted rates through agreements with health networks, (ii) the mix of members who are commercially insured and (iii) the nature of visits. In the future, we may add additional services for which we may charge in a variety of ways. To the extent the net amounts we charge our members, partners and clients change, our net revenue will also change.
•
Care Margin. Care margin is driven by net revenue, expansion of new medical offices or new services, average utilization of our services, and provider- and office-related expenses. As we open new medical offices or add new services, our care margin is likely to decrease initially due to a lag in realization of revenue from those new offices or services. In markets where we earn partnership revenue on PMPM contracts, higher patient visits, longer lengths of visits or increased use of medical supplies will typically lower our care margin. In markets where we earn patient service revenue, increased visits typically result in higher care margin. To the extent we need to increase the compensation for our providers, our care margin may decline.
•
Investments in Growth. We expect to continue to focus on long-term growth through investments in sales and marketing, technology research and development, and existing and new medical offices. We are working to enhance our digital health and technology offering and increase the potential breadth of our modernized platform solution. In particular, we have launched several new service offerings throughout 2020. We have also launched new offices, including in four new markets, during 2020. As we expand to new markets, we expect to make significant upfront investments in sales and marketing to establish brand awareness and acquire new members. Additionally, we intend to continue to invest in new offices in new and existing markets. As we invest in new markets, in the short term, we expect these activities to increase our operating expenses and cost of care; however, in the long term we anticipate that these investments will positively impact our results of operations.
•
Seasonality. As a result of seasonal trends, we typically experience our highest levels of office visits and patient service revenue during the first and fourth quarters of each year when compared to other quarters of the year. Conversely, the second and third quarters of the year have historically been the period of lower office visits, and as a result, lower patient service revenue relative to the other quarters of the year. However, the effects of this seasonality have historically been partially offset by our partnership revenue and membership revenue, which are recognized ratably over the period of each contract and recurring in nature, as well as our period-over-period growth. In the near term, we expect these seasonal trends to fluctuate due to the COVID-19 pandemic and resulting changes in in-office visits and virtual care utilization.
Key Metrics and Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We review a number of operating and financial metrics, including the following key metrics to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate our business plan and make strategic decisions.
Members
A member is a person who has paid for membership themselves or an employee or dependent whose membership has been paid for by an enterprise client for at least one year in a market where we have an office and who has registered with us. Members help drive membership revenue, partnership revenue and patient service revenue. We may offer trial memberships to enterprise clients, particularly for new services, and we offer access to One Medical Now, our 24/7 virtual care platform, to enterprise clients. The fees generated from these services are included in our Membership Revenue, although we do not include these covered employees as members. Our number of members depends, in part, on our ability to successfully market our services directly to consumers and to employers that are not yet enterprise clients and our activation rate within existing clients. While growth in the number of members is an important indicator of expected revenue growth, it also informs our management of the areas of our business that will require further investment to support expected future member growth. Member numbers as of the end of each period are rounded to the thousands.
Members (in thousands)*
*
Number of members is shown as of the end of each period.
Care Margin
We define care margin as loss from operations excluding depreciation and amortization, general and administrative expense and sales and marketing expense. We consider care margin to be an important measure to monitor our performance, specific to the direct costs of delivering care. We believe this margin is useful to measure whether we are controlling our direct expenses included in the provision of care sufficiently and whether we are effectively pricing our services. Care margin is presented for supplemental informational purposes only and should not be considered a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with GAAP. Care margin is not a financial measure of, nor does it imply profitability. We have not yet achieved profitability and, even in periods when our net revenue exceeds our cost of care, exclusive of depreciation and amortization, we may not be able to achieve or maintain profitability. The relationship of operating loss to cost of care, exclusive of depreciation and amortization, is not necessarily indicative of future performance. Other companies that present care margin may calculate it differently and, therefore, similarly titled measures presented by other companies may not be directly comparable to ours. In addition, care margin has limitations as an analytical tool, including that it does not reflect depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation or other overhead allocations.
The following table provides a reconciliation of loss from operations, the most closely comparable GAAP financial measure, to care margin:
*
Includes stock-based compensation
Adjusted EBITDA
We define adjusted EBITDA as net loss excluding interest income, interest expense, depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, change in the fair value of our redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability and provision for (benefit from) income taxes. We include adjusted EBITDA in this Annual Report because it is an important measure upon which our management assesses and believes investors should assess our operating performance. We consider adjusted EBITDA to be an important measure because it helps illustrate underlying trends in our business and our historical operating performance on a more consistent basis. Adjusted EBITDA is presented for supplemental informational purposes only and should not be considered a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with GAAP.
Our definition of adjusted EBITDA may differ from the definition used by other companies and therefore comparability may be limited. In addition, other companies may not publish this or similar metrics. Thus, our adjusted EBITDA should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for, or in isolation from, measures prepared in accordance with GAAP, such as net loss.
In addition, adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, including:
•
although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future, and adjusted EBITDA does not reflect cash used for capital expenditures for such replacements or for new capital expenditures;
•
adjusted EBITDA does not include the dilution that results from stock-based compensation or any cash outflows included in stock-based compensation, including from our purchases of shares of outstanding common stock; and
•
adjusted EBITDA does not reflect interest expense on our debt or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments.
We provide investors and other users of our financial information with a reconciliation of adjusted EBITDA to net loss. We encourage investors and others to review our financial information in its entirety, not to rely on any single financial measure and to view adjusted EBITDA in conjunction with net loss.
The following table provides a reconciliation of net loss, the most closely comparable GAAP financial measure, to adjusted EBITDA:
Components of Our Results of Operations
Net Revenue
We generate net revenue through net patient service revenue, partnership revenue, and membership revenue.
Net Patient Service Revenue. We generate net patient service revenue from providing primary care services to patients in our offices when we bill the member or their insurance plan on a fee-for-service basis as medical services are rendered. While substantially all of our patients are members, we occasionally also provide care to non-members.
Partnership Revenue. We generate partnership revenue from (i) our health network partners on a PMPM basis, (ii) largely fixed price or fixed price per employee contracts with enterprise clients for on-site medical services, (iii) COVID-19 on-site testing services for enterprise clients, schools and universities where we typically bill such customers a fixed price per service performed or (iv) capitation payments from IPAs that contract with HMOs for medical services provided to covered participants.
Under our partnership arrangements, we generally receive fees that are linked to PMPM, fixed price, fixed price per employee, fixed price per service, or capitation arrangements. All partnership revenue is recognized during the period in which we are obligated to provide professional clinical services to the member, employee, or participant, as applicable, and associated management, operational and administrative services to the health network partner, enterprise client, schools and universities or IPA, as applicable.
Membership Revenue. Membership revenue is generated from annual membership fees paid by consumer members and from enterprise clients who purchase access to memberships for their employees and dependents. Membership revenue also includes fees we receive from enterprise clients for trial memberships or for access to our One Medical Now service offering. Membership revenue is recognized ratably over the contract period with the individual member or enterprise client.
Grant income. Under the CARES Act, we were eligible for and received grant income from the Provider Relief Fund administered by HHS during the year ended December 31, 2020. The purpose of the payment is to reimburse us for healthcare-related expenses or lost revenues attributable to COVID-19.
The following table summarizes the Company’s net revenue by primary source as a percentage of net revenue. Amounts may not sum due to rounding.
Operating Expenses
Cost of Care, Exclusive of Depreciation and Amortization
Our cost of care, exclusive of depreciation and amortization, also excludes stock-based compensation. Cost of care primarily includes provider and support employee-related costs for both in-office and virtual care, occupancy costs, medical supplies, insurance and other operating costs. A large portion of these costs are fixed relative to member utilization of our services, such as occupancy costs and insurance costs. As a result, as net revenue increases due to improved pricing, which can result from, for example, higher net revenue per member under agreements with enterprise clients and health network partners, or when we provide services to more members without increasing our infrastructure or related costs, cost of care as a percentage of net revenue typically decreases. Providers include doctors of medicine, doctors of osteopathy, nurse practitioners and physician assistants. Support employees include phlebotomists and administrative assistants assisting our members with all non-medical related services. Virtual care includes video visits and other synchronous and asynchronous communication via our app and website. As we open new offices, and expand into new markets, we expect cost of care to increase in absolute dollars.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist of employee-related expenses, including salaries and related costs, commissions and stock-based compensation costs for our employees engaged in marketing, sales, account management and sales support. Sales and marketing expenses also include advertising production and delivery costs of communications materials that are produced to generate greater awareness and engagement among our clients and members, third-party independent research, trade shows and brand messages and public relations costs.
We expect our sales and marketing expenses to increase as we strategically invest to expand our business. We expect to hire additional sales personnel and related account management and sales support personnel to capture an increasing amount of our market opportunity. We also expect to continue our brand awareness and targeted marketing campaigns. As we scale our sales and marketing, we expect these expenses to increase in absolute dollars.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses include employee-related expenses, including salaries and related costs and stock-based compensation for all employees except sales and marketing teams, which are included in the sales and marketing expenses. In addition, general and administrative expenses include all corporate technology and occupancy costs.
We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase over time due to the additional legal, accounting, insurance, investor relations and other costs that we will incur as a public company, as well as other costs associated with continuing to grow our business.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization consist primarily of depreciation of property and equipment and amortization of capitalized software development costs.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest Income
Interest income consists of income earned on our cash and cash equivalents, restricted cash and short-term marketable securities.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of interest costs associated with our notes payable issued pursuant to the loan and security agreement with an institutional lender (the “LSA”) and our convertible senior notes (the “2025 Notes”). On September 1, 2020, the term loans pursuant to the LSA matured and the remaining outstanding principal was repaid, plus accrued and unpaid interests.
Change in Fair Value of Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock Warrant Liability
Prior to our initial public offering in January 2020, we classified our redeemable convertible preferred stock warrants as a liability on our consolidated balance sheets. We remeasured the redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability to fair value at each reporting date and recognized changes in the fair value of the redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability as a component of other income (expense), net in our consolidated statements of operations.
Upon the closing of our initial public offering, the warrants to purchase shares of redeemable convertible preferred stock became exercisable for shares of common stock, at which time we adjusted the redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability to fair value prior to reclassifying the redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability to additional paid-in capital. As a result, following the closing of our initial public offering, the warrants are no longer subject to fair value accounting.
Provision for (Benefit from) Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using an asset and liability approach. Deferred income taxes reflect the net tax effects of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income tax purposes. Valuation allowances are provided when necessary to reduce net deferred tax assets to an amount that is more likely than not to be realized.
In determining whether a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets is necessary, we analyze both positive and negative evidence related to the realization of deferred tax assets and inherent in that, assess the likelihood of sufficient future taxable income. We also consider the expected reversal of deferred tax liabilities and analyze the period in which these would be expected to reverse to determine whether the taxable temporary difference amounts serve as an adequate source of future taxable income to support the realizability of the deferred tax assets. In addition, we consider whether it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities based on the technical merits of the position.
Net Loss Attributable to Noncontrolling Interest
In September 2014, we entered into a joint venture agreement with a healthcare system to jointly operate physician-owned primary care offices in a market. We had the responsibility for the provision of medical services and for the day-to-day operation and management of the offices, including the establishment of guidelines for the employment and compensation of the physicians. Based upon this and other provisions of the operating agreement that indicated that we directed the economic activities that most significantly affect the economic performance of the joint venture, we determined that the joint venture was a variable interest entity and we were the primary beneficiary.
Accordingly, we consolidated the joint venture and the healthcare system’s interest was shown within equity (deficit) as noncontrolling interest. The healthcare system’s share of earnings was recorded in the consolidated statements of operations as net loss attributable to noncontrolling interest.
Effective April 1, 2020, we terminated the joint venture agreement with the healthcare system and transferred our ownership interest in the joint venture to the healthcare system. As a result, we determined that the joint venture no longer met the definition of a variable interest entity and accordingly, we determined that the joint venture was no longer required to be consolidated under the variable interest entity model. The joint venture was deconsolidated in the consolidated financial statements as of April 1, 2020 and we derecognized all assets and liabilities of the joint venture. We did not record a gain or loss in association with the deconsolidation as we did not retain any noncontrolling interest in the joint venture and no consideration was transferred as a result of the ownership interest transfer to the healthcare system.
The consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2019 and the consolidated statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 include the operations of the joint venture through the date of deconsolidation. The consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020 does not include the operations of the joint venture.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented and as a percentage of our net revenue for those periods. Percentages presented in the following tables may not sum due to rounding.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
(1)
Includes stock-based compensation, as follows:
Net Revenue
nm - not meaningful
Net revenue increased $104.0 million, or 38%, from $276.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $380.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase in net revenue was primarily due to an increase in members by 127,000, or 30%, from 422,000 as of December 31, 2019 to 549,000 as of December 31, 2020. In addition, net revenue per member increased by 6%, attributable to a higher mix of partnership revenue including revenue related to COVID-19 testing services during the year ended December 31, 2020. The remaining increase in our net revenue was due to grant income of $2.6 million we received from the COVID-19 Provider Relief Fund administered by the HHS during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net revenue from patient service and partnerships increased $85.1 million, or 38%, from $224.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $309.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the 30% increase in members and new and expanded partnerships with health networks. Partnership revenue increased $80.7 million, or 103%, from $78.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $159.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in partnership revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily a result of the new and expanded partnerships with health networks and increased members, in addition to new on-site clinics and expanded capacity of existing on-site clinics. The COVID-19 on-site testing services for employers, schools and universities during the year ended December 31, 2020 also positively impacted our partnership revenue. Net patient service revenue increased by 3% for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to an increase in aggregate billable services, which is offset by a lower average reimbursement for these billable services as a result of COVID-19, as well as a lower mix of fee-for-service revenue due to a shift in our revenue away from patient service revenue to partnership revenue. As of December 31, 2020, all of our members are covered by health network partnerships. As a result, we expect the shift in revenue from net patient services to partnership revenue to abate going forward.
Membership revenue increased $16.3 million, or 31%, from $52.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $68.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in membership revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to an increase in members of 127,000, or 30% from 422,000 as of December 31, 2019 to 549,000 as of December 31, 2020.
Operating Expenses
Cost of Care, Exclusive of Depreciation and Amortization
Cost of care, exclusive of depreciation and amortization, increased $67.3 million, or 40%, from $167.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $235.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to increases in provider employee and support employee-related expenses of $39.2 million, occupancy costs of $11.1 million, COVID-19 testing site and related security expenses of $8.5 million, and medical supply costs of $6.4 million primarily related to COVID-19 testing. In addition to growth in our existing offices, we added 24 offices since December 31, 2019 bringing our total number of offices to 107 as of December 31, 2020.
Cost of care, exclusive of depreciation and amortization, as a percentage of net revenue increased from 61% for the year ended December 31, 2019 to 62% for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was due primarily to COVID-19 testing and screening services related costs, which was mostly offset by an increase in partnership revenue from these testing and screening services in 2020.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses decreased $2.6 million, or 6%, from $39.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $37.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily due to decreases in brand marketing and direct advertising of $7.9 million, partially offset by increases in salaries and benefits of $4.7 million and stock-based compensation expense of $1.1 million.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased $48.3 million, or 44%, from $109.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $157.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to higher salaries and benefits of $22.4 million and stock-based compensation expense of $19.1 million, as we expanded our team to support our growth. Stock-based compensation includes $3.5 million associated with performance-based options to an executive that vested immediately upon the execution of the underwriting agreement for our initial public offering. Please see Note 16, Stock-Based Compensation, to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report. In addition, we also incurred additional legal and professional services expenses of $4.9 million and insurance premiums of $4.5 million primarily associated with being a public company, and software-as-a-service costs of $1.9 million, partially offset by a decrease in travel of $4.9 million due to shelter-in-place orders.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expenses increased $8.1 million, or 57%, from $14.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $22.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to depreciation and amortization expenses recognized related to new medical offices, capitalization of software development, upgraded office software, and our new corporate office during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest Income
Interest income decreased $2.7 million from $4.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to lower interest rates and investment yields despite higher average cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balances.
Interest Expense
nm - not meaningful
Interest expense increased $13.0 million from $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $13.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to amortization of the debt discount and issuance costs on our 2025 Notes issued in the second quarter of 2020.
Change in Fair Value of Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock Warrant Liability
nm - not meaningful
The change in fair value of the redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability increased $3.0 million from $3.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $6.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was due to the change in fair value of the underlying redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant. Upon the closing of our initial public offering in the first quarter of 2020, the warrants to purchase shares of redeemable convertible preferred stock were automatically converted to warrants to purchase shares of common stock, at which time we adjusted the redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability to fair value prior to reclassifying the redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability to additional paid-in capital. As a result, following the closing of the initial public offering, the warrants are no longer subject to fair value accounting.
Provision for (Benefit from) Income Taxes
nm - not meaningful
Provision for (benefit from) income taxes decreased $210 thousand from $87 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2019 to a benefit of $123 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020 due primarily to partial release of valuation allowance offset by increased taxable income and state taxes.
Net Loss Attributable to Noncontrolling Interest
Net loss attributable to noncontrolling interest decreased $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the deconsolidation of the joint venture as of April 1, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have financed our operations primarily with the issuance of the 2025 Notes, our initial public offering, the sale of redeemable convertible preferred stock, and to a lesser extent, the issuance of term notes under credit facilities. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities of $683.0 million, compared to $146.5 million as of December 31, 2019. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure needs for at least the next twelve months.
We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our pace of new member growth and expanded enterprise client and health network relationships, our pace and timing of expansion of new medical offices, the timing and extent of spend to support the expansion of sales, marketing and development activities, and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, financial condition and results of operations would be harmed. See Item 1A. to this Annual Report “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Business and Our Industry-In order to support the growth of our business, we may need to incur additional indebtedness or seek capital through new equity or debt financings, which sources of additional capital may not be available to us on acceptable terms or at all.”
Given the uncertainty around the duration and extent of the COVID-19 pandemic, we cannot accurately predict at this time the future potential impact of the pandemic on our business, results of operations, financial condition or liquidity.
Indebtedness
In January 2013, we entered into the LSA with Silicon Valley Bank, which, as amended, provides for aggregate borrowings of up to $11.0 million in the form of term loans. In 2016, we drew down the full $11.0 million available to us under the LSA. On September 1, 2020, the term notes under the LSA matured and the remaining outstanding principal was repaid, plus accrued and unpaid interests.
In May 2020, we issued $275.0 million aggregate principal amount of 3.0% convertible senior notes due June 2025 in a private offering and in June 2020, an additional $41.2 million aggregate principal amount of such notes pursuant to the exercise in full of the over-allotment option by the initial purchasers (the “2025 Notes”). The 2025 Notes are unsecured obligations and bear interest at a fixed rate of 3.0% per annum, payable semi-annually in arrears on June 15 and December 15 of each year, commencing on December 15, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, the net carrying amount of the liability component of the 2025 Notes was $241.2 million and the net carrying amount of the equity component of the 2025 Notes was $73.4 million.
Summary Statement of Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our net cash used in operating activities was $4.4 million, resulting from our net loss of $89.4 million and net cash used by our working capital needs of $3.1 million, largely offset by adjustments for non-cash charges of $82.0 million. The cash decrease resulting from changes in our working capital in 2020 consisted primarily of a $35.2 million increase in accounts receivables, net, a $12.2 million decrease in operating lease liabilities and a $4.9 million increase in inventories and other assets, partially offset by an increase of $27.1 million in accrued expenses and accounts payable, an increase of $16.6 million in deferred revenue, a decrease of $6.5 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets and an increase of $5.1 million in other liabilities. The increase in accounts receivable, net and deferred revenue is primarily due to growth of our partnership with health networks and growth of our enterprise and on-site clients. The net increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses is primarily related to timing of payments for accrued compensation and accrued interest on our 2025 Notes.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, our net cash used in operating activities was $31.7 million, resulting from our net loss of $53.7 million and net cash used in by our working capital needs of $17.7 million, partially offset by adjustments for non-cash charges of $39.7 million. The cash decrease resulting from changes in our working capital in 2019 consisted primarily of a $14.5 million increase in accounts receivable, net, an increase in other assets of $4.6 million, and a $8.1 million decrease in operating lease liabilities, partially offset by a $7.4 million increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses, and a $2.1 million increase in deferred revenue. The increase in accounts receivable, net is primarily due to receivables from health network partners that have longer invoicing and payment cycles than insurance payers. The increase in other assets is primarily associated with $3.6 million in deferred financing costs that will be offset against the proceeds of our initial public offering. The increases in accounts payable and accrued expenses was due to our higher level of operating activities and the timing of vendor invoicing and payments.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our net cash used by investing activities was $514.5 million, resulting primarily from purchases of short-term marketable securities of $963.3 million and purchases of property and equipment, net of $63.7 million related to leasehold improvements, computer equipment, and furniture and fixtures for new offices, remodels and improvements to existing offices, capitalization of internal-use software development costs, and office hardware and software. This was partially offset by sales and maturities of short-term marketable securities of $513.3 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, our net cash used by investing activities was $23.7 million, resulting primarily from maturities of short-term marketable securities of $324.3 million, offset by purchases of short-term marketable securities of $246.1 million and purchases of property and equipment of $54.4 million related to leasehold improvements, computer equipment, and furniture and fixtures for our new corporate office, new offices and remodels of existing offices, in addition to capitalization of internal-use software development costs.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our net cash provided by financing activities was $604.5 million, resulting primarily from proceeds from the issuance of our 2025 Notes of $316.3 million, our initial public offering of $281.8 million, exercises of stock options and warrants of $35.8 million, proceeds from the issuance of stock under our employee stock purchase plan of $4.8 million, offset by payment of the 2025 Notes issuance costs of $9.4 million, payment of offering costs associated with our initial public offering net against reimbursements for our secondary offering of $20.5 million and payment of a debt obligation of $3.3 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, financing activities used $1.4 million of cash, resulting primarily from payment of debt obligation of $4.4 million, partially offset by proceeds from the exercise of stock options of $3.0 million.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
(1)
Amounts in this table reflect the contractually required interest payable pursuant to the 2025 Notes.
(2)
This table includes contractual obligations relating to leases that have not yet commenced. In addition, the operating lease amounts presented in this table represent cash payments that are not discounted to the present value.
(3)
Amounts in the table do not reflect purchase obligations entered into in January and February 2021 within the ordinary course of business pursuant to which we are committed to spend an aggregate of $6.6 million.
The contractual commitment amounts in the table and footnotes above are associated with agreements that are enforceable and legally binding. Obligations under contracts that we can cancel without a significant penalty are not included in the table or footnotes above.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Actual results may differ from these estimates. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and our actual results, our future financial statements will be affected.
While our significant accounting policies are described in greater detail in Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue from contracts with customers using the five-step method described in Note 2 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
We generate net revenue through net patient service revenue, partnership revenue and membership revenue. Contracts that contain multiple performance obligations require an allocation of the transaction price to each performance obligation based on their relative standalone selling price. We determine standalone selling price, or SSP, for all our performance obligations using observable inputs, such as standalone sales and historical contract pricing. SSP is consistent with our overall pricing objectives, taking into consideration the type of services. SSP also reflects the amount we would charge for that performance obligation if it were sold separately in a standalone sale, and the price we would sell to similar customers in similar circumstances.
In general, we recognize net patient service revenue as services are rendered, which are delivered over a period of time but typically within one day, when we provide services to the patient. We recognize partnership revenue over time as we stand ready to provide professional clinical services and the associated management and administrative services to our employers and health network partners. We recognize membership revenue over time as we provision access to primary care services to consumer members and enterprise clients who purchase access to memberships for their employees and dependents.
We review the contract terms and conditions to evaluate the timing and amount of revenue recognition; the related contract balances; and our remaining performance obligations. We also estimate the variable consideration related to customer rebates or discounts based on our assessment of historical, current, and forecasted performance. These evaluations require significant judgment that could affect the timing and amount of revenue recognized.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure stock-based awards granted to employees and directors based on their fair value on the date of the grant and recognize compensation expense for those awards over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. For stock option awards issued with only service-based vesting conditions, we record the expense for these awards using the straight-line method. The fair value of these stock option grants is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which requires inputs based on certain subjective assumptions, including fair value of the underlying common stock, the expected stock price volatility, the expected term of the option, the risk-free interest rate for a period that approximates the expected term of the option, and our expected dividend yield. The Company also uses the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to estimate the fair value of its stock purchase rights under the 2020 Employee Stock Purchase Plan on the grant date.
Changes in the following assumptions can materially affect the estimate of fair value and ultimately how much stock-based compensation expense is recognized; and the resulting change in fair value, if any, is recognized in our statement of operations and comprehensive loss during the period the related services are rendered. These inputs are subjective and generally require significant analysis and judgment to develop.
Expected Term. We determine the expected term of awards using the simplified method which is used when there is insufficient historical data about exercise patterns and post-vesting employment termination behavior. The simplified method is based on the vesting period and the contractual term for each grant, or for each vesting-tranche for awards with graded vesting. The mid-point between the vesting date and the maximum contractual expiration date is used as the expected term under this method. For awards with multiple vesting-tranches, the times from grant until the mid-points for each of the tranches may be averaged to provide an overall expected term.
Expected Volatility. We use an average historical stock price volatility of a peer group of comparable publicly traded healthcare companies representative of our expected future stock price volatility, as we do not have sufficient trading history for our common stock. For purposes of identifying these peer companies, we consider the industry, stage of development, size and financial leverage of potential comparable companies. For each grant, we measure historical volatility over a period equivalent to the expected term.
Expected Dividend Rate. We have not paid and do not anticipate paying any dividends in the foreseeable future. Accordingly, we estimate the dividend yield to be zero.
Risk-Free Interest Rate. The risk-free interest rate is based on the implied yield currently available on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with maturities similar to the expected term of the award.
For stock option awards issued with market-based vesting conditions, the grant date fair value is determined based on multiple stock price paths developed through the use of a Monte Carlo simulation that incorporates into the valuation the possibility that the market condition may not be satisfied. A Monte Carlo simulation requires the use of various assumptions, including the underlying stock price, volatility and the risk-free interest rate as of the valuation date, corresponding to the length of the time remaining in the performance period, and expected dividend yield. The expected term represents the derived service period for the respective tranches, which is the longer of the explicit service period or the period in which the market conditions are expected to be met. Stock-based compensation expense associated with market-based awards is recognized over the derived requisite service using the accelerated attribution method, regardless of whether the market conditions are achieved. If the related market conditions are achieved earlier than the derived service period, the stock-based compensation expense will be recognized as a cumulative catch-up expense from the grant date to that point in time in achieving the share price goal.
We estimate forfeitures based on historical experience and revise those estimates in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from the estimated amounts.
We continue to use judgment in evaluating the expected volatility and expected term utilized in our stock-based compensation expense calculation on a prospective basis. As we continue to accumulate additional data related to our common stock, we may refine our estimates of expected volatility and expected term, which could materially impact our future stock-based compensation expense.
Consolidation of Variable Interest Entities
GAAP requires variable interest entities, or VIEs, to be consolidated if an entity’s interest in the VIE is a controlling financial interest. Under the variable interest model, a controlling financial interest is determined based on which entity, if any, has (i) the power to direct the activities of the VIE that most significantly impacts the VIEs economic performance and (ii) the obligations to absorb losses that could potentially be significant to the VIE or the right to receive benefits from the VIE that could potentially be significant to the VIE.
We perform ongoing reassessments of whether changes in the facts and circumstances regarding our involvement with a VIE would cause our consolidation conclusion to change. The consolidation status of the VIEs with which we are involved may change as a result of such reassessments. Changes in consolidation status are applied in accordance with applicable GAAP. Please see Note 3, “Variable Interest Entities” to our consolidated financial statements.
Valuation of Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock Warrant Liability
Prior to our initial public offering in the first quarter of 2020, we classified our redeemable convertible preferred stock warrants as a liability on our consolidated balance sheets. We remeasured the redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability to fair value at each reporting date and recognized changes in the fair value of the redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability as a component of other income (expense), net in our consolidated statements of operations.
Upon the closing of our initial public offering, the warrants to purchase shares of redeemable convertible preferred stock became exercisable and were automatically converted to warrants to purchase shares of common stock, at which time we adjusted the redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability to fair value at $13.7 million prior to reclassifying the redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability to additional paid-in capital. As a result, following the closing of our initial public offering, the warrants are no longer subject to fair value accounting.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”). Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We have elected to use this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date that we are (i) no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with the new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earlier to occur of (1) (a) December 31, 2025, (b) the last day of the fiscal year in which our annual gross revenue is $1.07 billion or more, or (c) the date on which we are deemed to be a “large-accelerated filer,” under the rules of the SEC with at least $700 million of our common stock held by non-affiliates as of the prior June 30th, and (2) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt during the prior three-year period.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Please see Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.