Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our historical consolidated financial statements and the related notes. This management’s discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Any statements that are not statements of historical fact are forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause our actual results or events to differ materially from those expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in section Item 1A. “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report. Except as required by applicable law we do not undertake any obligation to update our forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances occurring after the date of this Annual Report.
Overview
We are an early-stage biotechnology company that is focusing on building high fidelity, 3D tissues that recapitulate key aspects of human disease. We use these models to identify gene targets capable of modulating the disease phenotype across multiple patients and intend to initiate drug discovery programs around these validated targets. We are initially targeting the intestine and have ongoing 3D tissue development efforts in UC and CD. We intend to add additional tissues/diseases/targets to our portfolio in the coming year. In line with these plans, we are building upon both our external and in-house scientific expertise, which will be essential to our drug development effort.
We use our proprietary technology to build functional 3D human tissues that mimic key aspects of native human tissue composition, architecture, function and disease. Our advances include cell type-specific compartments, prevalent intercellular tight junctions, and the formation of microvascular structures. Management believes these attributes can enable critical complex, multicellular disease models that can be used to develop clinically effective drugs for selected therapeutic areas.
Our NovoGen Bioprinters® are automated devices that enable the fabrication of 3D living tissues comprised of mammalian cells. We believe that the use of our bioprinting platform as well as complementary 3D technologies will allow us to develop an understanding of disease biology that leads to validated novel drug targets, and therapeutics to those targets to treat disease.
The majority of our current focus is on IBD, including CD and UC. We expect to create disease models, leveraging our prior work including the work found in our peer-reviewed publication on bioprinted intestinal tissues (Madden et al. Bioprinted 3D Primary Human Intestinal Tissues Model Aspects of Native Physiology and ADME/Tox Functions. iScience. 2018 Apr 27;2:156-167. doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2018.03.015.) Our current understanding of intestinal tissue models and IBD disease models leads us to believe that we can create models that provide greater insight into the biology of these diseases than are generally currently available. Using these disease models, we intend to identify and validate novel therapeutic targets. After finding therapeutic drug targets, we will focus on developing novel small molecule, antibody, or other therapeutic drug candidates to treat the disease, and advance these drug candidates towards an IND and clinical trials.
We expect to broaden our work into additional therapeutic areas over time and are currently exploring specific tissues for development. In our work to identify the areas of interest, we evaluate areas that might be better served with 3D disease models than currently available models as well as the commercial opportunity.
Historical Operations and Strategic Alternatives Process
From early 2018 to August 2019, we focused our efforts on developing our in vivo liver tissues to treat end-stage liver disease and a select group of life-threatening, orphan diseases, for which there are limited treatment options other than organ transplantation. We also explored the development of other potential pipeline in vivo tissue constructs in-house and through collaborations with academic and government researchers. In the past, we also explored the development of in vitro tissues, including proof of concept models of diseased tissues, for use in drug discovery and development.
In August 2019, after a rigorous assessment of our in vivo liver therapeutic tissue program, we concluded that the variability of biological performance and related duration of potential benefits no longer supported an attractive opportunity due to redevelopment challenges and lengthening timelines to compile sufficient data to support an IND filing. As a result, we suspended development of our lead program and all other related in-house pipeline development activities.
Our Board also engaged a financial advisory firm to explore our available strategic alternatives, including evaluating a range of ways to generate value from our technology platform and intellectual property, our commercial and development capabilities, our listing on the Nasdaq Capital Market, and our remaining financial assets. These strategic alternatives included possible mergers and business combinations, sales of part or all of our assets, and licensing and partnering arrangements. We implemented various restructuring steps to manage our resources and extend our cash runway, including reducing commercial activities related to our liver tissues, except for sales of primary human cells out of inventory, negotiating an exit from our long-term facility lease, selling various assets, and reducing our workforce. Additionally, in November 2019, we sold certain inventory and equipment and related proprietary
information held by our wholly-owned subsidiary, Samsara, and as a result of such sale, Samsara ceased its operations and has since been dissolved.
After conducting a diligent and extensive process of evaluating strategic alternatives and identifying and reviewing potential candidates for a strategic acquisition or other transaction, which included the receipt of more than 27 non-binding indications of interest from interested parties and careful evaluation and consideration of those proposals, and following extensive negotiation with Tarveda, on December 13, 2019, we entered into the Merger Agreement. Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, and subject to the satisfaction or waiver of the conditions set forth in the Merger Agreement, our wholly-owned merger subsidiary would merge with and into Tarveda, with Tarveda becoming a wholly-owned subsidiary of Organovo and the surviving corporation of the Merger . The Merger Agreement included various conditions to the consummation of the Merger, including approval by our stockholders at the Special Meeting.
At the Special Meeting, the Merger was not approved by our stockholders. As a result, we terminated the Merger Agreement with Tarveda. Pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement, we were obligated to reimburse certain of Tarveda’s merger-related expenses not to exceed $300,000, which was offset by Tarveda’s portion of shared expenses incurred by us in fiscal 2020.
The Cooperation Agreement and Advisory Nominees Proposal
Following the Special Meeting and the termination of the Merger Agreement, our Board continued to solicit stockholder feedback regarding our strategic alternatives and how to maximize stockholder value. In response to feedback from our largest stockholder regarding its desire for our Board to consider opportunities in the 3D bioprinting field and suggestion that our Board should speak with Keith Murphy, our founder, stockholder and former Chief Executive Officer and Chairman, for potential business ideas, our Board initiated discussions with Mr. Murphy. Based on these discussions, we entered into the Cooperation Agreement. Under the terms of the Cooperation Agreement, our Board appointed Mr. Murphy and Adam K. Stern to the Board as Class III directors, and two of our existing directors, Richard Maroun and David Shapiro, resigned from our Board and the committees thereof. Our Board also agreed to nominate, recommend, support and solicit proxies for the re-election of Messrs. Murphy and Stern at the 2020 Annual Meeting. Our Board also agreed to nominate, recommend, support and solicit proxies for the Advisory Nominees Proposal at the 2020 Annual Meeting to appoint the Advisory Nominees to our Board. Mr. Murphy identified each of the Advisory Nominees. Our Board approved the appointment of the Advisory Nominees, to be automatically effective immediately following the final adjournment of the 2020 Annual Meeting if the final vote tabulation for the Advisory Nominees Proposal received more votes cast “FOR” than “AGAINST” its approval. In addition, each of our then-current directors (other than Messrs. Murphy and Stern) agreed to resign from our Board immediately following the appointment of the Advisory Nominees. At the 2020 Annual Meeting held on September 15, 2020, our stockholders approved the re-election of Messrs. Murphy and Stern to our Board as Class III directors to hold office until the 2023 Annual Meeting of Stockholders and the final vote tabulation for the Advisory Nominees Proposal received more votes cast “FOR” than “AGAINST” its approval and, accordingly, effective upon the final adjournment of the 2020 Annual Meeting, Ms. Milhous was appointed as a Class I director to hold office until the 2021 Annual Meeting of Stockholders and Messrs. Cohen and Gobel were appointed as Class II directors to hold office until the 2022 Annual Meeting and Carolyn Beaver, Taylor Crouch, Mark Kessel and Kirk Malloy, Ph.D. each resigned as directors. Following the election of the New Director Slate, we have recommenced operations and are now focusing our future efforts on developing highly customized 3D human tissues as living, dynamic models of healthy and diseased human biology for drug development.
COVID-19
In December 2019 a respiratory illness caused by a novel strain of coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, causing the Coronavirus Disease 2019, also known as COVID-19 emerged. While initially the outbreak was largely concentrated in China, it has since spread globally and been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization. Global health concerns relating to the COVID-19 pandemic have been weighing on the macroeconomic environment, and the pandemic has significantly increased economic volatility and uncertainty. The pandemic has resulted in government authorities implementing numerous measures to try to contain the virus, such as travel bans and restrictions, quarantines, shelter-in-place or stay-at-home orders, and business shutdowns. In 2020, we adapted quickly to COVID-19, instituting universal masking and distancing in the lab and in the offices. We encouraged and enabled remote work whenever possible. We instituted safety check software to monitor symptoms. We have successfully maintained a robust level of progress while ensuring the safety of our employees. As the viral load and variants allow, we intend to carefully return to more typical lab and office work flow.
The extent to which the coronavirus impacts our operations will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, including the rise of vaccine-resistant variants, duration of the outbreak, travel bans, restrictions, quarantines, shelter-in-place or stay-at-home orders, and business shutdowns. In particular, the continued COVID-19 pandemic could adversely impact various aspects of our operations, including among others, our ability to raise additional capital, the timing and ability to pursue our revised strategy, given the impact the pandemic may have on the manufacturing and supply chain, sales and marketing and clinical trial operations of potential strategic partners and the ability to advance our research and development activities and pursue development of our pipeline products each of which could have an adverse impact on our business and our financial
results. Our employees and consultants have recently returned to working at our office and lab when necessary and we currently believe our operations have not been negatively impacted by the pandemic.
Critical Accounting Policies, Estimates, and Judgments
Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). Any reference in this annual report to applicable guidance is meant to refer to the authoritative accounting principles generally accepted in the United States as found in the Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) and Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) of the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We continually evaluate our estimates and judgments, the most critical of which are those related to stock-based compensation expense. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Besides the estimates identified above that are considered critical, we make many other accounting estimates in preparing our financial statements and related disclosures. All estimates, whether or not deemed critical, affect reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, as well as disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. These estimates and judgments are also based on historical experience and other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Materially different results can occur as circumstances change and additional information becomes known, even for estimates and judgments that are not deemed critical.
Since March 31, 2020, the significant changes to our critical accounting policies include removing revenue recognition related items. Our significant accounting policies are set forth in “Note 1. Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained within this Annual Report. Of those policies, we believe that the policies discussed below may involve a higher degree of judgment and may be more critical to an accurate reflection of our financial condition and results of operations. Accounting policies regarding stock-based compensation are considered critical, as they require significant estimates, judgements, and assumptions. If there is a difference between the assumptions used in determining our stock-based compensation expense and the actual factors that become known over time, specifically with respect to anticipated forfeitures, we may change the input factors used in determining stock-based compensation costs for future grants. These changes, if any, may materially impact our results of operations in the period such changes are made.
Stock-based compensation
For purposes of calculating stock-based compensation, we estimate the fair value of stock options and shares acquirable under our Amended and Restated 2012 Equity Incentive Plan (the “2012 Plan”), our 2016 Employee Stock Purchase Plan (the “ESPP”) or our 2021 Inducement Equity Plan (the “Inducement Plan”) using a Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The determination of the fair value of share-based payment awards utilizing the Black-Scholes model is affected by our stock price and a number of assumptions, including expected volatility, expected life, risk-free interest rate and expected dividends. For stock options, prior to fiscal year 2020, we used a blend of historical volatility and implied volatility of comparable companies. As of April 1, 2019, we were using the Company-specific historical volatility rate as it was more reflective of market conditions and a better indicator of expected volatility. For certain options granted with vesting criteria contingent on market conditions, we engage with valuation specialists to calculate fair value and requisite service periods using Monte Carlo simulations. For shares acquirable under our ESPP, we use our Company-specific volatility rate. The expected life of the stock options is based on historical and other economic data trended into the future. The risk-free interest rate assumption is based on observed interest rates appropriate for the expected terms of our stock options. The dividend yield assumption is based on our history and expectation of no dividend payouts. If factors change and we employ different assumptions, our stock-based compensation expense may differ significantly from what we have recorded in the past.
For purposes of calculating stock-based compensation, we estimate the fair value of restricted stock units (“RSUs”) and performance-based restricted stock units (“PBRSUs”) with pre-defined performance criteria, based on the closing stock price on the date of grant. No exercise price or other monetary payment is required for receipt of the shares issued in settlement of the respective award; instead, consideration is furnished in the form of the participant’s service to us. The expense for PBRSUs with pre-defined performance criteria is adjusted with the probability of achievement of such performance criteria at each period end.
All of the above accounting policies regarding stock-based compensation are considered critical, as they require significant estimates, judgements, and assumptions. If there is a difference between the assumptions used in determining our stock-based compensation expense and the actual factors that become known over time, specifically with respect to anticipated forfeitures, we may change the input factors used in determining stock-based compensation costs for future grants. These changes, if any, may materially impact our results of operations in the period such changes are made.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended March 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands, except percentages):
Revenues
We had no revenues for the year ended March 31, 2021 compared to $2.2 million of revenue for the year ended March 31, 2020. The $2.2 million decrease was due to the termination of revenue generating activities following our decision to restructure operations to preserve capital as we pursued various strategic alternatives.
Costs and Expenses
Cost of Revenues
Cost of product and service revenues, which reflects expenses related to manufacturing our products and delivering services, was zero for the year ended March 31, 2021, compared to $0.3 million for the year ended March 31, 2020. The decrease was due to the termination of revenue generating activities following our decision to restructure operations to preserve capital as we pursued various strategic alternatives.
Research and Development Expenses
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands, except percentages):
Research and development expenses decreased $4.2 million, or 79%, from approximately $5.3 million for the year ended March 31, 2020 to approximately $1.1 million for the year ended March 31, 2021 as we materially reduced research and development activities following our decision to pursue our strategic alternatives during the second quarter of fiscal 2020. This action resulted in a $2.0 million reduction of personnel related costs, a $0.6 million reduction in lab expenses, a $0.9 million reduction in facilities costs, and a $0.7 million reduction in all other costs. Our full-time research and development staff decreased from an average of fourteen full-time employees for the year ended March 31, 2020 to an average of two full-time employees for the year ended March 31, 2021. Going forward, in line with our renewed research and development efforts, we expect to hire additional employees and incur significantly more research and development expenses.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
The following table summarizes our selling, general and administrative expenses for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands, except percentages):
Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased approximately $2.3 million, or 13%, from $18.1 million for the year ended March 31, 2020 to approximately $15.7 million for the year ended March 31, 2021. Overall, the decrease year over year is due to minimal spending in the first and second quarters of fiscal 2021 following the termination of the Merger Agreement. Other activity in fiscal 2021 includes the expenses incurred as a result of the approval of the Advisory Nominees Proposal in September 2020 triggering a “Change of Control” under our severance plan, as well as renewed operations in the third quarter. The higher expenses in fiscal 2020 are attributed to normal operations as well as our business restructuring in the second quarter to pursue strategic alternatives, which resulted in significant expenses. Overall, we had a $0.6 million decrease in personnel related costs, a $0.9 million decrease in depreciation and amortization, a $0.4 decrease in facilities costs, a $1.0 million decrease in general, legal, and corporate costs, offset by a $0.5 million increase in consulting fees. Our average selling, general and administrative headcount was five full-time employees for the year ended March 31, 2021 compared to twelve full-time employees in the prior year period.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income was less than $0.1 million for the year ended March 31, 2021. A loss of less than $0.1 million from the disposal of fixed assets was offset by interest income of less than $0.1 million. For the year ended March 31, 2020, other income was approximately $2.8 million and consisted of a $1.2 million gain from the sale of Samsara assets, a $0.5 million of gain on our lease termination, $0.5 million of income from the sale of other assets and $0.6 million of interest income.
Financial Condition, Liquidity and Capital Resources
We originally devoted our efforts to developing a platform technology to produce and study living tissues, with a focus on liver tissue, that emulate key aspects of human biology and disease, raising capital and building infrastructure. Following the decision to explore strategic alternatives, we took steps to manage our resources and extend our cash runway. These steps included reducing all commercial and research and development laboratory activities related to our liver tissues, except for sales or primary human cells out of inventory, negotiating an exit from our long-term facility lease, selling lab equipment and other inventory, and reducing our workforce. We have retained certain key management, employees and consultants, our core intellectual property, licenses, collaborations with research institutions and universities, and proprietary equipment. Going forward, we intend to leverage our proprietary technology platform to develop therapeutic drugs. Our initial plan is to focus on IBD, including CD and UC with a goal of broadening our work into additional therapeutic areas over time. In connection with our new strategy, we intend to rebuild our research and development functions to support our screening and drug development efforts.
As of March 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $37.4 million and an accumulated deficit of $296.3 million. As of March 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $27.4 million and an accumulated deficit of $279.5 million. We had negative cash flows from operations of $13.3 million and $14.9 million for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
As of March 31, 2021, we had total current assets of approximately $38.4 million and current liabilities of approximately $0.7 million, resulting in working capital of $37.7 million. At March 31, 2020, we had total current assets of approximately $28.3 million and current liabilities of approximately $1.8 million, resulting in working capital of $26.5 million.
The following table sets forth a summary of the primary sources and uses of cash for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was approximately $13.3 million and $14.9 million for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The $1.6 million decrease in operating cash usage, for the year ended March 31, 2021, can be attributed primarily to our operational restructuring, which included a significant decrease in headcount.
Investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $0.4 million versus net cash provided by investing activities of $0.7 million for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The net cash used in investing activities was related to the purchase of fixed assets in the year ended March 31, 2021. The net cash provided by investing activities was related to proceeds from the disposal of fixed assets associated with the streamlining of our operations in the year ended March 31, 2020.
Financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was approximately $23.8 million and $4.9 million for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The results in both years are primarily driven by at-the-market share offerings. Refer to “Operations funding requirements” below for further information regarding financing activities.
Operations funding requirements
During the year ended March 31, 2021, we raised net proceeds of approximately $23.8 million through the sale of 1,932,972 shares of our common stock through at-the-market offerings.
Through March 31, 2021, we have financed our operations primarily through the sale of common stock in public offerings, the private placement of equity securities, from revenue derived from products and research-based services, grants, and collaborative research agreements, and from the sale of convertible notes.
Our ongoing cash requirements include research and development expenses, compensation for personnel, consulting fees, legal and accounting support, insurance premiums, facilities, maintenance of our intellectual property portfolio, license and collaboration agreements, listing on the Nasdaq Capital Market, and other misceallaneous fees to support our operations. We expect our total operating expense for the fiscal year ending March 31, 2022 to be between $13.0 million and $15.0 million. Based on our current operating plan and available cash resources, we believe we have sufficient resources to fund our business for at least the next twelve months.
In June 2021, our U.S. Pat. Nos. 9,855,369 and 9,149,952, which relate to our bioprinter technology, are the subject of IPR proceedings filed by Cellink AB and its subsidiaries, MatTek Incorporated and Visikol, Inc. collectively (“Cellink AB”). The objective of the IPR proceedings is to invalidate the claims in the noted patents. We estimate the costs of the IPR proceedings to total between $850,000 and $950,000.
We previously had an effective shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-222929) (the “2018 Shelf”) that registered $100.0 million of common stock, preferred stock, warrants and units, or any combination of the foregoing, that was set to expire on February 22, 2021. On January 19, 2021, we filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-252224) and a related prospectus supplement. The shelf registration statement was declared effective by the SEC on January 29, 2021 (the “2021 Shelf”). The 2021 Shelf registered $150.0 million of common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants and units, or any combination of the foregoing. The 2021 Shelf replaced the 2018 Shelf on January 29, 2021.
On March 16, 2018, we entered into a Sales Agreement (“2018 Sales Agreement”) with H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC and Jones Trading Institutional Services LLC (each an “Agent” and together, the “Agents”) and filed a prospectus supplement to the 2018 Shelf, pursuant to which we could offer and sell, from time to time through the Agents, shares of our common stock in at-the-market sales transactions having an aggregate offering price of up to $50.0 million. We raised approximately $22.0 million in gross proceeds under
the 2018 Shelf and the 2018 Sales Agreement. On January 29, 2021, we filed a prospectus supplement to the 2021 Shelf, pursuant to which we may offer and sell, from time to time through the Agents, shares of our common stock in at-the-market sales transactions having an aggregate offering price of up to $50.0 million less the at-the-market sales raised under the 2018 Shelf. Any shares offered and sold will be issued pursuant to our 2021 Shelf.
We can raise up to $150.0 million in future offerings under the 2021 Shelf, which includes up to $28.0 million through our at-the-market program. During the year ended March 31, 2021, we sold 379,655 shares of common stock in at-the-market offerings, with net proceeds of approximately $3.0 million under the 2018 Shelf. During the year ended March 31, 2021, we sold 1,553,317 shares of common stock in at-the-market offerings, with net proceeds of approximately $20.8 million under the 2021 Shelf. As of March 31, 2021, there was approximately $128.6 million available in future offerings under the 2021 Shelf, and approximately $28.0 million available for future offerings through our at-the-market program.
Having insufficient funds may require us to relinquish rights to our technology on less favorable terms than we would otherwise choose. Failure to obtain adequate financing could adversely affect our ability to operate as a going concern. If we raise additional funds from the issuance of equity securities, substantial dilution to our existing stockholders would likely result. If we raise additional funds by incurring debt financing, the terms of the debt may involve significant cash payment obligations as well as covenants and specific financial ratios that may restrict our ability to operate our business.
On June 25, 2019, we received a notice letter from the Listing Qualifications Staff of Nasdaq indicating that, based upon the closing bid price of our common stock for the last 30 consecutive business days, we no longer met the requirement to maintain a minimum closing bid price of $1 per share, as set forth in Nasdaq Listing Rule 5450(a)(1). On December 26, 2019, we obtained an additional compliance period of 180 calendar days by electing to transfer to the Nasdaq Capital Market to take advantage of the additional compliance period offered on that market. On March 26, 2020, we obtained shareholder approval to effect a reverse stock split in a range from 20:1 to 40:1. On August 18, 2020, we effected a 1-for-20 reverse stock split of our common stock and on September 2, 2020, we received notification from Nasdaq that we had regained compliance.
As of March 31, 2021, we had 8,670,492 total issued and outstanding shares of common stock.
Our 2008 Equity Incentive Plan (the “2008 Plan”) provided for the issuance of up to 76,079 shares of common stock upon the exercise of outstanding stock options, of which 44,812 shares were issued. The 2008 Plan terminated on July 1, 2018. The 2012 Plan provides for the issuance of up to 1,427,699 shares of our common stock, of which 63,759 shares remain available for issuance as of March 31, 2021, to executive officers, directors, advisory board members, employees and consultants. Additionally, 75,000 shares of common stock have been reserved for issuance under the 2016 ESPP, of which 59,435 shares remain available for future issuance as of March 31, 2021. Further, 104,410 shares of common stock have been reserved for issuances under certain Inducement Award Stock Option Agreements and Inducement Award Performance-Based Restricted Stock Unit Agreements (the “Inducement Award Agreements”). Finally, 750,000 shares of common stock have been reserved for issuances under our Inducement Plan. In aggregate, issued and outstanding common stock and shares issuable under outstanding equity awards or reserved for future issuance under the 2008 Plan, the 2012 Plan, the Inducement Plan, the Inducement Award Agreements, and the 2016 ESPP total 9,831,627 shares of common stock as of March 31, 2021.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements, including unrecorded derivative instruments that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources. We have certain options outstanding, but we do not expect to receive sufficient proceeds from the exercise of these instruments unless and until the underlying securities are registered, and/or all restrictions on trading, if any, are removed, and in either case the trading price of our common stock is significantly greater than the applicable exercise prices of the options and warrants.
Effect of Inflation and Changes in Prices
Management does not believe that inflation and changes in price will have a material effect on our operations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For information regarding recently adopted and issued accounting pronouncements, see “Note 12. Recent Accounting Pronouncements” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements contained in this Annual Report.