ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes to those statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Form 10-K. The last day of our fiscal year is January 31, and we refer to our fiscal year ended January 31, 2021 as fiscal 2021, our fiscal year ended January 31, 2020 as fiscal 2020 and our fiscal year ended January 31, 2019 as fiscal 2019. All other references to years are references to calendar years.
This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses fiscal 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between fiscal 2021 and 2020. Discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for fiscal 2020 as compared to 2019 is included in Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended January 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on April 14, 2020.
Executive Overview
Ooma creates powerful connected experiences for businesses and consumers. Our smart SaaS and UCaaS platforms serve as a communications hub, which offers cloud-based communications solutions, smart security and other connected services. Our business and residential solutions deliver our proprietary PureVoice high-definition voice quality, advanced functionality and integration with mobile devices, at competitive pricing and value. Our platforms help create smart workplaces and homes by providing communications, monitoring, security, automation, productivity and networking infrastructure applications.
We generate subscription and services revenue by selling subscriptions and other services for our communications services, as well as other connected services. We generate our product and other revenue from the sale of our on-premise appliances and end-point devices, as well as from porting fees to enable customers to transfer their existing phone numbers to the Ooma service. We primarily offer our solutions in the U.S. and Canada.
We refer to Ooma Office and Ooma Enterprise collectively as Ooma Business. Ooma Residential includes Ooma Telo basic and premier services as well as our smart security solutions. See Item 1. Business above for additional information regarding our business, including products and services offered, competitive market and regulatory matters.
Fiscal 2021 Financial Performance
•
Total revenue was $168.9 million, up 11% year-over-year, primarily driven by the continued growth of Ooma Business.
•
Subscription and services revenue increased as a percentage of our total revenue over the last three years, from approximately 90% in fiscal 2019 to 93% in fiscal 2021.
•
Subscription and services revenue from Ooma Business and Ooma Residential grew 27% and 3% year-over-year, respectively.
•
Total gross margin was 62%, compared to 59% in fiscal 2020, primarily driven by the growth of Ooma Business and associated benefits of economies of scale, and cost savings associated with the discontinuation of Ooma Smart Cam in October 2019.
•
GAAP net loss was $2.4 million, improved from a net loss of $18.8 million in fiscal 2020, largely driven by our revenue growth, higher gross margins, and due to lower travel and other expenses.
•
Non-GAAP net income was $11.5 million, compared to a non-GAAP net loss of $0.7 million in fiscal 2020.
•
Adjusted EBITDA was $14.0 million, compared to $1.0 million in fiscal 2020.
•
As of January 31, 2021, we had total cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments of $28.3 million, up $2.2 million from $26.1 million as of January 31, 2020.
Ooma | FY2021 Form 10-K | 43
COVID-19 Update
In December 2019, a novel coronavirus disease known as COVID-19 was reported and on March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization characterized COVID-19 as a pandemic. The worldwide spread of COVID-19 has resulted in authorities implementing numerous measures to contain the virus, including travel bans and restrictions, quarantines, shelter-in-place orders, and business limitations and shutdowns.
During the global pandemic, we have continued to remain focused on executing our growth strategy while also adapting to the changes in our market environment and business activities driven by COVID-19. Since mid-March 2020, we have required our employees to work from home and suspended all non-essential business travel, which changed how we operate our business. Inside sales and online sales functions were less affected, but sales through face-to-face channels and through retailers became more challenging.
In the first half of fiscal 2021, we saw our customer churn rate increase from pre-pandemic levels and experienced some delays in installation services, which we believe was primarily attributable to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. During the second half of fiscal 2021, we have seen some stabilization in our churn rate. While our revenue can be relatively predictable as a result of our subscription-based business model, the severity and duration of the pandemic and its impact on our operations continues to remain uncertain and may not be fully reflected in our results of operations and overall financial performance until future periods.
A prolonged pandemic could adversely impact the efficiency and effectiveness of our organization, further disrupt our global supply chain network, result in delays or decreases in customer collections, reduce demand for our products and services, increase churn, and inhibit our sales efforts, any of which could materially impact our revenues, results of operations, cash flows and liquidity. For more information on risks associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, please see “Risk Factors” in Item 1A above.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
Our historical financial performance and key business metrics have been, and we expect that our financial performance and key business metrics in the future will be, primarily driven by the following factors:
Core user growth. Our growth in the number of core users, a key business metric defined below, is a key indicator of our market penetration, the growth of our business and our anticipated future subscription and services revenue, especially Ooma Business.
Low core user churn. We believe that maintaining our current low core user churn is an important factor in our ability to continue to improve our financial performance and is a distinguishing advantage over many of our competitors. We focus on providing high-quality services and support to our users so they are motivated to remain with us. Our core user churn rate is higher for Ooma Business customers than Ooma Residential customers, which is driven in part by the failure rate of small businesses as well as the COVID-19 pandemic. Accordingly, we expect that our overall core user churn rate will increase as sales of our business products increase relative to sales of residential products.
Growth in additional services. We believe that there is significant opportunity for us to increase the additional subscription and services that our customers purchase from us in both the business and residential markets. Customers who purchase additional subscription and services from us generate more value to Ooma over the life of our customer relationship. In order to drive adoption of additional services, we will need to continue to enhance our existing solutions and develop new connected services. For example, we intend to invest in Ooma Business to launch additional features to continue our momentum serving larger businesses and further increase our average revenue per user. We also plan to evolve our Ooma Connect and Wi-Fi solutions as part of our longer-term strategy to provide a more complete solution for small and medium-sized businesses.
Investing in long-term revenue growth. We believe that our total addressable market opportunity is large and we intend to continue significantly investing in sales and marketing to grow our user base. We expect the domestic and international markets in which we conduct our business will remain highly competitive. We expect to continue investing in research and development to enhance our platforms and develop additional connected services. We may evaluate additional possible acquisitions of businesses, products and technologies that are complementary to our business.
Ooma | FY2021 Form 10-K | 44
Key Business Metrics
We review the key metrics below to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate financial projections and make strategic decisions.
The following table sets forth our key metrics for each of the periods indicated (in thousands, except percentages):
Core Users increased year-over-year, which was primarily driven by growth in business users. As of January 31, 2021, Ooma Business users comprised approximately 25% of our total core users, up from 22% as of January 31, 2020. We believe that the number of our core users is an indicator of our market penetration, the growth of our business and our anticipated future subscription and services revenue. We define our core users as the number of active residential user accounts and office user extensions. We believe that the relationship that we establish with our core users positions us to sell additional premium communications services and other new connected services to them.
Annualized Exit Recurring Revenue grew year-over-year due to an increase in the average revenue per core user, which was largely driven by an increase in business users. We believe that AERR is an indicator of recurring subscription and services revenue for near-term future periods. We estimate our AERR by dividing our recurring quarterly subscription revenue (excluding Talkatone revenue) by the average number of core users each quarter and annualize by multiplying by four. We then multiply that result by the number of core users at the end of the period to calculate AERR.
Net Dollar Subscription Retention Rate declined year-over-year primarily due to increased user churn related to the COVID-19 pandemic. We believe that our net dollar subscription retention rate provides insight into our ability to retain and grow our subscription and services revenue, and is an indicator of the long-term value of our customer relationships and the stability of our revenue base. It measures the percentage year-over-year change in our recurring subscription revenue per core user (excluding Talkatone revenue), which is then adjusted by factoring in the percentage of our core users we have retained during the same period. Our net dollar subscription retention rate is affected by changes in average amounts that our core users pay to us, fluctuations in the number of our core users, and our core user churn rate.
We calculate our estimated net dollar subscription retention rate for our core users by multiplying:
(i)
our year-over-year percentage change in annual recurring revenue per core user, which is calculated by:
▪
determining the annual recurring revenue per core user by dividing annual recurring revenue for the period ended by the number of core users at the end of that particular period; and
▪
calculating the year-over-year percentage change in annual recurring revenue per core user by dividing the current period recurring revenue per core user by the annual recurring revenue per core user for the same period in the prior year.
by:
(ii)
our core user annual retention rate, which is calculated by:
▪
determining our core user churn, by identifying the number of paying core users who terminate service during a month, excluding infant churn, which we define as office extensions and home users who terminate service prior to the end of the second full calendar month after their activation date;
▪
calculating our monthly churn rate by dividing our churn in a month by the number of core users at the beginning of that month; and
▪
calculating our annual retention rate as one minus the sum of our monthly churn rates for the preceding 12-month period.
Ooma | FY2021 Form 10-K | 45
Adjusted EBITDA
In addition, we use Adjusted EBITDA (Earnings Before Interest Tax and Depreciation and Amortization) to manage our business, evaluate our performance and make planning decisions. We consider this measure to be a useful measure of our operating performance, because it contains adjustments for unusual events or factors that do not directly affect what management considers being the core operating performance, and are used by our management for that purpose. We also believe this measure enables us to better evaluate our performance by facilitating a meaningful comparison of our core operating results in a given period to those in prior and future periods. In addition, investors often use similar measures to evaluate the operating performance with competitors. Adjusted EBITDA represents net income (loss) before interest and other income, income tax provision or benefit, depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation and related taxes, amortization of acquired intangible assets and other acquisition-related charges, restructuring charges and certain litigation costs that are not representative of the ordinary course of our business.
Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not consider any expenses for assets being depreciated and amortized that are necessary to our business;
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not consider the impact of income tax provisions or benefits, stock-based compensation and related taxes, amortization of acquired intangible assets and other acquisition-related charges, restructuring charges and certain litigation costs that are not recurring in nature;
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect other non-operating expenses, net of other non-operating income, including net interest and other income/expense; and
•
other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently, which reduces its usefulness as a comparative measure.
Because of these limitations, you should consider Adjusted EBITDA alongside other financial performance measures, including net loss and our other GAAP results.
The following table provides a reconciliation of net loss (the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure) to Adjusted EBITDA for each of the periods indicated (in thousands):
Ooma | FY2021 Form 10-K | 46
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Subscription and services revenue is derived primarily from recurring subscription fees related to service plans such as Ooma Business, Ooma Residential and other communications services, and to a lesser extent from payments associated with our Talkatone mobile application, prepaid international calls and installation-related services. We expect our subscription and services revenue to grow as we expand our core user base, driven primarily by growth in Ooma Business.
Product and other revenue consists primarily of sales of our on-premise appliances and end-point devices used in connection with our services, including shipping and handling fees for our direct customers and to a lesser extent from porting fees. We expect our product and other revenue to remain relatively unchanged on a year-over-year basis.
Cost of revenue and gross margin
Cost of subscription and services revenue includes payments made for third-party network operations and telecommunications services, certain telecom taxes and fees (including Federal USF contributions), credit card processing fees, costs to build out and maintain data centers, depreciation and maintenance of servers and equipment, personnel costs associated with customer care and network operations support and allocated overhead costs.
Cost of product and other revenue includes the costs associated with the manufacturing of our on-premise appliances and end-point devices, as well as personnel costs for employees and contractors, costs related to porting our customers’ phone numbers to our service, shipping and handling costs, tariffs imposed on imported product and allocated overhead costs.
Subscription and services gross margin may fluctuate from period-to-period based on the interplay of a number of factors, including revenue mix and fluctuations in the costs described above. We expect our subscription and services gross margin to increase over the long-term, primarily as we achieve scale efficiencies and as Ooma Business revenue becomes a larger portion of total subscription revenue.
Product and other gross margin may fluctuate from period-to-period based on a number of factors, including total units shipped as compared to the direct costs of production and relatively fixed personnel costs incurred. We sell our on-premise appliances at aggressive price points to facilitate the adoption of our platforms and services. We expect our product and other gross margin to continue to be negative for the foreseeable future.
Our subscription and services gross margin is significantly higher than product and other gross margin. As a result, any significant change in revenue mix will cause our total gross margin to change. For example, in periods where we sell significantly more on-premise appliances, we would expect our total gross margin to be impacted.
Operating expenses
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel costs for employees and contractors, advertising and marketing costs, amortization of sales commissions paid to internal sales personnel and third parties, amortization of acquired intangible assets, travel expenses and allocated overhead costs. We expect our sales and marketing expenses to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to grow our business.
Research and development expenses are focused on developing new and expanded features for our services and improvements to our platforms and backend architecture. Research and development consists primarily of personnel costs for employees and contractors, as well as costs for supplies, software tools, product certification and allocated overhead costs. We expect our research and development expenses to increase in absolute dollars.
General and administrative expenses consist of personnel costs for our finance, legal, human resources and other administrative employees and contractors, as well as professional service fees, legal fees, acquisition-related transaction costs and allocated overhead costs. We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase in absolute dollars.
Ooma | FY2021 Form 10-K | 47
Consolidated Results of Operations
The tables in this section set forth selected consolidated statements of operations data for each of the periods indicated (dollars in thousands):
Costs and expenses included stock-based compensation expense and related payroll taxes as follows (in thousands):
Ooma | FY2021 Form 10-K | 48
Revenue
NM = not meaningful
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020
We derived approximately 54% and 58% of our total revenue from Ooma Residential and approximately 44% and 39% from Ooma Business in fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively. Subscription and services revenue increased $17.4 million or 12% year-over-year, primarily attributable to an increase in our core users and an increase in the average revenue per user, driven by the growth of Ooma Business. Product and other revenue was comparable to the prior year.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020
Subscription and services gross margin of 71% increased year-over-year from 69% reflecting the continued growth of Ooma Business and associated benefits of economies of scale. Cost of subscription and services revenue for fiscal 2021 increased $2.4 million or 5% year-over-year, primarily due to a $1.5 million increase in telecom and network infrastructure costs as well as increased regulatory costs. Overall, the year-over-year increase in the cost of subscription and services reflects both organic and acquisition-related growth of our business.
Product and other revenue gross margin of negative 49% improved year-over-year from negative 53% due to the non-recurrence of $2.1 million in restructuring charges associated with the discontinuation of Smart Cam, which was partly offset by an increase in freight costs and promotional activities.
Ooma | FY2021 Form 10-K | 49
Operating Expenses
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020
Sales and marketing expenses increased $0.4 million year-over-year, reflecting a $1.8 million increase in amortization of deferred sales commissions that was largely offset by a $1.0 million decrease in travel related costs and a $0.5 million decrease in personnel related costs.
Research and development expenses decreased $1.7 million or 4% year-over-year, primarily due to a $1.0 million decrease in consultant costs and the non-recurrence of $0.6 million in severance and other charges associated with our October 2019 restructuring actions. Overall, the year-over-year decrease in research and development expenses was largely driven by the cost savings associated with the discontinuation of Smart Cam.
General and administrative expenses decreased slightly year-over-year, primarily reflecting a $1.1 million decrease in legal costs that was largely offset by a $1.0 million increase in personnel related costs, driven by higher headcount. The decrease in legal costs was primarily attributable to the non-recurrence of costs associated with certain litigation proceedings that were settled in fiscal 2020.
Interest and Other Income, net
Interest and other income, net decreased $0.4 million year-over-year to $0.4 million in fiscal 2021 compared to $0.8 million in fiscal 2020, mainly due to a decrease in investment income that resulted from lower interest rates and a higher proportion of cash equivalents in our investment portfolio during fiscal 2021.
Ooma | FY2021 Form 10-K | 50
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
This Form 10-K contains certain non-GAAP financial measures, including non-GAAP net income (loss) and Adjusted EBITDA (see “Key Metrics” above). These non-GAAP financial measures exclude non-cash stock-based compensation expense and related taxes, amortization of acquired intangible assets and other acquisition-related charges, restructuring charges and certain litigation costs that are not representative of the ordinary course of our business.
These non-GAAP financial measures are presented to provide investors with additional information regarding our financial results and core business operations. We consider these non-GAAP financial measures to be useful measures of the operating performance of the Company, because they contain adjustments for unusual events or factors that do not directly affect what management considers to be our core operating performance, and are used by our management for that purpose. We also believe that these non-GAAP financial measures allow for a better evaluation of our performance by facilitating a meaningful comparison of our core operating results in a given period to those in prior and future periods. In addition, investors often use similar measures to evaluate the operating performance of a company.
Non-GAAP financial measures are presented for supplemental informational purposes only to aid an understanding of our operating results and should not be considered a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with GAAP and may be different from non-GAAP financial measures presented by other companies. A limitation of the non-GAAP financial measures presented is that the adjustments relate to items that the Company generally expects to continue to recognize. The adjustment of these items should not be construed as an inference that the adjusted expenses or gains are unusual, infrequent or non-recurring. Therefore, both GAAP financial measures of Ooma’s financial performance and the respective non-GAAP measures should be considered together.
The following table presents a reconciliation of GAAP net loss to non-GAAP net income (loss) for each of the periods indicated (in thousands):
Quarterly Results of Operations
The following table sets forth selected unaudited quarterly financial data for each of the eight quarterly periods ended January 31, 2021 (in thousands, except percentages):
Our total revenue has grown sequentially each quarter due to the continued growth in our subscriber base driven by an increase in our core users.
Our results for the third quarter of fiscal 2020 were negatively affected by $3.1 million in total restructuring charges associated with the discontinuation of Ooma Smart Cam in October 2019 and a small reduction-in-force.
Ooma | FY2021 Form 10-K | 51
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of January 31, 2021, we had $28.3 million of total cash, cash equivalents and investments, which we believe will be sufficient to meet our cash needs for at least the next 12 months.
In January 2021, we entered into a credit and security agreement with certain banks that provided for a secured revolving credit facility under which we may borrow up to an aggregate of $25 million and, subject to certain conditions, may be increased to up to $45 million. We currently have no outstanding borrowings. See Note 12: Financing Arrangements of the accompanying notes of our consolidated financial statements for more information.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our growth rate, the introduction of new and enhanced offerings, the timing and extent of our sales and marketing activities and research and development expenditures, the expansion of our business internationally, and the impact of COVID-19 pandemic on these or other factors. We may in the future make investments in or acquisitions of businesses or technologies, which may require the use of cash.
The table below provides selected cash flow information, for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Operating Activities
The table below provides selected cash flow information, for the periods indicated (in thousands):
For fiscal 2021, our net loss of $2.4 million included non-cash charges primarily related to stock-based compensation, operating lease expense and depreciation and amortization expense. Operating asset and liability changes for fiscal 2021 included:
•
an increase of $5.5 million in other current and non-current assets primarily due to the capitalization of sales commissions costs under Topic 606
•
a decrease of $3.9 million in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities due to the timing of payments
•
an increase of $3.4 million in inventories to scale our business and mitigate the risk of longer lead times and supplier shortages related to the COVID-19 pandemic
Cash provided by operating activities for fiscal 2021 increased $11.9 million year-over-year, which primarily reflected a significant decrease in net loss as well as working capital impacts resulting from the timing of payments.
Ooma | FY2021 Form 10-K | 52
Investing Activities
Cash provided by investing activities was $0.2 million for fiscal 2021, which consisted of proceeds of $23.5 million from maturities and sales of short-term investments, offset in part by $20.1 million used for purchases of short-term investments and $3.2 million used for capital expenditures. Cash provided by investing activities decreased $2.6 million year-over-year, which reflected lower net proceeds associated with short-term investments and the absence of business acquisition activity in fiscal 2021.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities was $1.0 million for fiscal 2021, which consisted of proceeds of $2.9 million from the issuance of common stock related to our Employee Stock Purchase Plan (“ESPP”) and stock option exercises, offset in part by payments of $1.6 million related to shares repurchased for tax withholdings on vesting of RSUs, as well as payments of $0.2 million in connection with securing our new revolving credit facility. Cash provided by financing activities was comparable year-over-year.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
As of January 31, 2021, our total future expected payment obligations under non-cancelable operating leases with terms longer than one year were approximately $7.0 million. See Note 7: Operating Leases in the notes to our consolidated financial statements for a table of contractual obligations, including payments due by period. As of January 31, 2021, non-cancelable purchase commitments with our contract manufacturers totaled approximately $5.4 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any material relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, including entities such as structured finance or special purpose entities that were established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements.
Ooma | FY2021 Form 10-K | 53
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP, which requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, cash flows and the related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on other assumptions we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ materially from these estimates. Note 2 to the notes to consolidated financial statements of this Form 10-K describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance as these policies involve a greater degree of judgment and complexity.
Revenue Recognition
Subscription and services revenue is derived primarily from recurring subscription fees related to service plans such as Ooma Business, Ooma Residential and other communications services. Subscription revenue is generally recognized ratably over the contractual service term. Product and other revenue is generated from the sale of on-premise appliances and end-point devices, including shipping and handling fees for our direct customers, and to a lesser extent from porting fees that enable customers to transfer their existing phone numbers. We recognize revenue from sales to direct end-customers and channel partners at the point in time that control transfers which is typically when we deliver the product or when all customer contractual provisions have been met, if any.
Our contracts with customers typically contain multiple performance obligations that consist of product(s) and related communications services. Judgment is required to properly identify the accounting units of multiple performance obligations and to determine the manner in which revenue should be allocated among the obligations. Individual performance obligations are accounted for separately if they are distinct. The contract transaction price is then allocated to the separate performance obligations on a relative stand-alone selling price (“SSP”) basis. We determine the SSP for our communications services based on observable historical stand-alone sales to customers, for which we require that a substantial majority of selling prices fall within a reasonably narrow pricing range. We establish SSP for our on-premise appliances and end-point devices based upon our best estimates and judgments, considering company-specific factors such as pricing strategies, discounting practices, and estimated product and other costs. The determination of SSP is made through consultation with and approval by our management. As our business offerings evolve over time, we may be required to modify our estimated selling prices in subsequent periods, and the timing of our revenue recognition could be affected.
Our distribution agreements with channel partners typically contain clauses for price protection and right of return. We record reductions to revenue for estimated product returns from end users and customer sales incentives at the time the related revenue is recognized. Product returns and customer sales incentives are estimated based on our historical experience, current trends and expectations regarding future experience. Trends are influenced by product life cycles, new product introductions, market acceptance of products, the type of customer, seasonality and other factors. Product return and sales incentive rates may fluctuate over time but are sufficiently predictable to allow our management to estimate expected future amounts. If actual future returns and sales incentives differ from past experience, additional reserves may be required. To date, actual results have not been materially different from our estimates.
Inventories
Inventories consist of raw materials and finished goods and are stated at the lower of actual cost or market on a first-in, first-out basis. Our assessment of market value requires the use of estimates regarding the net realizable value of our inventory balances, including an assessment of excess or obsolete inventory. At each balance sheet date, we determine excess or obsolete inventory write-downs based on multiple factors, including: forecast demand for our products within a specified time horizon, generally 12 months, product acceptance and competitiveness in the marketplace, product life cycles, product development plans, and current and historical sales levels.
Inventory write-downs for excess and obsolete inventory are recorded in cost of goods sold within the consolidated statement of operations during the period in which such write-downs are determined as necessary by management. If actual future demand or market conditions are less favorable than those projected by management, additional inventory write-downs may be required. This would have a negative impact on our gross margin in that period. If in any period we are able to sell inventories that were not valued or that had been written down in a previous period, related revenues would be recorded without any offsetting charge to cost of sales resulting in a net benefit to our gross margin in that period.
For fiscal 2020, we recorded write-downs of $1.4 million for excess inventory and non-cancelable purchase commitments related to the discontinuation of Ooma Smart Cam in October 2019. Inventory write-downs recorded for fiscal 2021 and 2019 were not material.
Ooma | FY2021 Form 10-K | 54