ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
References to “we”, “us”, “our” or the “Company” are to Supernova Partners Acquisition Company, Inc., except where the context requires otherwise. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act, and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on August 31, 2020. We were formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities (the “Business Combination”).
Our sponsor is Supernova Partners LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (the “Sponsor”). The registration statement for our initial public offering was declared effective on October 20, 2020. On October 23, 2020, we consummated the initial public offering of 40,250,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the Class A common stock included in the Units being offered, the “Public Shares”), including 5,250,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments (the “Over-Allotment Units”), at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $402.5 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $22.8 million, inclusive of approximately $14.1 million in deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we consummated the 6,700,000 private placement warrants at a price of $1.50 per private placement warrant to the Sponsor, generating proceeds of approximately $10.1 million.
Upon the closing of the initial public offering and the private placement, $402.5 million ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and certain of the proceeds of the Private Placement was placed in a trust account (“Trust Account”), located in the United States with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and invested only in U.S. “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended (the “Investment Company Act”) having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, until the earlier of (i) the completion of the Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
If we are unable to complete a Business Combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or October 23, 2022 (as such period may be extended pursuant to the Certificate of Incorporation, the “Combination Period”), we will (1) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up; (2) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than 10 business days thereafter, redeem 100% of the Public Shares, at a per share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account (net of taxes payable and less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish Public Stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any); and (3) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining
stockholders and our board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject in each case to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Recent Developments
As more fully described in Item 1. Business, on March 17, 2021, we entered into the Merger Agreement by and among us, First Merger Sub, Second Merger Sub, and Offerpad.
In connection with the execution of the Merger Agreement, the PIPE Investors entered into the PIPE Subscription Agreements pursuant to which the PIPE Investors have committed to purchase the PIPE Shares at the PIPE Investment. The purchase of the PIPE Shares is conditioned upon, among other things, the consummation of the transactions and will be consummated concurrently with the closing. The shares of Class A common stock to be issued pursuant to the PIPE Subscription Agreements have not been registered under the Securities Act and will be issued in reliance on the availability of an exemption from such registration.
In addition, in connection with the execution of the Merger Agreement we entered into a sponsor support agreement with our sponsor, Offerpad and our directors and officers.
The proposed Business Combination is expected to be consummated after receipt of the required approvals by the stockholders of Supernova and Offerpad and the satisfaction or waiver of certain other customary conditions. For full details and the filed agreements, refer to our Current Report on 8-K announcing the Merger Agreement filed on March 18, 2021.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception through December 31, 2020 related to our formation, the preparation for the initial public offering, and since the closing of the initial public offering, the search for a prospective initial Business Combination. We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. We will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from August 31, 2020 (inception) to December 31, 2020, we had net loss of approximately $217,000, which consisted of approximately $229,000 in general and administrative expenses, approximately $61,000 of franchise tax expenses, and approximately $5,000 of income tax expenses, offset by approximately $79,000 in investment income on the Trust Account.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $1.1 million in cash and working capital of approximately $1.2 million (not taking into account approximately $66,000 of taxes that may be paid using investment income from the Trust Account).
Prior to the consummation of the initial public offering on October 23, 2020, our liquidity needs were satisfied through the receipt of $25,000 from our Sponsor in exchange for the issuance of the founder shares, and the proceeds of the Note from our Sponsor. Subsequent to the consummation of the initial public offering and private placement, our liquidity needs have been satisfied with the proceeds from the consummation of the private placement not held in the Trust Account. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor may, but is not obligated to, provide us working capital loans.
Based on the foregoing, our management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial Business Combination candidates, performing due diligence on
prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the balance sheet. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
On September 9, 2020, our Sponsor paid $25,000 to cover for certain offering costs on us in exchange for issuance of 11,500,000 shares of our Class B common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, (the “Founder Shares”). On September 14, 2020, we effectuated an 0.75-for-1 reverse split of the Founder Shares, resulting in an aggregate outstanding amount of 8,625,000 Founder Shares. On October 20, 2020, we effectuated a 6-for-7 stock split of the founder shares, resulting in an aggregate outstanding amount of 10,062,500 Founder Shares. The initial stockholders agreed to forfeit, after giving effect to the stock split that occurred on October 20, 2020, up to 1,312,500 Founder Shares to the extent that the over-allotment option was not exercised in full by the underwriters, so that the Founder Shares would represent 20.0% of our issued and outstanding shares after the Initial Public Offering. The underwriter exercised its over-allotment option in full on October 23, 2020; thus, these 1,312,500 Founder Shares were no longer subject to forfeiture.
The initial stockholders agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of the Founder Shares until the earlier to occur of: (i) one year after the completion of the initial Business Combination or earlier if, subsequent to the initial Business Combination, the closing price of the Class A common stock equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for stock splits, stock capitalizations, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after the initial Business Combination, and (ii) the date following the completion of the initial Business Combination on which we complete a liquidation, merger, capital stock exchange or other similar transaction that results in all of the stockholders having the right to exchange their Class A common stock for cash, securities or other property.
Private Placement Warrants
Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we consummated the private placement of 6,700,000 private placement warrants at a price of $1.50 per private placement warrant to the Sponsor, generating proceeds of approximately $10.1 million.
Each whole private placement warrant is exercisable for one whole share of Class A common stock at a price of $11.50 per share. A portion of the proceeds from the sale of the private placement warrants to the Sponsor was added to the proceeds from the initial public offering held in the Trust Account. If we do not complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period, the private placement warrants will expire worthless. The private placement warrants will be non-redeemable for cash (except as described below) and exercisable on a cashless basis so long as they are held by the Sponsor or its permitted transferees.
The Sponsor agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell the private placement warrants until 30 days after the completion of the initial Business Combination.
Related Party Loans
On September 9, 2020, the Sponsor, a related party, agreed to loan us an aggregate of up to $300,000 to cover expenses related to the initial public offering pursuant to a promissory note (the “Note”). This loan is non-interest bearing and payable upon the completion of the initial public offering. We borrowed approximately $183,000 under the Note and fully repaid the Note on October 23, 2020.
In addition, in order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but
are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). If we complete a Business Combination, we may repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans could be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination or, at the lenders’ discretion, up to $1,500,000 of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post Business Combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. As of December 31, 2020, we had no borrowings under the Working Capital Loans.
Contractual Obligations
Registration Rights
The holders of Founder Shares, private placement warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any shares of Class A common stock issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans and upon conversion of the Founder Shares), if any, are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement. These holders will be entitled to certain demand and “piggyback” registration rights. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, approximately $8.1 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. In addition, $0.35 per unit, or approximately $14.1 million in the aggregate, will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions.
The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our outstanding common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2020, 38,455,615 shares of common stock subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the balance sheet.
Net Income (Loss) Per Common Share
Net income (loss) per common share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. The Company has not considered the effect of the
warrants sold in the Initial Public Offering and Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 20,116,667 shares of our common stock in the calculation of diluted loss per share, since the exercise of the warrants are contingent upon the occurrence of future events and the inclusion of such warrants would be anti-dilutive.
We apply the two-class method in calculating income (loss) per common share. Net income (loss) per common share, basic and diluted for Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is calculated by dividing the proportionate share of income or loss on marketable securities held by the Trust Account, net of applicable franchise and income taxes, by the weighted average number of shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption outstanding since original issuance.
Net income (loss) per common share, basic and diluted for non-redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing net income (loss) less income attributable to Class A shares of common stock subject to possible redemption by the weighted average number of shares of non-redeemable common stock outstanding for the period presented.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our initial public offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Our management does not believe there are any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, that would have a material effect on our financial statements.