Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
General
Critical Accounting Policies
The Company’s financial condition and results of operations are sensitive to accounting measurements and estimates of matters that are inherently uncertain. When applying accounting policies in areas that are subjective in nature, the Company must use its best judgment to arrive at the carrying value of certain assets. One of the most critical accounting policies applied by the Company is related to the valuation of its loan portfolio.
A variety of estimates impact the carrying value of the Company’s loan portfolio including the calculation of the allowance for loan losses, valuation of underlying collateral, the timing of loan charge-offs and the amount and amortization of loan fees and deferred origination costs.
The calculation of the allowance for loan losses is a complex process containing estimates which are inherently subjective and susceptible to significant revision as current information becomes available. The allowance is established and maintained at a level management believes is adequate to cover losses resulting from the inability of borrowers to make required payments on loans. Estimates for loan losses are determined by analyzing risks associated with specific loans and the loan portfolio, current trends in delinquencies and charge-offs, the views of the Company’s regulators, changes in the size and composition of the loan portfolio and peer comparisons. The analysis also requires consideration of the economic climate and direction, changes in the economic and interest rate environment which may impact a borrower’s ability to pay, legislation impacting the banking industry and economic conditions specific to the tri-county region the Bank serves in Southeast Florida. Because the calculation of the allowance for loan losses relies on the Company’s estimates and judgments relating to inherently uncertain events, results may differ from management’s estimates.
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company assessed its earnings history and trend over each year and its estimate of future earnings, and determined that it was more likely than not that its deferred tax assets would not be realized in the near term. Accordingly, a valuation allowance was recorded and maintained against the net deferred tax asset for the amount not expected to be realized in the future.
The allowance for loan losses is also discussed as part of “Loan Portfolio, Asset Quality and Allowance for Loan Losses” and in Note 3 of Notes to the consolidated financial statements. The Company’s significant accounting policies are discussed in Note 1 of Notes to the consolidated financial statements.
Regulation and Legislation
As a state-chartered commercial bank, the Bank is subject to extensive regulation by the Florida Office of Financial Regulation, or Florida OFR, and the FDIC. The Bank files reports with the Florida OFR and the FDIC concerning its activities and financial condition, in addition to obtaining regulatory approvals prior to entering into certain transactions such as mergers with or acquisitions of other financial institutions. Periodic examinations are performed by the Florida OFR and the FDIC to monitor the Bank’s compliance with the various regulatory requirements. The Company is also subject to regulation and examination by the Federal Reserve Board of Governors.
Loan Portfolio, Asset Quality and Allowance for Loan Losses
The Bank’s primary business is making business loans. This activity may subject the Bank to potential loan losses, the magnitude of which depends on a variety of economic factors affecting borrowers which are beyond its control. As of December 31, 2020, the Bank’s impaired loans were approximately $2.2 million, or 1.4% of the gross loan portfolio.
The following table sets forth the composition of the Bank’s loan portfolio (dollars in thousands):
The following table sets forth the activity in the allowance for loan losses (in thousands):
The allowance for loan losses represents management’s estimate of probable incurred losses inherent in the existing loan portfolio. The allowance for loan losses is increased (decreased) by the provision (credit) for loan losses charged to operations and reduced by loans charged off, net of recoveries. The allowance for loan losses represented 1.23% and 1.93% of the total loans outstanding at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The Bank evaluates the allowance for loan losses on a regular basis. The allowance for loan losses is determined based on a periodic review of several factors: reviews and evaluation of individual loans, historical loan loss experiences, the nature and volume of the loan portfolio, adverse situations that may affect the borrower’s ability to repay, estimated value of any underlying collateral and current economic conditions. This evaluation is inherently subjective as it requires estimates that are susceptible to significant revision as more information becomes available.
The allowance consists of two components. The first component consists of amounts specifically reserved (“specific allowance”) for specific loans identified as impaired, as defined by FASB Accounting Standards Codification No. 310 (“ASC 310”). Impaired loans are those loans that management has estimated will not be repaid as agreed upon. The Bank measures impairment on a loan by loan basis for all of its loans by either the present value of expected future cash flows discounted at the loan’s effective interest rate, the loan’s obtainable market price, or the fair value of the collateral if the loan is collateral-dependent. A loan may be impaired (i.e. not expected to be repaid as agreed), but may be sufficiently collateralized such that the Bank expects to recover all principal and interest eventually, and therefore no specific reserve is warranted.
The second component is a general reserve (“general allowance”) on all of the Bank’s loans, other than those identified as impaired. The Bank groups these loans into categories with similar characteristics and then applies a loss factor to each group which is derived from the Bank’s historical loss experience for that category adjusted for qualitative factors such as economic conditions and other trends or uncertainties that could affect management’s estimate of probable loss. The aggregate of these two components results in the Bank’s total allowance for loan losses.
The following table sets forth the Bank’s allowance for loan losses by loan type (dollars in thousands):
The following summarizes the amount of impaired loans (in thousands):
During 2020, 2019, and 2018, the average recorded investment in impaired loans and interest income recognized and received on impaired loans is as follows (in thousands):
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity represents an institution’s ability to meet current and future obligations through liquidation or maturity of existing assets or the acquisition of additional liabilities. The Bank’s ability to respond to the needs of depositors and borrowers and to benefit from investment opportunities is facilitated through liquidity management.
The Bank’s primary sources of cash during the year ended December 31, 2020, were payments of principal and interest on loans made by the Bank to third parties, payments of principal and interest on debt securities held by the Bank and deposits made by third parties at the Bank. Cash was used primarily to fund loans and repay Federal Home Loan Bank of Atlanta (“FHLB”) advances. The Bank adjusts rates on its deposits to attract or retain deposits as needed. The Bank primarily obtains deposits from its market area.
The Bank may borrow funds from other financial institutions. The Bank is a member of the FHLB, which allows it to borrow funds under a pre-arranged line of credit. As of December 31, 2020, the Bank had $23 million in borrowings outstanding from the FHLB of Atlanta to facilitate lending and manage its asset and liability structure, and remaining credit availability with the FHLB of $29.1 million. At December 31, 2020, the Company also had lines of credit amounting to $9.5 million with four correspondent banks to purchase federal funds. The Company also has a line of credit with the Federal Reserve Bank under which the Company may draw up to $223,000. The line is secured by $230,000 in securities.
Debt Securities
The Bank’s securities portfolio is comprised of SBA pool securities, mortgage backed securities, taxable municipal securities and collateralized mortgage obligations. The securities portfolio is categorized as either “held-to-maturity” or “available for sale.” Debt Securities held-to-maturity represent those securities which the Company has the positive intent and ability to hold to maturity. These debt securities are carried at amortized cost. Debt Securities available for sale represent those investments which may be sold for various reasons including changes in interest rates and liquidity considerations. These debt securities are reported at fair market value and unrealized gains and losses are excluded from earnings and reported in other comprehensive loss.
The following table sets forth the amortized cost and fair value of the Bank’s debt securities portfolio (in thousands):
The following table sets forth, by maturity distribution, certain information pertaining to the debt securities portfolio at amortized cost (dollars in thousands):
Expected maturities of these debt securities will differ from contractual maturities because borrowers have the right to call or repay obligations with or without call or prepayment penalties.
Market Risk
Market risk is the risk of loss from adverse changes in market prices and rates. The Bank’s market risk arises primarily from interest-rate risk inherent in its lending and deposit-taking activities. The Bank does not engage in securities trading or hedging activities and does not invest in interest-rate derivatives or enter into interest rate swaps.
The Bank may utilize financial instruments with off-balance-sheet risk in the normal course of business to meet the financing needs of its customers. The measurement of market risk associated with financial instruments is meaningful only when all related and offsetting on- and off-balance-sheet transactions are aggregated, and the resulting net positions are identified. Disclosures about the fair value of financial instruments, which reflect changes in market prices and rates, can be found in note 8 of notes to consolidated financial statements.
The Bank’s primary objective in managing interest-rate risk is to minimize the potential adverse impact of changes in interest rates on its net interest income and capital, while adjusting its asset-liability structure to obtain the maximum yield-cost spread on that structure. The Bank actively monitors and manages its interest-rate risk exposure by managing its asset and liability structure. However, a sudden and substantial increase in interest rates may adversely impact its earnings, to the extent that the interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities do not change or reprice at the same speed, to the same extent, or on the same basis.
The Bank uses modeling techniques to simulate changes in net interest income under various rate scenarios. Important elements of these techniques include the mix of floating versus fixed-rate assets and liabilities, and the scheduled, as well as expected, repricing and maturing volumes and rates of the existing balance sheet.
Asset Liability Management
As part of its asset and liability management, the Bank has emphasized establishing and implementing internal asset-liability decision processes, as well as control procedures to aid in managing its earnings. Management believes that these processes and procedures provide us with better capital planning, asset mix and volume controls, loan-pricing guidelines, and deposit interest-rate guidelines, which should result in tighter controls and less exposure to interest-rate risk.
The matching of assets and liabilities may be analyzed by examining the extent to which such assets and liabilities are “interest rate sensitive” and by monitoring an institution’s interest rate sensitivity “gap.” An asset or liability is said to be interest rate sensitive within a specific time period if it will mature or reprice within that time period. The interest-rate sensitivity gap is defined as the difference between interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities maturing or repricing within a given time period. The gap ratio is computed as the amount of rate sensitive assets less the amount of rate sensitive liabilities divided by total assets. A gap is considered positive when the amount of interest-rate sensitive assets exceeds interest-rate sensitive liabilities. A gap is considered negative when the amount of interest-rate sensitive liabilities exceeds interest-rate sensitive assets. During a period of rising interest rates, a negative gap would adversely affect net interest income, while a positive gap would result in an increase in net interest income. During a period of falling interest rates, a negative gap would result in an increase in net interest income, while a positive gap would adversely affect net interest income.
In order to minimize the potential for adverse effects of material and prolonged increases in interest rates on the results of operations, the Bank’s management continues to monitor its assets and liabilities to better match the maturities and repricing terms of its interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. The Bank’s policies emphasize the origination of adjustable-rate loans, building a stable core deposit base and, to the extent possible, matching deposit maturities with loan repricing timeframes or maturities.
The following table sets forth certain information related to the Bank’s interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities at December 31, 2020, that are estimated to mature or are scheduled to reprice within the period shown (dollars in thousands):
Gap Maturity / Repricing Schedule
(1) In preparing the table above, adjustable-rate loans are included in the period in which the interest rates are next scheduled to adjust rather than in the period in which the loans mature. Fixed-rate loans are scheduled, including repayment, according to their maturities.
(2) Securities are scheduled through the repricing date.
(3) Money-market, interest-bearing checking and savings deposits are regarded as readily accessible withdrawable accounts. Time deposits are scheduled through the maturity dates.
The following table sets forth loan maturities by type of loan at December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
The following table sets forth the maturity or repricing of loans by interest type at December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
Scheduled contractual principal repayments of loans do not reflect the actual life of such assets. The average life of loans is substantially less than their average contractual terms due to prepayments. In addition, due-on-sale clauses on loans generally give us the right to declare a conventional loan immediately due and payable in the event, among other things, that the borrower sells real property subject to a mortgage and the loan is not repaid. The average life of mortgage loans tends to increase, however, when current mortgage loan rates are substantially higher than rates on existing mortgage loans and, conversely, decrease when rates on existing mortgages are substantially higher than current mortgage rates.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Contractual Obligations
The Company is party to financial instruments with off-balance-sheet risk in the normal course of business to meet the financing needs of its customers. These financial instruments include commitments to extend credit, unused lines of credit, and standby letters of credit. These instruments involve, to varying degrees, elements of credit and interest-rate risk in excess of the amounts recognized in the consolidated balance sheet. The contractual amounts of those instruments reflect the extent of the Company’s involvement in particular classes of financial instruments.
The Company’s exposure to credit loss in the event of nonperformance by the other party to the financial instrument for commitments to extend credit is represented by the contractual amount of those instruments. The Company uses the same credit policies in making commitments as it does for on-balance-sheet instruments.
Commitments to extend credit are agreements to lend to a customer as long as there is no violation of any condition established in the contract. Commitments generally have fixed-expiration dates or other termination clauses and may require payment of a fee. Since certain commitments expire without being drawn upon, the total committed amounts do not necessarily represent future cash requirements. The Company evaluates each customer’s credit worthiness on a case-by-case basis. The amount of collateral obtained, if deemed necessary in order to extend credit, is based on management’s credit evaluation of the counterparty.
A summary of the contractual amounts of the Company’s financial instruments with off-balance sheet risk at December 31, 2020 follows (in thousands):
The following is a summary of the Company’s on-balance sheet contractual obligations at December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
Deposits
Deposits traditionally are the primary source of funds for the Company’s use in lending, making investments and meeting liquidity demands. The Company has focused on raising time deposits primarily within its market area, which is the tri-county area of Broward, Miami-Dade and Palm Beach counties. However, the Company offers a variety of deposit products, which are promoted within its market area. Deposits increased $89.3 million in 2020. The increase in deposit balances primarily consisted of increases of $47.7 million in noninterest-bearing demand deposits and $55.2 million in NOW and money-market deposits. Time deposits decreased by $13.6 million during 2020.
The following table displays the distribution of the Company’s deposits at December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 (in thousands):
(1) Includes Individual Retirement Accounts (IRA’s) totalling $2,000,000 and $2,221,000 at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, all of which are in the form of time deposits.
Time Deposits of $250,000 or more, or Jumbo Time Deposits, are generally considered a more unpredictable source of funds. The following table sets forth the Company’s maturity distribution of time deposits of $250,000 or more at December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Analysis of Results of Operations
The Company’s profitability depends to a large extent on net interest income, which is the difference between the interest received on earning assets, such as loans and securities, and the interest paid on interest-bearing liabilities, principally deposits and borrowings. Net interest income is determined by the difference between yields earned on interest-earning assets and rates paid on interest-bearing liabilities (“interest-rate spread”) and the relative amounts of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. The Company’s interest-rate spread is affected by regulatory, economic, and competitive factors that influence interest rates, loan demand, and deposit flows. The Company’s results of operations are also affected by the provision for loan losses, operating expenses such as salaries and employee benefits, occupancy and other operating expenses including income taxes, and noninterest income such as loan prepayment fees.
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, information regarding (i) the total dollar amount of interest income from interest-earning assets and the resultant average yield; (ii) the total dollar amount of interest expense on interest-bearing liabilities and the resultant average cost; (iii) net interest income; (iv) interest rate spread; and (v) net interest margin. Average balances are based on average daily balances (dollars in thousands):
(1) Includes interest-earning deposits with banks, Federal funds sold and Federal Home Loan Bank stock dividends.
(2) Interest rate spread represents the difference between average yield on interest-earning assets and the average cost of interest-bearing liabilities.
(3) Net interest margin is net interest income divided by average interest-earning assets.
(4) Includes Federal Home Loan Bank advances and the junior subordinated debenture.
Rate/Volume Analysis
The following tables set forth certain information regarding changes in interest income and interest expense for the periods indicated. For each category of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, information is provided on changes attributable to (1) changes in rate (change in rate multiplied by prior volume), (2) changes in volume (change in volume multiplied by prior rate) and (3) changes in rate-volume (change in rate multiplied by change in volume) (in thousands):
Financial Condition as of December 31, 2020 Compared to December 31, 2019
The Company’s total assets at December 31, 2020, were $235.1 million, an increase of $108.3 million from December 31, 2019. The increase of $108.3 in total assets was primarily consisted of increases of $45.6 million in cash and cash equivalents, $11 million in debt securities and $50.2 million in net loans. The Company experienced growth across the various loan types due to new organic originations. The increase in loans consisted to increases of $12.2 million in multi-family real estate loans, $16 million in commercial real estate loans and $17.3 million in commercial loans.
The Company’s total liabilities at December 31, 2020, were $217.2 million, an increase of $97.7 million from December 31, 2019. The increase of $97.7 million in total liabilities was mainly due to a an increase of $89.3 million in total deposits and an increase of $10 million in Federal Home Loan Bank advances.
The Company’s total stockholders’ equity at December 31, 2020, were $17.8 million, an increase of $10.6 million. The increase of $10.6 was principally due to the issuance of 400 shares of Series B Participating Preferred Stock for an aggregate amount of $10 million.
At December 31, 2020, the Bank had a Tier 1 leverage ratio of 9%. The Company’s capital was enhanced during 2020 through the issuance of common stock and preferred stock, consisting of $540,000 from the sale of common stock, $10,000,000 from the sale of preferred stock, $219,000 from the issuance of common stock to a director and an executive officer as compensation for services, and $514,000 from the issuance of common stock in exchange for Trust Preferred Securities.
Junior Subordinated Debenture. In 2004, the Company formed OptimumBank Capital Trust I (the “Trust’’) for the purpose of raising capital through the sale of trust preferred securities. At that time, the Trust raised $5,155,000 through the sale of 5,000 trust preferred securities (the “Trust Preferred Securities”) to a third party investor and the issuance of 155 common trust securities to the Company.
The Trust utilized the proceeds of $5,155,000 to purchase a junior subordinated debenture from the Company (the “Junior Subordinated Debenture”). Under the Junior Subordinated Debenture, the Company is required to make interest payments on a periodic basis and to pay the outstanding principal amount plus accrued interest on October 7, 2034.
In May 2018, Preferred Shares, LLC (the “Purchaser”) acquired all 5,000 of the Trust Preferred Securities from a third party. The Purchaser is an affiliate of a director of the Company. The Purchaser has subsequently sold and/or transferred 3,087 of the Trust Preferred Securities to unaffiliated third parties.
The Company has been in default under the Junior Subordinated Debenture due to the failure to pay interest since 2015. In September 2020, the Company paid approximately $1.1 million to the holders of the outstanding Trust Preferred Securities, which represented all accrued interest through September 2020 under the Junior Subordinated Debenture attributable to the Trust Preferred Securities that had not been cancelled. The coupon interest rate floats quarterly at the three-month LIBOR rate plus 2.45% (2.68% at December 31, 2020).
During 2018, the Company issued 301,778 shares of the Company’s common stock in exchange for 694 Trust Preferred Securities. For accounting purposes, the Trust Preferred Securities acquired by the Company were deemed to be cancelled. As a result, the Company cancelled $694,000 in principal amount of the Trust Preferred Securities, together with accrued interest of $211,000, and increased its stockholders’ equity by the same amount.
During 2019, the Company issued 924,395 shares of the Company’s common stock in exchange for 1,881 Trust Preferred Securities. For accounting purposes, the Trust Preferred Securities acquired by the Company were deemed to be cancelled. As a result, the Company cancelled $1,881,000 in principal amount of the Trust Preferred Securities, together with accrued interest of $763,000, and increased its stockholders’ equity by the same amount.
During December 2020, the Company issued 171,500 shares of the Company’s common stock in exchange for 512 Trust Preferred Securities. For accounting purposes, the Trust Preferred Securities acquired by the Company were deemed to be cancelled. As a result, the Company cancelled $512,000 in principal amount of the Trust Preferred Securities, together with accrued interest of $2,000, and increased its stockholders’ equity by the same amount.
The principal owed by the Company in connection with the Junior Subordinated Debenture was $2,068,000 at December 31, 2020 and $2,580,000 at December 31, 2019. The accrued interest owed by the Company associated with the Junior Subordinated Debenture was $30,000 and $995,000 at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 respectively. The accrued interest is presented on the accompanying consolidated balance sheet under the caption “Other liabilities”.
Results of Operations for Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net Loss. The Company had a net loss of ($782,000) for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a net loss of ($1,100,000) for the year ended December 31, 2019. The Company recorded provision for loan losses amounting to $1,020,000 during year ended December 31, 2020, which was largely due to the economic environment associated with the COVID-19 pandemic and related charge offs. The Company recorded a recovery of provision for loan losses amounting to $79,000 during the year ended December 31, 2019. Excluding the (provision) credit for loan losses, the Company would have had net earnings of $238,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 and a net loss of ($1,179,000) for the year ended December 31, 2019. Excluding the (provision) credit for loan losses, net loss decreased $1,417,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Interest Income. Interest income increased to $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $5.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to an increase in loan volume.
Interest Expense. Interest expense on deposits and borrowings decreased $326,000 to $1,720,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. The decrease in interest expense was caused by a reduction in interest rates paid on deposits and borrowings offset by volume increases in deposits and borrowings.
Provision for Loan Losses. The provision for losses during the year ended December 31, 2020 amounted to $1,020,000. The provision for loan losses is charged to operations in order to bring the total allowance for loan losses to a level deemed appropriate by management to absorb losses inherent in the portfolio at December 31, 2020 and 2019. Management’s periodic evaluation of the adequacy of the allowance is based upon historical experience, the volume and type of lending conducted by us, adverse situations that may affect the borrower’s ability to repay, estimated value of the underlying collateral, loans identified as impaired, general economic conditions, particularly as they relate to our market areas, and other factors related to the estimated collectability of our loan portfolio. The allowance for loan losses totalled $1.9 million or 1.23% of loans outstanding at December 31, 2020, as compared to $2.0 million or 1.93% of loans outstanding at December 31, 2019.
Noninterest Income. Total noninterest income increased by $112,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $182,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is primarily related to service charges on deposits.
Noninterest Expenses. Total noninterest expenses increased $505,000 to $5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $4.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to an increase in salaries and employee benefits and occupancy and equipment.
COVID-19 Related Loan Data
Loan Forbearance. During the year ended December 31, 2020 we granted 180-day forbearances on 60 loans totalling $43.8 million. At December 31, 2020, we have no loans under forbearances as all of the 60 loans exited the forbearance program and resumed their regular payments as scheduled.
Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”). We closed 204 PPP loans totaling $19.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Impact of Inflation and Changing Prices
The consolidated financial statements and related data presented herein have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, which requires the measurement of financial position and operating results in terms of historical dollars, without considering changes in the relative purchasing power of money over time due to inflation. Unlike most industrial companies, substantially all of the Bank’s assets and liabilities are monetary in nature. As a result, interest rates have a more significant impact on its performance than the effects of general levels of inflation. Interest rates do not necessarily move in the same direction or in the same magnitude as the prices of goods and services, since such prices are affected by inflation to a larger extent than interest rates.