Item 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
BACKGROUND
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of OPY and its consolidated subsidiaries (together, the "Company", "we", "our" or "us"). The Company's consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto which appear elsewhere in this annual report.
The Company engages in a broad range of activities in the securities industry, including retail securities brokerage, institutional sales and trading, market-making, research, investment banking (both corporate and public finance), investment advisory and asset management services and trust services. Its principal subsidiaries are Oppenheimer & Co. Inc. ("Oppenheimer") and Oppenheimer Asset Management Inc. ("OAM"). As of December 31, 2020, we provided our services from 92 offices in 24 states located throughout the United States, offices in Tel Aviv, Israel, Hong Kong, China, London, England, St. Helier, Isle of Jersey, Frankfurt, Germany and Geneva, Switzerland. Client assets administered as of December 31, 2020 totaled $104.8 billion. The Company provides investment advisory services through OAM and Oppenheimer Investment Management LLC ("OIM") and Oppenheimer's financial advisor direct programs. At December 31, 2020, client assets under management ("AUM") totaled $38.8 billion. We also provide trust services and products through Oppenheimer Trust Company of Delaware and discount brokerage services through Freedom Investments, Inc. ("Freedom"). Through OPY Credit Corp., we offer syndication as well as trading of issued syndicated corporate loans. At December 31, 2020, the Company employed 2,908 employees (2,871 full-time and 37 part-time), of whom 1,002 were financial advisors.
Outlook
We are focused on growing our private client and asset management businesses through strategic additions of experienced financial advisors in our existing branch system and employment of experienced money management personnel in our asset management business as well as deploying our capital for expansion through targeted acquisitions. We are also focused on opportunities in our capital market businesses where we can acquire experienced personnel and/or business units that will improve our ability to attract institutional clients in both equities and fixed income without significantly raising our risk profile. In investment banking we are committed to grow our footprint by adding experienced bankers within our existing industry practices.
We continuously invest in and improve our technology platform to support client service and to remain competitive while continuously managing expenses. The Company's long-term growth plan is to continue to expand existing offices by hiring experienced professionals as well as expand through the purchase of operating branch offices from other broker-dealers or the opening of new branch offices in attractive locations, and to continue to grow and develop the existing trading, investment banking, investment advisory and other divisions. We are committed to continuing to improve our technology capabilities to ensure compliance with industry regulations, support client service and expand our wealth management and capital markets capabilities. We recognize the importance of compliance with applicable regulatory requirements and are committed to performing rigorous and ongoing assessments of our compliance and risk management effort, and investing in people and programs, while providing a platform with first class investment programs and services.
The Company is also reviewing its full service business model to determine the opportunities available to build or acquire closely related businesses in areas where competitors have shown some success. Equally important is the search for viable acquisition candidates. Our long-term intention is to pursue growth by acquisition where we can find a comfortable match in terms of corporate goals and personnel at a price that would provide our shareholders with incremental value. We review potential acquisition opportunities from time to time on the basis of fulfilling the Company's strategic goals, while evaluating and managing our existing businesses. In addition, the Company may from time to time make minority private investments out of excess capital in allied or unrelated businesses with the goal of syndicating the investment to eligible clients or to retain ownership because we believe them to be an attractive investment.
Impact of Interest Rates
The Federal Reserve Bank implemented a series of increases in its benchmark short-term interest rate between December 2015 and December 2018. These increases in short-term interest rates had a significant positive impact on our overall financial performance, as we have programs offered to our clients (for the investment of short-term funds as well as margin loans) which
are sensitive to changes in interest rates. Given the relationship of our interest-sensitive assets to liabilities, increases in short-
term interest rates generally result in an overall increase in our net earnings. While the Federal Reserve increased short-term interest rates during that period, market deposit rates paid on client cash balances were not impacted to as great a degree, resulting in an increase in fees the Company earned from FDIC insured deposits of clients offered by the Company.
During the last two years, the Federal Reserve reduced short-term interest rates resulting in a decrease in fees the Company earned from FDIC insured deposits of clients through a program offered by the Company. Decreases in short-term interest rates, increases in deposit rates paid to clients, and/or a significant decline in our clients’ cash balances have a negative impact on our earnings. The Federal Reserve reduced its benchmark rate significantly during two separate unscheduled meetings in March 2020 by a total of 1.50%. Accordingly, the Company’s earnings during the full year of 2020 were negatively impacted by such decreases. Recently, clients' domestic cash sweep balances have increased to levels that we have not seen since around April 2017. The impact of low interest rates will continue to be significant for the foreseeable future as the Federal Reserve has stated that these lower rates are likely to persist for the next several years.
CORONAVIRUS DISEASE 2019 ("COVID-19 PANDEMIC")
The Company continues to monitor the effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic both on a national level as well as regionally and locally and is responding accordingly. In addition, we continue to provide frequent communications to clients, employees, and regulators. We have adopted enhanced cleaning practices and other health protocols in our offices, taken measures to significantly restrict non-essential business travel and have practices in place to mandate that employees who may have been exposed to COVID-19, or show any relevant symptoms, self-quarantine. In early March 2020, the Company executed on its Business Continuity Plan whereby the vast majority of our employees began to work remotely with only "essential" employees reporting to our offices. We accomplished this by significantly expanding the use of technology infrastructure that facilitates remote operations. Our ability to avoid significant business disruptions is reliant on the continued ability to have the vast majority of employees work remotely. To date, there have been no significant disruptions to our business or control processes as a result of this dispersion of employees. Recent outbreaks in various states indicate that COVID-19 will continue to impact the economy and, by extension, our business, well into 2021. We currently anticipate that a large number of our employees will continue to work remotely for the indefinite future until vaccinations are more widely administered.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The results for the fourth quarter and full year 2020 were outstanding and really showcased the strength of the platform and the dedication and commitment from our employees throughout this COVID-19 impacted year. The combination of a low interest rate environment, high volatility, and a robust rally in equities over the last nine months provided the impetus for extremely favorable results for the year. Our Capital Markets business continued to outperform with a record quarter and year for revenue and earnings, while the Wealth Management business continued to produce solid operating returns based on increased commission activity and higher fee income from assets under management. The Wealth Management business got a significant boost from the record performance of the hedge funds that we sponsor which led to an increase in incentive fees from alternative investments in the fourth quarter of 2020 which are measured and earned at the end of each year.
Investment banking had its best quarter ever as the firm increased its market share during a robust period for equities issuance in the U.S. capital markets. M&A activity also picked up significantly during the fourth quarter with several notable advisory and placement fees. Equities and fixed income sales and trading activity continued to be brisk as volatility remained elevated during the period. The broader equities markets finished the year at record levels and were up 11.7% during the fourth quarter contributing to record assets under management at December 31, 2020, which will drive our advisory fee revenue for the first quarter of 2021.
Non-compensation expenses remained under close control and we were able to manage our operating environment throughout this year of remote work. At year-end we continued to operate with about 90% of our employees working from home amid the increase in the reported infection rate from COVID-19. We look forward to the return to some level of normalcy by the third quarter of 2021 as the rate of vaccination increases in the U.S. and around the world.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table and discussion summarizes the changes in the major revenue and expense categories for the past three
years:
Fiscal 2020 compared to Fiscal 2019
Revenue
•Commission revenue was $395.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of 23.4% compared with $320.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 as a result of increased volatility and client participation in active equities-related markets.
•Advisory fees were $455.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of 28.7% compared with $353.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 due to higher management fees and incentive fees from alternative investments.
•Investment banking revenue was $222.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of 76.1% compared with $126.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 due to significantly higher underwriting revenues from equities transactions and increased M&A activity later in the year.
•Bank deposit sweep income was $34.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of 70.3% compared with $117.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 due to lower short-term interest rates partially offset by higher average cash sweep balances.
•Interest revenue was $33.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of 34.0% compared with $50.7 million in 2019 due to lower short-term interest rates partially offset by higher average margin balances.
•Principal transactions revenue was $27.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of 7.4% compared with $30.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 as a result of lower client involvement in markets during the early months of the COVID pandemic.
•Other revenue was $29.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of 15.1% compared to $35.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to a decrease in the cash surrender value of Company-owned life insurance during 2020.
Expenses
•Compensation and related expenses totaled $771.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of 17.2% compared with the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due to increased production and incentive compensation tied to increases in revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020. Compensation and related expenses as a percentage of revenue was 64.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with 63.6% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
•Non-compensation expenses were $258.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of 14.0% compared with $300.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 due to decreased interest costs, lower legal and regulatory costs and reduced costs associated with business travel and entertainment and conferences during the year ended December 31, 2020.
•The effective income tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 27.2% compared with 29.3% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The lower effective tax rate for 2020 was primarily due to lower state and local income taxes, valuation allowance on foreign operations and other non-deductible expenses over higher pre-tax income in the current year compared to 2019.
Fiscal 2019 compared to Fiscal 2018
Revenue
•Commission revenue was $320.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of 2.9% compared with $329.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
•Advisory fees were $353.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of 12.5% compared with $314.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 due to an increase in incentive fees earned from alternative investments during the fourth quarter of 2019.
•Investment banking revenue was $126.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of 9.4% compared with $115.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 due to higher merger and acquisition advisory fees offset by lower equities underwriting revenue during the 2019 year.
•Bank deposit sweep income was $117.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of 1.2% compared with $116.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
•Interest revenue was $50.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of 3.4% compared with $52.5 million in 2018.
•Principal transactions revenue was $30.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of 108.1% compared with $14.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. During the third quarter of 2018, the Company participated in tender offers by issuers of ARS which resulted in recognized losses totaling $8.1 million. The recognized losses were comprised of realized losses of $4.6 million related to tendering ARS holdings at prices below par and unrealized losses of $3.5 million related to revaluing the remaining affected ARS owned and commitments to purchase at the tender offer prices. Additionally, the increase was due to higher trading profits in fixed income during the 2019 year.
•Other revenue was $35.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of 122.6% compared to $15.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 primarily due to an increase in the cash surrender value of Company-owned life insurance during 2019.
Expenses
•Compensation and related expenses totaled $657.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of 8.3% compared with the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was due to higher salaries, producer, incentive, share-based, and deferred compensation expenses during the year ended December 31, 2019. The Company recorded compensation and related expenses of $3.7 million related to its OARs Plan during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared with $0.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2018. Compensation and related expenses as a percentage of revenue was 63.6% for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared with 63.4% for the year ended December 31, 2018.
•Non-compensation expenses were $300.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of 1.7% compared with $306.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2018 due primarily to lower legal and regulatory costs partially offset by higher communication and technology costs and underwriting deal-related costs during the year ended December 31, 2019.
•The effective income tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2019 was 29.3% compared with 35.6% for the year ended December 31, 2018. The elevated effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2018 was partially due to the establishment of a valuation allowance for the deferred tax asset related to net operating losses of the Company's operations in Europe.
BUSINESS SEGMENTS
The table below presents information about the reported revenue and pre-tax income (loss) of the Company's reportable business segments for the three months and year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Private Client
Private Client reported revenue of $642.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, 1.7% lower compared with a year ago. Pre-tax income of $122.8 million in the year end resulted in a pre-tax profit margin of 19.1%. Financial advisor headcount declined amid increased retirements to 1,002 at the end of 2020 compared to 1,032 at the end of 2019, although the productivity of our financial advisors increased significantly reflecting higher individual production levels.
•Retail commissions were $209.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of 11.0% from a year ago as a result of increased volatility and client participation in active equities-related markets including options.
•Advisory fees increased 23.4% due to increases in management fees from advisory programs and incentive fees from alternative investments during the year. Incentive fees allocated to this segment were $61.7 million for the current year versus $20.8 million last year.
•Bank deposit sweep income decreased 70.3% from a year ago due to lower short-term interest rates partially offset by higher average cash sweep balances.
•Interest revenue declined 29.8% from a year ago due to lower short-term interest rates partially offset by higher average margin balances.
•Other revenue decreased 1.8% primarily due to decreases in the cash surrender value of Company-owned life insurance policies.
•Compensation expenses increased 13.6% primarily due to increased production and share-based compensation costs partially offset by lower deferred compensation.
•Non-compensation expenses decreased 15.5% primarily due to lower interest, legal and regulatory costs as well as travel and entertainment costs.
Asset Management
Asset Management reported revenue of $130.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, 46.8% higher compared with a year ago. Pre-tax income was $71.6 million, an increase of 126.6% compared with a year ago.
•Advisory fee revenue on traditional and alternative managed products was $130.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of 44.5% due to higher assets under management during the year as well as higher incentive fees from alternative investments. Incentive fees allocated to this segment were $49.4 million for the 2020 year versus $16.7 million last year.
•AUM hit a record level of $38.8 billion at December 31, 2020, which is the basis for advisory fee billings for the first quarter of 2021. The increase in AUM was comprised of higher asset values of $6.0 billion on existing client holdings and a net contribution of assets of $0.7 billion.
•Compensation expenses were down 0.2% and non-compensation expenses were up 4.9% when compared to the prior year.
The following table provides a breakdown of the change in assets under management for the year ended December 31, 2020:
(1)Traditional investments include third party advisory programs, Oppenheimer financial advisor managed and advisory programs, and Oppenheimer Asset Management taxable and tax-exempt portfolio management strategies.
(2)Institutional fixed income provides solutions to institutional investors including: Taft-Hartley Funds, Public Pension Funds, Corporate Pension Funds, and Foundations and Endowments.
(3)Hedge funds represent single manager hedge fund strategies in areas including hedged equity, technology and financial services, and multi-manager and multi-strategy fund of funds.
(4)Private equity funds represent private equity fund of funds including portfolios focused on natural resources and related assets.
(5)The portfolio enhancement program sells uncovered, far out-of-money puts and calls on the S&P 500 Index. The program is market neutral and uncorrelated to the index. Valuation is based on collateral requirements for a series of contracts representing the investment strategy.
Capital Markets
Capital Markets reported revenue of $426.8 million for 2020, 46.7% higher compared with a year ago. Pre-Tax income was $83.4 million compared with a pre-tax loss of $13.7 million a year ago.
•Advisory fees earned from investment banking activities increased 50.7% to $80.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with $53.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 driven by increased M&A activity and fees associated with a significant number of capital raising transactions (PIPES) in the healthcare and technology sectors completed during the year.
•Equities underwriting fees increased 153.0% to $103.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with $40.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 due to significantly higher levels of capital issuances in the equity markets particularly in healthcare and technology sectors.
•Fixed income underwriting fees increased 10.6% to $87.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with $75.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily driven by public finance issuances during the year, partially offset by lower underwriting fees in emerging markets.
•Equities sales and trading increased to $130.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, 30.9% higher compared to $99.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 due to elevated volatility in the equities markets during the year.
•Fixed income sales and trading increased 14.9% driven by robust trading in taxable fixed income during the year.
•Compensation expenses increased 29.8% primarily due to increased production and incentive compensation tied to increases in revenue.
•Non-compensation expenses were 17.2% lower due to decreased interest costs and reduced costs associated with business travel and entertainment and conferences.
Critical Accounting Policies
The Company's accounting policies are essential to understanding and interpreting the financial results reported on the consolidated financial statements. The significant accounting policies used in the preparation of the Company's consolidated financial statements are summarized in note 2 to those statements. Certain of those policies are considered to be particularly important to the presentation of the Company's financial results because they require management to make difficult, complex or subjective judgments, often as a result of matters that are inherently uncertain. The following is a discussion of these policies:
Fair Value Measurements
The accounting guidance for the fair value measurement of financial assets, defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value, establishes a fair value measurement hierarchy, and expands fair value measurement disclosures. Fair value, as defined by the accounting guidance, is the price that would be received in the sale of an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. The fair value hierarchy established by this accounting guidance prioritizes the inputs used in valuation techniques into the following three categories (highest to lowest priority):
Level 1:Observable inputs that reflect quoted prices (unadjusted) for identical assets or liabilities in active markets;
Level 2:Inputs other than quoted prices included in Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability either directly or indirectly; and
Level 3:Unobservable inputs that are significant to the overall fair value measurement.
The Company's financial instruments that are recorded at fair value generally are classified within Level 1 or Level 2 within the fair value hierarchy using quoted market prices or quotes from market makers or broker-dealers. Financial instruments classified within Level 1 are valued based on quoted market prices in active markets and consist of U.S. Treasury and Agency securities, corporate equities, and certain money market instruments. Level 2 financial instruments primarily consist of investment grade and high-yield corporate debt, convertible bonds, mortgage and asset-backed securities, and municipal obligations. Financial instruments classified as Level 2 are valued based on quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities in active markets and quoted prices for identical or similar assets and liabilities in markets that are not active. Financial instruments are classified as Level 3 if observable pricing inputs are not available due to limited market activity for the asset or liability. As of December 31, 2020 the Company had $30.7 million in financial instruments, comprised of auction rate securities, classified within Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy.
Legal and Regulatory Reserves
The Company records reserves related to legal and regulatory proceedings in accounts payable and other liabilities. The determination of the amounts of these reserves requires significant judgment on the part of management. In accordance with applicable accounting guidance, the Company establishes reserves for litigation and regulatory matters where available information indicates that it is probable a liability had been incurred at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the Company can reasonably estimate the amount of that loss. When loss contingencies are not probable or cannot be reasonably estimated, the Company does not establish reserves.
When determining whether to record a reserve, management considers many factors including, but not limited to, the amount of the claim; the stage and forum of the proceeding, the sophistication of the claimant, the amount of the loss, if any, in the client's account and the possibility of wrongdoing, if any, on the part of an employee of the Company; the basis and validity of the claim; previous results in similar cases; and applicable legal precedents and case law. Each legal and regulatory proceeding is reviewed with counsel in each accounting period and the reserve is adjusted as deemed appropriate by management. Any change in the reserve amount is recorded in the results of that period. The assumptions of management in determining the estimates of reserves may be incorrect and the actual disposition of a legal or regulatory proceeding could be greater or less than the reserve amount.
Leases
In the first quarter of 2019, the Company adopted ASU 2016-02, "Leases". The Accounting Standards Update ("ASU") requires the recognition of right-of use ("ROU") assets and lease liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet by lessees for those leases classified as operating leases under previous guidance.
ROU assets and lease liabilities are initially recognized based on the present value of the future minimum lease payments over the lease term, excluding non-base rent components such as fixed common area maintenance costs and other fixed costs such as real estate taxes and insurance. The discount rates used in determining the present value of leases are the Company’s incremental borrowing rates, developed based upon each lease’s term. The lease term includes options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain that the Company will exercise that option. For operating leases, the ROU assets also include any prepaid lease payments and initial direct costs incurred and are reduced by lease incentives. For these leases, lease expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term if the ROU asset has not been impaired or abandoned.
Goodwill
The Company defines a reporting unit as an operating segment. The Company's goodwill resides in its Private Client Division ("PCD") reporting unit. Goodwill of a reporting unit is subject to at least an annual test for impairment to determine if the estimated fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. Goodwill of a reporting unit is required to be tested for impairment between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount. Due to the volatility in the financial services sector and equity markets in general, determining whether an impairment of goodwill has occurred is increasingly difficult and requires management to exercise significant judgment. The Company's annual goodwill impairment analysis performed at December 31, 2020 applied the same valuation methodologies with consistent inputs as that performed at December 31, 2019, as follows:
In estimating the fair value of the PCD reporting unit, the Company uses traditional standard valuation methods, including the market comparable approach and income approach. The market comparable approach is based on comparisons of the subject company to public companies whose stocks are actively traded ("Price Multiples") or to similar companies engaged in an actual merger or acquisition ("Precedent Transactions"). As part of this process, multiples of value relative to financial variables, such as earnings or stockholders' equity, are developed and applied to the appropriate financial variables of the subject company to indicate its value. The income approach involves estimating the present value of the subject company's future cash flows by using projections of the cash flows that the business is expected to generate, and discounting these cash flows at a given rate of return ("Discounted Cash Flow" or "DCF"). Each of these standard valuation methodologies requires the use of management estimates and assumptions.
In its Price Multiples valuation analysis, the Company uses various operating metrics of comparable companies, including revenues, after-tax earnings, EBITDA as well as price-to-book value ratios at a point in time. The Company analyzes prices paid in Precedent Transactions that are comparable to the business conducted in the PCD. The DCF analysis includes the Company's assumptions regarding discount rate, and growth rates of the PCD's revenues, expenses, EBITDA, and capital expenditures, adjusted for current economic conditions and expectations. The Company weighs each of the three valuation methods equally in its overall valuation. Given the subjectivity involved in selecting which valuation method to use, the corresponding weightings, and the input variables for use in the analyses, it is possible that a different valuation model and the selection of different input variables could produce a materially different estimate of the fair value of the PCD reporting unit.
At each annual goodwill impairment testing date, the PCD reporting unit had a fair value that was substantially in excess of its carrying value. See note 19 to the consolidated financial statements appearing in Item 8 for further discussion.
Intangible Assets
Indefinite intangible assets are comprised of trademarks, trade names and an Internet domain name. These intangible assets carried at $32.1 million, which are not amortized, are subject to at least an annual test for impairment to determine if the estimated fair value is less than their carrying amount. The fair value of the trademarks and trade names was substantially in excess of its carrying value at December 31, 2020. See note 19 to the consolidated financial statements appearing in Item 8 for further discussion.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes under the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined on the basis of the differences between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. The effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
The Company recognizes deferred tax assets to the extent it believes these assets are more likely than not to be realized. In making such a determination, the Company considers all available positive and negative evidence, including future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable income, tax planning strategies, and the results of recent operations.
The Company records uncertain tax positions in accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") 740, "Income Taxes" on the basis of a two-step process whereby it determines whether it is more likely than not that the tax positions will be sustained on the basis of the technical merits of the position and, for those tax positions that meet the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold, the Company recognizes the largest amount of tax benefit that is more than 50 percent likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement with the related tax authority.
The Company records interest and penalties accruing on unrecognized tax benefits in income (loss) before income taxes as interest expense and other expense, respectively, in its consolidated income statements.
The Company permanently reinvests eligible earnings of its foreign subsidiaries and, accordingly, does not accrue any U.S. income taxes that would arise if such earnings were repatriated.
New Accounting Pronouncements
Recently issued accounting pronouncements are described in note 2 to the consolidated financial statements appearing in Item 8.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
At December 31, 2020, total assets increased by 10.1% from December 31, 2019. The Company satisfies its need for short-term financing from internally generated funds and collateralized and uncollateralized borrowings, consisting primarily of bank call loans, stock loans, and uncommitted lines of credit. We finance our trading in government securities through the use of securities sold under agreements to repurchase ("repurchase agreements"). We met our longer-term capital needs through the issuance of the 5.50% Senior Secured Notes due 2025 (see "Senior Secured Notes" below). Oppenheimer has arrangements with banks for borrowings on a fully-collateralized basis. The amount of Oppenheimer's bank borrowings fluctuates in response to changes in the level of the Company's securities inventories and customer margin debt, changes in notes receivable from employees, investment in furniture, equipment and leasehold improvements, and changes in stock loan balances and financing through repurchase agreements. At December 31, 2020, the Company had $82.0 million of such borrowings outstanding compared to outstanding borrowings of $0 million at December 31, 2019. The Company also has some availability of short-term bank financing on an unsecured basis.
The Company's overseas subsidiaries, Oppenheimer Europe Ltd. and Oppenheimer Investments Asia Limited, are subject to local regulatory capital requirements that restrict our ability to utilize their capital for other purposes. The regulatory capital requirements for Oppenheimer Europe Ltd. and Oppenheimer Investments Asia Limited were $4.3 million and $386,917, respectively, at December 31, 2020. The liquid assets at Oppenheimer Europe Ltd. are primarily comprised of cash deposits in bank accounts.
The liquid assets at Oppenheimer Investments Asia Limited are primarily comprised of investments in U.S. Treasuries and cash deposits in bank accounts. Any restrictions on transfer of these liquid assets from Oppenheimer Europe Ltd. and Oppenheimer Investments Asia Limited to the Company or its other subsidiaries would be limited by regulatory capital requirements.
The Company permanently reinvests eligible earnings of its foreign subsidiaries and, accordingly, does not accrue any U.S. income taxes that would arise if these earnings were repatriated. The unrecognized deferred tax liability associated with the outside basis difference of its foreign subsidiaries is estimated at $3.5 million for those subsidiaries. We have continued to reinvest permanently the excess earnings of Oppenheimer Israel (OPCO) Ltd. in its own business and in the businesses in Europe and Asia to support business initiatives in those regions. We will continue to review our historical treatment of these earnings to determine whether our historical practice will continue or whether a change is warranted. The Company has begun assessing the impact that the new presidential administration’s tax proposals will have on its operations and cash flows.
Senior Secured Notes
On September 22, 2020, in a private offering, we issued $125.0 million aggregate principal amount of 5.50% Senior Secured Notes due 2025 (the "Unregistered Notes") under an Indenture at an issue price of 100% of the principal amount. Interest on the Unregistered Notes is payable semi-annually on April 1st and October 1st. We used the net proceeds from the offering of the Unregistered Notes, along with cash on hand, to redeem in full our 6.75% Senior Secured Notes due July 1, 2022 in the principal amount of $150.0 million (the Company held $1.4 million in treasury for a net outstanding amount of $148.6 million), and pay all related fees and expenses related thereto. On November 23, 2020, we completed an exchange offer in which we exchanged 99.8% of our Unregistered Notes for a like principal amount of notes with identical terms except that such new notes have been registered under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the "Notes"). We did not receive any proceeds in the exchange offer. See note 12 to the consolidated financial statements appearing in Item 1 for further discussion.
The Notes are jointly and severally and fully and unconditionally guaranteed on a senior secured basis by E.A. Viner International Co. and Viner Finance Inc. (together, the "Guarantors"), unless released as described below. Each of the Guarantors is 100% owned by the Parent. The indenture for the Notes contains covenants with restrictions which are discussed in note 12.
The guarantees are senior secured obligations of each guarantor. The guarantees rank:
•effectively senior in right of payment to all unsecured and unsubordinated obligations of such guarantor, to the extent of the value of the collateral owned by such guarantor (and, to the extent of any unsecured remainder after payment of the value of the collateral, rank equally in right of payment with such unsecured and unsubordinated indebtedness of such guarantor); and
•senior in right of payment to any subordinated debt of the such guarantor;
•secured on a first-priority basis by the collateral, subject to certain exceptions and permitted liens, and it is intended that pari passu lien indebtedness, if any, will be secured on an equal and ratable basis.
Each subsidiary guarantee is limited so that it does not constitute a fraudulent conveyance under applicable law, which may reduce the subsidiary’s obligation under the guarantee. There are no externally imposed restrictions on transfers of assets between the Company and its subsidiaries.
Each Guarantor will be automatically and unconditionally released and discharged upon: the sale, exchange or transfer of the capital stock of a Guarantor and the Guarantor ceasing to be a direct or indirect subsidiary of the Parent if such sale does not constitute an asset sale under the indenture for the Notes or does not constitute an asset sale effected in compliance with the asset sale and merger covenants of the indenture for the Notes; a Guarantor being dissolved or liquidated; a Guarantor being designated unrestricted in compliance with the applicable provisions of the Notes; or the exercise by the Parent of its legal defeasance option or covenant defeasance option or the discharge of the Parent's obligations under the indenture for the Notes in accordance with the terms of such indenture.
The following tables present results of operations for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and balance sheet at December 31, 2020 for the Parent and Guarantors.
On September 14, 2020, S&P affirmed the Company's 'B+' Corporate Family rating and 'B+' rating on the Unregistered Notes and affirmed its stable outlook. On September 21, 2020, Moody's Corporation affirmed the Company's Corporate Family ‘B1’ rating and affirmed its 'B1' rating on the Unregistered Notes and its stable outlook.
Liquidity
For the most part, the Company's assets consist of cash and cash equivalents and assets that it can readily convert into cash. The receivable from brokers, dealers and clearing organizations represents deposits for securities borrowed transactions, margin deposits or current transactions awaiting settlement. The receivable from customers represents margin balances and amounts
due on transactions awaiting settlement. Our receivables are, for the most part, collateralized by marketable securities. Our collateral maintenance policies and procedures are designed to limit our exposure to credit risk. Securities owned, with the exception of the ARS, are mainly comprised of actively trading, readily marketable securities. We advanced $14.8 million in forgivable notes (which are inherently illiquid) to employees for the year ended December 31, 2020 ($13.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019) as upfront or backend inducements to commence or continue employment as the case may be. The amount of funds allocated to such inducements will vary with hiring activity.
We satisfy our need for short-term liquidity from internally generated funds, collateralized and uncollateralized bank borrowings, stock loans and repurchase agreements and warehouse facilities. Bank borrowings are, in most cases, collateralized by firm and customer securities.
We obtain short-term borrowings primarily through bank call loans. Bank call loans are generally payable on demand and bear interest at various rates. At December 31, 2020, bank call loans were $82.0 million ($0.0 million at December 31, 2019). The average daily bank loan outstanding for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $82.8 million ($11.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019). The largest daily bank loan outstanding for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $324.3 million ($516.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019).
At December 31, 2020, securities loan balances totaled $249.5 million ($234.3 million at December 31, 2019). The average daily securities loan balance for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $238.3 million ($240.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019). The largest daily stock loan balance for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $317.8 million ($285.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019).
We finance our government trading operations through the use of securities purchased under agreements to resell ("reverse repurchase agreements") and repurchase agreements. Except as described below, repurchase and reverse repurchase agreements, principally involving government and agency securities, are carried at amounts at which securities subsequently will be resold or reacquired as specified in the respective agreements and include accrued interest.
Repurchase and reverse repurchase agreements are presented on a net-by-counterparty basis, when the repurchase and reverse repurchase agreements are executed with the same counterparty, have the same explicit settlement date, are executed in accordance with a master netting arrangement, the securities underlying the repurchase and reverse repurchase agreements exist in "book entry" form and certain other requirements are met.
Certain of our repurchase agreements and reverse repurchase agreements are carried at fair value as a result of the Company's fair value option election. We elected the fair value option for those repurchase agreements and reverse repurchase agreements that do not settle overnight or have an open settlement date. We have elected the fair value option for these instruments to more accurately reflect market and economic events in our earnings and to mitigate a potential imbalance in earnings caused by using different measurement attributes (i.e. fair value versus carrying value) for certain assets and liabilities. At December 31, 2020, we did not have any repurchase agreements and reverse repurchase agreements that did not settle overnight or have an open settlement date.
At December 31, 2020, the gross balances of reverse repurchase agreements and repurchase agreements were $88.3 million and $430.8 million, respectively. The average daily balance of reverse repurchase agreements and repurchase agreements on a gross basis for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $170.7 million and $374.3 million, respectively ($117.5 million and $550.9 million, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2019). The largest amount of reverse repurchase agreements and repurchase agreements outstanding on a gross basis during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $714.2 million and $803.0 million, respectively ($326.3 million and $890.5 million, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2019).
At December 31, 2020, the gross leverage ratio was 4.0
Liquidity Management
We manage our need for liquidity on a daily basis to ensure compliance with regulatory requirements. Our liquidity needs may be affected by market conditions, increased inventory positions, business expansion and other unanticipated occurrences. In the event that existing financial resources do not satisfy our liquidity needs, we may have to seek additional external financing. The availability of such additional external financing may depend on market factors outside our control.
We have Company-owned life insurance policies which are utilized to fund certain non-qualified deferred compensation plans. Certain policies which could provide additional liquidity if needed had a cash surrender value of $80.8 million as of December 31, 2020.
We regularly review our sources of liquidity and financing and conduct internal stress analysis to determine the impact on the Company of events that could remove sources of liquidity or financing and to plan actions the Company could take in the case of such an eventuality. Our reviews have resulted in plans that we believe would result in a reduction of assets through liquidation that would significantly reduce the Company's need for external financing.
Funding Risk
Management believes that funds from operations, combined with our capital base and available credit facilities, are sufficient for our liquidity needs in the foreseeable future. Under some circumstances, banks including those on whom we rely may back away from providing funding to the securities industry. Such a development might impact our ability to finance our day-to-day activities or increase the costs to acquire funding. We may or may not be able to pass such increased funding costs on to our clients.
During the recent period of high volatility, we have seen increased calls for deposits of collateral to offset perceived risk between the Company's settlement liability to industry utilities such as the Options Clearing Corporation (“OCC”) and National Securities Clearing Corp. (“NSCC”) as well as more stringent collateral arrangements with our bank lenders. All such requirements have been met in the ordinary course with available collateral.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
Information concerning our off-balance sheet arrangements is included in note 7 to the consolidated financial statements appearing in Item 8. Such information is hereby incorporated by reference.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
The following table sets forth the Company's contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
(1)See note 4 to the consolidated financial statements appearing in Item 8 for additional information.
(2)Includes interest liability of $64.0 million.
(3)Includes commitments to provide bridge financing to a rental services company ($20.0 million), equity financing in a take-private transaction ($20.0 million), and unfunded obligations in private equity funds sponsored by the Company ($1.2 million). See note 17 to the consolidated financial statements appearing in Item 8 for additional information.
(4)See note 12 to the consolidated financial statements appearing in Item 8 for additional information.
(5)Includes interest payable of $34.5 million through maturity.
CYBERSECURITY
For many years, we have sought to maintain the security of our clients' data, limit access to our data processing environment, and protect our data processing facilities. See "Risk Factors - Cybersecurity - Security breaches of our technology systems, or those of our clients or other third-party vendors we rely on, could subject us to significant liability and harm our reputation" in Item 1A. Recent examples of vulnerabilities by other companies and the government that have resulted in loss of client data and fraudulent activities by both domestic and foreign actors have caused us to continuously review our security policies and procedures and to take additional actions to protect our network and our information.
Given the importance of the protection of client data, regulators have developed increased oversight of cybersecurity planning and protections that broker-dealers and other financial service providers have implemented. Such planning and protection are subject to the SEC's and FINRA's oversight and examination on a periodic or targeted basis. We expect that regulatory oversight will intensify, as a result of publicly announced data breaches by other organizations involving tens of millions of items of personally identifiable information. We continue to implement protections and adopt procedures to address the risks posed by the current information technology environment. The Company has significantly increased the resources dedicated to this effort and believes that further increases may be required in the future, in anticipation of increases in the sophistication and persistency of such attacks. There can be no guarantee that our cybersecurity efforts will be successful in discovering or preventing a security breach.
REGULATORY MATTERS AND DEVELOPMENTS
Regulation Best Interest (U.S.)
On April 18, 2018, the SEC announced its proposed "Regulation Best Interest," a package of rulemakings and interpretations that address customers' relationships with investment advisers and broker-dealers.
On June 5, 2019, the SEC adopted a final version of this rulemaking package that included the adoption of Regulation Best Interest (“Reg BI”) as Rule 15l-1 under the Exchange Act. Reg BI imposes a new federal standard of conduct on registered broker-dealers and their associated persons when dealing with retail clients and requires that a broker-dealer and its representatives act in the best interest of such client and not place its own interests ahead of the customer’s interests. Reg BI does not define the term “best interest” but instead sets forth four distinct obligations, disclosure, care, conflict of interest and compliance that a broker-dealer must satisfy in each transaction. The effective date for compliance with Reg BI was June 30, 2020. In addition to passing Reg BI the SEC also adopted rules (i) requiring broker-dealers and investment advisers to provide a written relationship summary to each client, and (ii) clarifying certain interpretations under the Advisers Act including but not limited to when a broker-dealer's activity is considered “solely incidental” to its broker-dealer business and is, therefore, not considered investment advisory activity (collectively, the “Reg BI Rules”).
It is too early to predict what all the effects of the Reg BI Rules will have on the Company. However, there is a need for enhanced documentation for recommendations of securities transactions to broker-dealer retail clients as well as the cessation of certain practices as well as limitations on certain kinds of transactions previously conducted in the normal course of business. The new rules and processes related thereto may limit revenue and most likely will involve increased costs, including, but not limited to, compliance costs associated with new or enhanced technology as well as increased litigation costs.
The Company has reviewed its business practices and operating models in light of the Reg BI Rules and has made significant structural, technological and operational changes to our business leading up to the effective date of June 30, 2020 for compliance with the Reg BI Rules. As a result, the Company conducted significant training of all its employees with respect to the requirements of Reg BI and made each of the required mailings (both electronic and conventional) prior to the effective date. The Company believes that the changes made to its business processes will result in compliance with these new requirements. As business is conducted under the Reg BI Rules, it is likely that additional changes may be necessary.
Regulatory Environment
See the discussion of the regulatory environment in which we operate and the impact on our operations of certain rules and regulations in Item 1 “Business - Regulation” herein for additional information.
Oppenheimer and many of its affiliates are each subject to various regulatory capital requirements. As of December 31, 2020, all of our active regulated domestic and international subsidiaries had net capital in excess of minimum requirements. See note 18 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for further information on regulatory capital requirements.
FACTORS AFFECTING "FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS"
From time to time, the Company may publish or make oral statements that constitute “forward-looking statements” under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 which provides a safe harbor for forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements may relate to such matters as anticipated financial performance, future revenues, earnings, liabilities or expenses, business prospects, projected ventures, new products, anticipated market performance, and similar matters. The Company cautions readers that a variety of factors could cause the Company’s actual results to differ materially from the anticipated results or other expectations expressed in the Company’s forward-looking statements. These risks and uncertainties, many of which are beyond the Company’s control, include, but are not limited to: (i) transaction volume in the securities markets, (ii) the volatility of the securities markets, (iii) fluctuations in interest rates, (iv) changes in regulatory requirements that could affect the cost and method of doing business, (v) general economic conditions, both domestic and international, (vi) competition from existing financial institutions, new entrants and other participants in the securities markets and financial services industry, (vii) potential cybersecurity threats, (viii) legal developments affecting the litigation experience of the securities industry and the Company, (ix) changes in foreign, federal and state tax laws that could affect the popularity of products sold by the Company or impose taxes on securities transactions, (x) the adoption and implementation of the SEC’s “Regulation Best Interest” and other regulations adopted in recent years, (xi) war, terrorist acts and nuclear confrontation as well as political unrest, (xii) the Company’s ability to achieve its business plan, (xiii) the effects of the economy on the Company’s ability to find and maintain financing options and liquidity, (xiv) credit, operational, legal and regulatory risks, (xv) risks related to foreign operations, including those in the United Kingdom which may be affected by Britain’s January 2020 exit from the EU(“Brexit”), (xvi) the effect of technological innovation on the financial services industry and securities business, (xvii) risks related to election results, Congressional gridlock, political and social unrest, government shutdowns and investigations, trade wars, changes in or uncertainty surrounding regulation and threats of default by the Federal government, (xviii) risks related to changes in capital requirements under international standards that may cause banks to back away from providing funding to the securities industry, and (xviv) risks related to the severity and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic; the pandemic’s impact on the U.S. and global economies; and Federal, state and local governmental responses to the pandemic. There can be no assurance that the Company has correctly or completely identified and assessed all of the factors affecting the Company's business. See “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A.