Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a special purpose acquisition company incorporated in the Cayman Islands on January 24, 2020 formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar Business Combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash derived from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, shares and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Recent Developments
On February 16, 2021, the Company entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger and Reorganization (the “Merger Agreement”) by and between the Company, Zero Carbon Merger Inc., a Delaware corporation and our direct, wholly owned subsidiary (“Merger Sub”), and Micromidas, Inc., a Delaware corporation doing business as Origin Materials (“Micromidas”).
Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, (i) the Company will domesticate from a Cayman Islands exempted company to a Delaware corporation (the “Domestication”) and (ii) Merger Sub will merge with and into Micromidas with Micromidas continuing as the surviving entity and a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (the “Merger” and together with the Domestication and the other transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement, the “Proposed Business Combination”). In connection with the Domestication, the Company will change its name to “Origin Materials, Inc.” We refer to the Company following the Business Combination as “Origin.”
As a result of the Proposed Business Combination, each issued and outstanding Class A ordinary share and Class B ordinary share of the Company will convert into a share of Class A common stock of Origin (“Class A Common Stock”), and each issued and outstanding warrant to purchase Class A ordinary shares of the Company will be exercisable by its terms to purchase an equal number of shares of Class A Common Stock.
The aggregate stock consideration to be distributed to Micromidas’s holders at the effective time of the Merger (the “Effective Time”) is 78,213,000 shares of Class A Common Stock, which is subject to certain downward adjustments pursuant to the Merger Agreement. At the Effective Time, by virtue of the Merger and without any action on the part of the Company, Merger Sub, Micromidas or the holders of any of Micromidas’s securities:
(a) each share of Micromidas common stock (“Micromidas Common Stock”), series A preferred stock (“Micromidas Series A Preferred Stock”), series B preferred stock (“Micromidas Series B Preferred Stock”) and series C preferred stock (“Micromidas Series C Preferred Stock”), in each case outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time will be canceled and converted into the right to receive a number of shares of Class A Common Stock equal to the Common Exchange Ratio, Series A Exchange Ratio, Series B Exchange Ratio and Series C Exchange Ratio, respectively, each as defined in the Merger Agreement (subject to certain adjustments as described in the Merger Agreement);
(b) any shares of Micromidas capital stock held in the treasury of Micromidas or owned by the Company, Merger Sub or Micromidas immediately prior to the Effective Time will be canceled without any conversion thereof and no payment or distribution shall be made with respect thereto;
(c) each issued and outstanding share of common stock of Merger Sub will be converted into and become one validly issued, fully paid and non-assessable share of common stock of the surviving corporation in the Merger; and
(d) each warrant to purchase Micromidas stock will terminate, be cancelled and cease to exist and will be deemed to have been exercised immediately prior to the closing of the Merger (the “Closing”) and settled in the applicable number of shares of Micromidas Series A Preferred Stock or Micromidas Series B Preferred Stock, as applicable, rounded down to the nearest whole share, and then treated in the manner described in (a), above;
(e) each option to purchase Micromidas Common Stock that is outstanding under Micromidas’s 2010 Stock Incentive Plan and the 2020 Equity Incentive Plan (the “Equity Incentive Plans”) (each, a “Company Option”) held by a former employee or service provider of Micromidas, Inc. (each, a “Former Employee Option”) that is vested and outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time shall be deemed to have been exercised, on a net exercise basis with respect to the applicable exercise price and any required withholding or employment taxes thereon, immediately prior to the Closing and settled in the applicable number of shares of Micromidas Common Stock, rounded down to the nearest whole share, and treated in accordance with clause (a) above. Each Former Employee Option that is
unvested and outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time shall be automatically cancelled at the Closing without the payment of consideration. From and after the Closing, except with respect to the holder’s right to receive Class A Common Stock, if any, the Former Employee Option shall be cancelled and cease to be outstanding and the holder shall cease to have any rights with respect thereto;
(f) each Company Option (other than a Former Employee Option), whether vested or unvested, will be assumed by Artius and converted into an option to purchase shares of Class A Common Stock (each, a “Converted Option”) equal to the product (rounded down to the nearest whole number) of (a) the number of shares of Micromidas Common Stock subject to such Company Option immediately prior to the Effective Time and (b) the Common Exchange Ratio, at an exercise price per share (rounded up to the nearest whole cent) equal to (i) the exercise price per share of such Company Option immediately prior to the Effective Time divided by (ii) the Common Exchange Ratio; provided, however, that the exercise price and the number of shares of Class A Common Stock purchasable pursuant to such Converted Options shall be determined in a manner consistent with the requirements of Section 409A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”); provided, further, however, that in the case of such Company Option to which Section 422 of the Code applies, the exercise price and the number of shares of Class A Common Stock purchasable pursuant to such option shall be determined in accordance with the foregoing, subject to such adjustments in a manner consistent with Treasury Regulation Section 1.424-1, such that the Converted Option will not constitute a modification of such Company Option for purposes of Section 409A or Section 424 of the Code. Except as specifically provided above, following the Effective Time, each Converted Option shall continue to be governed by the same terms and conditions (including vesting and exercisability terms) as were applicable to the corresponding former Company Option immediately prior to the Effective Time. At or prior to the Effective Time, the Company shall take any actions that are necessary to effectuate the treatment of the Company Options pursuant to this paragraph.
As additional consideration for the Merger, after the Effective Time, Origin will issue to certain holders of Micromidas’s securities up to 25 million additional shares of Class A Common Stock (the “Earnout Shares”) as follows: (i) one third of the Earnout Shares will be issued when the volume weighted average price of Class A Common Stock (“VWAP”) equals or exceeds $15.00 for 10 consecutive trading days during the three year period following the closing of the Proposed Business Combination, (ii) one third of the Earnout Shares will be issued when VWAP equals or exceeds $20.00 for 10 consecutive trading days during the four year period following the closing of the Proposed Business Combination, and (iii) one third of the Earnout Shares will be issued when VWAP equals or exceeds $25.00 for 10 consecutive trading days during the five year period following the closing of the Proposed Business Combination.
Under the Merger Agreement, the obligations of the parties to consummate the transactions contemplated thereby are subject to the satisfaction or waiver of certain customary closing conditions, including, the Company obtaining the requisite approval of its shareholders, which the company expects to seek at a special meeting of the Company. The Merger Agreement may be terminated at any time prior to the Closing by mutual written consent of the Company and Micromidas and, among other things, if the Proposed Business Combination has not occurred by August 31, 2021. As such, the Closing cannot be assured.
Concurrently with the execution of the Merger Agreement, the Company entered into the following agreements:
•
Subscription Agreements with certain qualified institutional buyers and accredited investors (collectively, the “Investors”), pursuant to which, among other things, the Investors agreed to subscribe for and purchase, and the Company agreed to issue and sell to the Investors, an aggregate of 20,000,000 newly issued shares of Class A Common Stock in connection with the closing of the Proposed Business Combination for aggregate gross proceeds of $200,000,000 (the “PIPE Placement”);
•
A Sponsor Letter Agreement , pursuant to which the Sponsor agreed to, among other things, (i) vote in favor of the Artius Stockholder Voting Matters (as defined in the Merger Agreement), (ii) pay any excess of Artius Transaction Expenses (as defined in the Merger Agreement) over the Artius Transaction Expense Cap (as defined in the Sponsor Letter Agreement), and (iii) subject 4,500,000 of its Class B ordinary shares to certain vesting and forfeiture provisions pursuant to the Sponsor Letter Agreement, as further described below under “Sponsor Letter Agreement”.
•
A Transaction Support Stockholder Support Agreement with Micromidas and certain stockholders of Micromidas pursuant to which the parties agreed, as promptly as practicable following the effectiveness of the proxy statement/prospectus relating to the approval by Artius shareholders of the Merger, to execute and deliver a written consent with respect to certain securities of Micromidas adopting the Merger Agreement and approving the Merger, delivered promptly, and in any event within one business day after (i) the registration statement related to the Merger is declared effective and (ii) the Company has requested such delivery. The securities of Micromidas owned by its stockholders who are party to the Company Transaction Stockholder Support Agreements and subject to such the agreements are sufficient to approve the adoption of the Merger Agreement.
•
A Lock-up Agreement, pursuant to which the Sponsor, certain executive officers and directors of Micromidas and certain existing stockholders of Micromidas agreed to restrict, among other things, the transfer of Company securities held by such holders immediately following the Closing until the earliest to occur of (i) 365 days after the date of the Closing, (ii) the first day after the date on which the closing price of the Class A Common Stock equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for stock splits, stock dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after the date of the Closing, or (iii) the date on which the Company completes a liquidation, merger, capital stock exchange, reorganization or other similar transaction after the Closing date that results in all of the public stockholders of the Company having the right to exchange their shares of Class A Common Stock for cash, securities or other property.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any operating revenues to date. Our only activities from inception through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and the search for a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the Initial Public Offering. We are incurring expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with searching for, and completing, a Business Combination.
For the period from January 24, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $125,151, which consists of operating and formation costs of $341,627 offset by interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $212,516 and an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $3,960.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On July 16, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 72,450,000 Units, inclusive of the underwriters’ election to fully exercise their option to purchase an additional 9,450,000 Units, at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $724,500,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 11,326,667 Private Placement Warrants to the Sponsor at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant generating gross proceeds of $16,990,000.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the exercise of the over-allotment option in full and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $724,500,000 was placed in the Trust Account, and we had $1,385,431 of cash
held outside of the Trust Account, after payment of costs related to the Initial Public Offering, and available for working capital purposes. We incurred $40,686,819 in transaction costs, including $14,490,000 of underwriting fees, $25,357,500 of deferred underwriting fees and $839,319 of other offering costs.
For the period from January 24, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $562,274, consisting of a net loss of $125,151, interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account and not available for operations of $212,516 and an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in our Trust Account of $3,960. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $220,647 of cash from operating activities.
At December 31, 2020, we had marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $724,716,476. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account, excluding deferred underwriting commissions, to complete our Business Combination. We may withdraw interest from the Trust Account to pay taxes, if any. To the extent that our share capital or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete a Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
At December 31, 2020, we had cash of $1,123,407 held outside of the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants, at a price of $1.50 per warrant, at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a monthly fee of $25,000 for accounting, bookkeeping, office space, IT support, professional, secretarial and administrative services, provided to the Company. We began incurring these fees on July 14, 2020 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of a Business Combination and the Company’s liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per unit, or $25,357,500 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Loss Per Ordinary Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Ordinary shares subject to possible redemption, which are not currently redeemable and are not redeemable at fair value, have been excluded from the calculation of basic net loss per ordinary share since such shares, if redeemed, only participate in their pro rata share of the Trust Account earnings. Our net income is adjusted for the portion of income that is attributable to ordinary shares subject to redemption, as these shares only participate in the earnings of the Trust Account and not our income or losses.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.