ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, such as statements regarding our plans, objectives, expectations, intentions and projections. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Unless the context otherwise requires, for purposes of this section, the terms “we,” “us,” “the Company,” “Organogenesis” or “our company” refer to Organogenesis Holdings Inc. and its subsidiaries as they currently exist.
Overview
Organogenesis is a leading regenerative medicine company focused on the development, manufacture, and commercialization of solutions for the Advanced Wound Care and Surgical & Sports Medicine markets. Our products have been shown through clinical and scientific studies to support and in some cases accelerate tissue healing and improve patient outcomes. We are advancing the standard of care in each phase of the healing process through multiple breakthroughs in tissue engineering and cell therapy. Our solutions address large and growing markets driven by aging demographics and increases in comorbidities such as diabetes, obesity, cardiovascular and peripheral vascular disease and smoking. We offer our differentiated products and in-house customer support to a wide range of health care customers including hospitals, wound care centers, government facilities, ambulatory service centers (“ASCs”), and physician offices. Our mission is to provide integrated healing solutions that substantially improve medical outcomes and the lives of patients while lowering the overall cost of care.
We offer a comprehensive portfolio of products in the markets we serve that address patient needs across the continuum of care. We have and intend to continue to generate data from clinical trials, real-world outcomes and health economics research that validate the clinical efficacy and value proposition offered by our products. Several of our existing and pipeline products in our portfolio have PMA approval, BLA approval or 510(k) clearance from the FDA. Given the extensive time and cost required to conduct clinical trials and receive FDA approvals, we believe that our data and regulatory approvals provide us a strong competitive advantage. Our product development expertise and multiple technology platforms provide a robust product pipeline, which we believe will drive future growth.
In the Advanced Wound Care market, we focus on the development and commercialization of advanced wound care products for the treatment of chronic and acute wounds in various treatment settings. We have a comprehensive portfolio of regenerative medicine products, capable of supporting patients from early in the wound healing process through wound closure regardless of wound type. Our Advanced Wound Care products include Apligraf for the treatment of venous leg ulcers (“VLUs”) and diabetic foot ulcers (“DFUs”); Dermagraft for the treatment of DFUs; PuraPly AM to address biofilm across a broad variety of wound types; and Affinity and NuShield to address a variety of wound sizes and types. We have a highly trained and specialized direct wound care sales force paired with exceptional customer support services.
In the Surgical & Sports Medicine market, we focus on products that support the healing of musculoskeletal injuries, including degenerative conditions such as osteoarthritis and tendonitis. We are leveraging our regenerative medicine capabilities in this attractive, adjacent market. Our Surgical & Sports Medicine products include ReNu for in-office joint and tendon applications; NuCel for bony fusion in the spine and extremities; NuShield and Affinity for surgical application in targeted soft tissue repairs; and PuraPly AM for surgical treatment of open wounds. We currently sell these products through independent agencies and our growing direct sales force.
We generated net revenue of $338.3 million, $261.0 million and $193.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. We had net income of $17.9 million and net loss of $40.5 million and $64.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. While we reported net income for the year ended December 31, 2020, we have incurred significant losses since inception and we may incur operating losses in the future as we expend resources as part of our efforts to grow our organization to support the planned expansion of our business. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $153.1 million. Our primary sources of capital to date have been from sales of our products, borrowings from related parties and institutional lenders and proceeds from the sale of our Class A common stock. We operate in one segment of regenerative medicine.
Items Affecting Comparability
Avista Merger. On December 10, 2018, Avista Healthcare Public Acquisition Corp., our predecessor company (“AHPAC”), consummated the previously announced business combination pursuant to that certain Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated as of August 17, 2018 (as amended, the “Avista Merger Agreement”), by and among AHPAC, Avista Healthcare Merger Sub, Inc., a direct wholly-owned subsidiary of AHPAC (“Avista Merger Sub”) and Organogenesis Inc.. As a result of the transactions contemplated by the Avista Merger Agreement, Avista Merger Sub merged with and into Organogenesis Inc., with Organogenesis Inc. surviving the merger (the “Avista Merger”). In addition, in connection with the business combination, AHPAC redomesticated as a Delaware corporation (the “Domestication”). After the Domestication, AHPAC changed its name to “Organogenesis Holdings Inc.” As a result of the Avista Merger, Organogenesis Inc. became a wholly-owned subsidiary of Organogenesis Holdings Inc. For periods prior to the closing of the Avista Merger on December 10, 2018, the disclosure in Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations has been updated to give effect to the Avista Merger.
Management’s Use of Non-GAAP Measures
Our management uses financial measures that are not in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or GAAP, in addition to financial measures in accordance with GAAP to evaluate our operating results. These non-GAAP financial measures should be considered supplemental to, and not a substitute for, our reported financial results prepared in accordance with GAAP. Our management uses Adjusted EBITDA to evaluate our operating performance and trends and make planning decisions. Our management believes Adjusted EBITDA helps identify underlying trends in our business that could otherwise be masked by the effect of the items that we exclude. Accordingly, we believe that Adjusted EBITDA provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results, enhancing the overall understanding of our past performance and future prospects, and allowing for greater transparency with respect to key financial metrics used by our management in its financial and operational decision-making.
We define EBITDA as net income (loss) before depreciation and amortization, interest expense and income taxes. We define Adjusted EBITDA as EBITDA, further adjusted for the impact of certain items that we do not consider indicative of our core operating performance. These items include non-cash equity compensation, loss on the extinguishment of debt and mark to market adjustments on our warrant liabilities and our contingent assets and liabilities, write-off of IPO costs, transaction costs related to Avista Merger, a warrant exchange transaction, and CPN acquisition, gain on settlement of deferred acquisition consideration, recovery of certain notes receivable from related parties and restructuring charges. We have presented Adjusted EBITDA in this Annual Report on Form 10-K because it is a key measure used by our management and Board of Directors to understand and evaluate our operating performance, generate future operating plans and make strategic decisions regarding the allocation of capital. In particular, we believe that the exclusion of certain items in calculating Adjusted EBITDA can produce a useful measure for period-to-period comparisons of our business.
Our Adjusted EBITDA is not prepared in accordance with GAAP, and should not be considered in isolation of, or as an alternative to, measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. There are a number of limitations related to the use of Adjusted EBITDA rather than net income (loss), which is the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
•
Adjusted EBITDA excludes stock-based compensation expense as it has been, and will continue to be for the foreseeable future, a significant recurring non-cash expense for our business and an important part of our compensation strategy;
•
Adjusted EBITDA excludes depreciation and amortization expense and, although these are non-cash expenses, the assets being depreciated may have to be replaced in the future;
•
Adjusted EBITDA excludes net interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest, which reduces cash available to us;
•
Adjusted EBITDA excludes the impact of the changes in the fair value of our warrant liability, our contingent consideration forfeiture asset and Earnout liability;
•
Adjusted EBITDA excludes the write-off of the costs in connection with an abandoned public offering and the costs incurred in connection with the Avista Merger;
•
Adjusted EBITDA excludes certain transactions expenses such as the Company’s warrant exchange transaction and the CPN acquisition transaction;
•
Adjusted EBITDA excludes loss on the extinguishment of debt;
•
Adjusted EBITDA excludes charges related to restructuring activities;
•
Adjusted EBITDA excludes certain income associated with the settlement of deferred acquisition consideration and recovery of certain notes receivable from related parties;
•
Adjusted EBITDA excludes income tax expense (benefit); and
•
other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently, which reduces its usefulness as a comparative measure.
Because of these limitations, we consider, and you should consider, Adjusted EBITDA together with other operating and financial performance measures presented in accordance with GAAP. A reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA from net income (loss), the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP, has been included herein.
Components of and Key Factors Influencing our Results of Operations
In assessing the performance of our business, we consider a variety of performance and financial measures. We believe the items discussed below provide insight into the factors that affect these key measures.
Revenue
We derive our net revenue from our portfolio of Advanced Wound Care and Surgical & Sports Medicine products. We primarily sell our Advanced Wound Care products through direct sales representatives who manage and maintain the sales relationships with hospitals, wound care centers, government facilities, ASCs and physician offices. We primarily sell our Surgical & Sports Medicine products through third-party agencies.
We recognize revenue from sales of our Advanced Wound Care and Surgical & Sports Medicine products when the customer obtains control of our product, which occurs at a point in time and may be upon procedure date, shipment or delivery, based on the contractual terms of a contract. We record revenue net of a reserve for returns, discounts and GPO rebates, which represent a direct reduction to the revenue we recognize.
Several factors affect our reported revenue in any period, including product, payer and geographic sales mix, operational effectiveness, pricing realization, marketing and promotional efforts, the timing of orders and shipments, regulatory actions including healthcare reimbursement scenarios, competition and business acquisitions.
Included within our product revenue is our PuraPly product portfolio that consists of PuraPly and PuraPly AM. We launched PuraPly in mid-2015 and introduced PuraPly AM in 2016. In order to encourage the development of innovative medical devices, drugs and biologics, CMS can grant new products an additional “pass-through payment” in addition to the bundled payment amount for a limited period of no more than three years. Our PuraPly products were granted pass-through status from launch through December 31, 2017, which created an economic incentive for practitioners to use PuraPly over other skin substitutes. As a result, we saw increases in revenue related to our PuraPly portfolio in 2017. Beginning January 1, 2018, PuraPly AM and PuraPly transitioned to the bundled payment structure for skin substitutes, which provides for a two-tiered payment system in the hospital outpatient and ASC setting. The two-tiered Medicare payment system bundles payment for our Advanced Wound Care products (and all skin substitutes) into the payment for the procedure for applying the skin substitute, resulting in a single payment to the provider that includes reimbursement for both the procedure and the product itself. As a result of the transition to the bundled payment structure, total Medicare reimbursement for procedures using our PuraPly AM and PuraPly products decreased substantially. This reduction in reimbursement resulted in a substantial decrease in revenue from our PuraPly AM and PuraPly products during the first nine months of 2018 and had a negative effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition. On March 23, 2018, Congress passed, and the President signed into law, the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2018, or the Act. The Act restored the pass-through status of PuraPly and PuraPly AM effective October 1, 2018. As a result, effective October 1, 2018, Medicare resumed making pass-through payments to hospitals using PuraPly and PuraPly AM in the outpatient hospital setting and in ASCs. PuraPly and PuraPly AM had pass-through reimbursement status through September 30, 2020. With the expiration of the pass-through reimbursement status, our net revenue from PuraPly and PuraPly AM may decrease as they transition to the bundled payment structure. While we expect our net revenue from Non-PuraPly products will continue to increase, we cannot be certain that any such revenue increase will fully offset the revenue decrease from PuraPly products if such a decrease occurs. We are not able to estimate the extent of the changes in revenue due to the uncertainties related to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, which could have material adverse effects on our revenue, especially to the extent that the pandemic persists or exacerbates over an extended period of time.
Cost of goods sold, gross profit and gross profit margin
Cost of goods sold includes personnel costs, product testing costs, quality assurance costs, raw materials and product costs, manufacturing costs, and the costs associated with our manufacturing and warehouse facilities. The increases in our cost of goods sold correspond with the increases in sales units driven by the expansion of our sales force and sales territories, expansion of our product portfolio offerings, and the number of healthcare facilities that offer our products. We expect our cost of goods sold to increase due primarily to increased sales volumes.
Gross profit is calculated as net revenue less cost of goods sold and generally increases as revenue increases. Gross profit margin is calculated as gross profit divided by total net revenue. Our gross profit and gross profit margin are affected by product and geographic sales mix, realized pricing of our products, the efficiency of our manufacturing operations and the costs of materials used and fees charged by third-party manufacturers to produce our products. Regulatory actions, including healthcare reimbursement scenarios, which may require costly expenditures or result in pricing pressures, may decrease our gross profit and gross profit margin.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses generally include personnel costs for sales, marketing, sales support, customer support, and general and administrative personnel, sales commissions, incentive compensation, insurance, professional fees, depreciation, amortization, bad debt expense, royalties, information systems costs and costs associated with our administrative facilities. We generally expect our selling, general and administrative expenses to continue to increase due to increased investments in market development and the geographic expansion of our sales forces as we drive for continued revenue growth.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses include personnel costs for our research and development personnel, expenses related to improvements in our manufacturing processes, enhancements to our currently available products, and additional investments in our product and platform development pipeline. Our research and development expenses also include expenses for clinical trials. We expense research and development costs as incurred. We generally expect that research and development expenses will increase as we continue to conduct clinical trials on new and existing products, move products through the regulatory pathway (e.g., seek BLA approval), add personnel to support product enhancements as well as to bring new products to market, and enhance our manufacturing process and procedures.
Write-off of deferred offering costs
We deferred costs incurred related to a proposed initial public offering, or IPO, of Organogenesis Inc. that included legal, audit, and other professional fees. During the quarter ended June 30, 2018, the IPO process was abandoned and as a result, we recorded a write-off to expense the accumulated costs.
Other expense, net
Interest expense, net. Interest expense, net consists of interest on our outstanding indebtedness, including amortization of debt discount and debt issuance costs, net of interest income recognized.
Change in fair value of warrant liability. In connection with the 2016 Loans, we issued warrants to purchase our Class A common stock to the lenders, who are affiliates of ours. We classified the warrants as a liability on our consolidated balance sheets because these warrants provided for down-round protection which would cause the exercise price of the warrants to be adjusted if future equity issuances were below the current exercise price of the warrants. The warrant liability was initially recorded at fair value upon issuance and was subsequently remeasured to fair value at each reporting date until the warrants were net exercised in December 2018 in connection with the Avista Merger. Changes in the fair value of the warrant liability were recognized as a component of other income (expense), net in the consolidated statements of operations.
Loss on the extinguishment of debt. In connection with the consummation of the Avista Merger in December 2018, outstanding principal of $45.7 million related to the affiliate debt was exchanged for 6,502,679 shares of our Class A common stock and a cash payment of $35.6 million, including $22.0 million of principal and $13.6 million of accrued interest and accrued affiliate loan fees as of and through the closing date of the Avista Merger. Following the consummation of these transactions, the affiliate debt was deemed fully paid and was discharged and terminated. We incurred a loss of $2.1 million on the extinguishment of the affiliate debt in connection with the write off of unamortized debt issuance costs and the difference in the carrying value of the affiliate debt converted to Class A common stock and the fair value of the Class A common stock issued in the conversion.
In March 2019, upon entering into the 2019 Credit Agreement, we paid an aggregate amount of $17.6 million associated with the termination of the ML Agreement (as defined below), including unpaid principal, accrued interest and an early termination penalty. We recognized $1.9 million as loss on the extinguishment of the loan.
Gain on settlement of deferred acquisition consideration-In February 2020, we settled the dispute on the $5.0 million deferred purchase acquisition consideration with the sellers of NuTech Medical for $4.0 million and assumed from the sellers of NuTech Medical the responsibilities related to a legacy lawsuit of NuTech Medical which was settled in October 2020. In connection with the settlement of this dispute and the legacy lawsuit, we recorded a gain of $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income taxes
We account for income taxes using an asset and liability approach. Deferred income taxes reflect the net tax effects of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income tax purposes. Valuation allowances are provided when necessary to reduce net deferred tax assets to an amount that is more likely than not to be realized.
In determining whether a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets is necessary, we analyze both positive and negative evidence related to the realization of deferred tax assets and inherent in that, assess the likelihood of sufficient future taxable income. We also consider the expected reversal of deferred tax liabilities and analyze the period in which these liabilities would be expected to reverse to determine whether the taxable temporary difference amounts serve as an adequate source of future taxable income to support the realizability of the deferred tax assets. In addition, we consider whether it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by taxing authorities based on the technical merits of the position. Based on a consideration of the factors discussed above, including the fact that through the period ended December 31, 2020, our results reflected a three-year cumulative loss position, we have determined that a valuation allowance is necessary against the full amount of our net deferred tax assets, excluding alternative minimum tax credits. As a result of the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (“Tax Act”) and the 2020 CARES Act, alternative minimum tax credits were refunded on the 2018 and 2019 tax returns in full.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, our results of operations:
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
The following table presents a reconciliation of GAAP net income (loss) to non-GAAP EBITDA and non-GAAP Adjusted EBITDA, for each of the periods presented:
(1) Amount reflects employee retention and other benefit-related costs related to the Company’s restructuring activities in the fourth quarter ended December 31, 2020. See Note “11. Restructuring”.
(2) Amount reflects the gain recognized related to the settlement of the deferred acquisition consideration dispute with the sellers of NuTech Medical in February 2020 as well as the settlement of the assumed legacy lawsuit from the sellers of NuTech Medical in October 2020. See Note “18. Commitments and Contingencies”.
(3) Amount reflects the collection of certain notes receivable from related parties previously reserved. See Note “19. Related Party Transactions”.
(4) Amount reflects the change in fair value of the common shares issued in connection with the acquisition of NuTech Medical that were forfeitable upon the occurrence of the FDA requiring approval of certain products acquired from NuTech Medical. The forfeiture rights expired in March 2018 because there was no adverse FDA event and the related expenses resulting from the write-off of the forfeiture rights were recorded within selling, general and administrative expenses in the quarter ended March 31, 2018.
(5) In connection with our 2016 Loans, we classified the warrants issued to purchase our Class A common stock to the lenders, who are affiliates of ours, as a liability on our consolidated balance sheet. The warrants were net exercised in December 2018 in connection with the Avista Merger. Amount reflects the change in the fair value of the warrant liability.
(6) Amount reflects the change in the fair value of the Earnout liability in connection with the CPN acquisition. See Note “3. Acquisition”.
(7) Amount reflects a one-time write-off in the quarter ended June 30, 2018 of costs accumulated in connection with an abandoned public offering which was replaced with the Avista Merger transaction.
(8) Amounts reflect the amount of loss recognized on the extinguishment of the Master Lease Agreement upon repayment in 2019 and the amount of loss recognized on the repayment and conversion to equity of the affiliated debt in December 2018.
(9) Amount reflects legal and professional fees incurred primarily in the second half of the year ended December 31, 2018 related directly to the Avista Merger which were expensed as incurred.
(10) Amount reflects legal, advisory and other professional fees incurred in the quarter ended September 30, 2019 related directly to the warrant exchange transactions. See Note “14. Stockholders’ Equity”.
(11) Amount reflects the legal, advisory and other professional fees incurred in the nine months ended September 30, 2020 related directly to the CPN acquisition. See Note “3. Acquisition”.
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018
Revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net revenue from our Advanced Wound Care products increased by $73.9 million, or 33%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in Advanced Wound Care net revenue was primarily attributable to the expanded sales force, increased sales to existing and new customers and increased adoption of our amniotic product portfolio, including our Affinity product.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net revenue from our Surgical & Sports Medicine products increased by $3.4 million, or 9%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in Surgical & Sports Medicine net revenue was primarily attributable to the expanded sales force and penetration of existing and new customer accounts, partially offset by postponement or cancellation of medical procedures as a result of COVID-19.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net revenue from our Advanced Wound Care products increased by $56.4 million, or 34%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in Advanced Wound Care net revenue was primarily attributable to the expanded sales force and increased sales to existing and new customers, PuraPly regaining pass-through reimbursement status for the two-year period effective October 1, 2018 and the continued growth in adoption of our amniotic products.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net revenue from our Surgical & Sports Medicine products increased by $11.1 million, or 38%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in Surgical & Sports Medicine net revenue was primarily due to the expanded sales force and penetration of existing and new customer accounts.
Included within net revenue is PuraPly revenue of $147.3 million, $126.8 million, and $69.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. PuraPly had pass-through status from October 1, 2018 to September 30, 2020, causing the increase in PuraPly revenue in the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The continued increase in PuraPly revenue in the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to the expanded sales forces, expanded product offerings, and increased sales to existing and new customers.
Cost of Goods Sold, Gross Profit and Gross Margin
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cost of goods sold increased by $11.4 million, or 15%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in cost of goods sold was primarily due to increased unit volumes, additional manufacturing and quality control headcount.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, gross profit increased by $65.9 million, or 36%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in gross profit resulted primarily from increased sales volume due to the strength in our Advanced Wound Care and Surgical & Sports Medicine products as well as a shift in product mix to our higher gross margin products.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cost of goods sold increased by $7.1 million, or 10%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in cost of goods sold was primarily due to increased unit volumes, additional manufacturing and quality control headcount, and facilities improvement projects.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, gross profit increased by $60.4 million or 48%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in gross profit resulted primarily from increased sales volume due to the strength in our Advanced Wound Care and Surgical & Sports Medicine products, PuraPly regaining pass-through reimbursement status for the two-year period effective October 1, 2018, and the resulting higher margins realized as a result of manufacturing efficiencies associated with our Advanced Wound Care products.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2020, selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $3.8 million, or 2%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in selling, general and administrative expenses was primarily due to a $15.3 million increase related to additional headcount, primarily in our direct sales force and increased sales commissions due to increased sales, a $2.0 million cancellation fee for certain product development and consulting agreements, and a $1.7 million increase in credit card processing fees due to increased collection. These increases were partially offset by a $10.0 million decrease related to reduced travel and marketing programs amid travel restrictions in place due to the COVID-19, a $2.3 million decrease in legal, consulting fees and other costs associated with the ongoing operations of our business, a $2.3 decrease in amortization associated with the intangible assets amortized using an accelerated method and a $1.1 million decrease in bad debt primarily due to the collection of the previously reserved related party receivables. We expect our selling, general and administrative expenses to continue to increase throughout 2021.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $37.7 million, or 23%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in selling, general and administrative expenses is primarily due to an increase of $30.6 million related to additional headcount, primarily in our direct sales force and increased sales commissions due to increased sales, an increase of $2.6 million in legal, consulting fees and other costs associated with the ongoing operations of our business, an increase of $2.4 million in amortization associated with intangible assets amortized using an accelerated method, an increase of $1.7 million associated with marketing and promotional materials for our products, and an increase of $1.7 million in royalties attributable to certain product sales. These increases are partially offset by a decrease of $1.5 million associated with transaction advisory fees incurred in 2018.
Research and Development Expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2020, research and development expenses increased by $5.3 million, or 36%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in research and development expenses was primarily due to an increase in process development costs associated with a new contract manufacturer, increased headcount associated with our existing Advanced Wound Care and Surgical & Sports Medicine products, an increase in product costs associated with our pipeline products not yet commercialized and an increase in the clinical study and related costs necessary to seek regulatory approvals for certain of our products. We expect our research and development costs to continue to increase throughout 2021.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, research and development expenses increased by $4.1 million, or 38%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in research and development expenses is primarily due to the increase in clinical research costs and increased headcount associated with our existing Advanced World Care and Surgical & Sports Medicine products and an increase in product costs associated with our pipeline products not yet commercialized.
Write-off of Deferred Offering Costs
** not meaningful
During the year ended December 31, 2018, there was a one-time write-off of costs accumulated in connection with a proposed initial public offering by Organogenesis Inc. that was abandoned and was replaced with the Avista Merger.
Other Expense, Net
** not meaningful
For the year ended December 31, 2020, other expense, net, decreased by $1.9 million or 18%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Interest expense, net, increased by $2.3 million or 25% primarily due to the increased borrowings under the 2019 Credit Agreement. The loss on the extinguishment of debt of $1.9 million in 2019 reflected the write-off of unamortized debt discount upon repayment of the Master Lease Agreement as well as early payment penalties in March 2019. The gain of $2.2 million in 2020 was related to the settlement of the deferred acquisition consideration dispute with the sellers of NuTech Medical in February 2020 as well as the settlement in October 2020 of a legacy lawsuit which we assumed from the sellers of NuTech Medical as part of the resolution of the aforementioned dispute.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, other expense, net, decreased by $2.3 million, or 18%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. Interest expense, net, decreased by $1.8 million, or 17 %, primarily due to the repayment and conversion to equity of affiliate debt in connection with the Avista Merger. Change in fair value of warrant liability decreased by $0.5 million due to the exercise of the underlying warrants in connection with the Avista Merger. The loss on extinguishment of debt of $1.9 million in 2019 reflects the write-off of unamortized debt discount upon repayment of the Master Lease Agreement as well as early payment penalties in March 2019. The loss on extinguishment of debt of $2.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2018 reflects the write off of unamortized debt issuance costs upon repayment of affiliate debt and the difference in the carrying value of the affiliate debt converted to Class A common stock and the fair value of the Class A common stock issued in the conversion in December 2018.
Income Tax Expense
For the year ended December 31, 2020, income tax expense increased by $0.4 million, or 253%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is primarily due to the cash tax expected in states where net operating loss utilization is limited.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, income tax expense increased by $0.1 million, or 79%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase is primarily due to increased revenue for gross receipts-based U.S. state income taxes and the Swiss subsidiary’s profits.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have funded our operations and capital expenditures through cash flows from product sales, loans from affiliates and entities controlled by certain of our affiliates, third-party debt and proceeds from the sale of our capital stock. As of December 31, 2020, we had $106.1 million in working capital which includes $84.4 million in cash. We expect that our cash on hand and other components of working capital as of December 31, 2020, plus net cash flows from product sales, will be sufficient to fund our operating expenses, capital expenditure requirements and debt service payments for at least 12 months beyond the filing date of this annual report. We continue to closely monitor ongoing developments in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic, which may negatively impact our commercial prospects, cash position and access to capital in fiscal 2021 or beyond. We will continue to assess our cash and other sources of liquidity and, if circumstances warrant, we will make appropriate adjustments to our operating plan. Please see “Item 1A. Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for an additional discussion of risks and potential risks of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Our primary uses of cash are working capital requirements, capital expenditure and debt service payments. Additionally, from time to time, we may use capital for acquisitions and other investing and financing activities. Working capital is used principally for our personnel as well as manufacturing costs related to the production of our products. Our working capital requirements vary from period-to-period depending on manufacturing volumes, the timing of shipments and the payment cycles of our customers and payers. Our capital expenditures consist primarily of building improvements, manufacturing equipment, computer hardware and software.
To the extent additional funds are necessary to meet our long-term liquidity needs as we continue to execute our business strategy, we anticipate that they will be obtained through additional equity or debt financings, other strategic transactions or a combination of these potential sources of funds. There can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain additional funds on terms acceptable to us, on a timely basis or at all, particularly in light of the adverse impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on the capital markets. Any failure to obtain sufficient funds on acceptable terms when needed could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, and financial condition. Our current borrowings under the 2019 Credit Agreement are subject to compliance with certain financial covenants regarding Minimum Trailing Twelve Month Consolidated Revenue and Non-PuraPly revenue. If we are not able to comply with these covenants, due to the impacts of COVID-19 or otherwise, the borrowings under the 2019 Credit Agreement may become due and payable immediately unless we obtain an amendment from our lenders. There can be no assurance that our lenders would agree to any such amendment on acceptable terms, or at all.
The following table presents our cash and outstanding debt as of the dates indicated:
(1) Under the line of credit or the Revolving Faciltiy, we have up to $30,000 available (subject to Borrowing Base) for future revolving borrowings.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for each of the periods presented:
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by operating activities was $6.8 million, resulting from our net income of $17.9 million and non-cash charges of $15.0 million, partially offset by net cash used in connection with changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $26.2 million. Net cash used in changes in our operating assets and liabilities included an increase in accounts receivable of $18.8 million, an increase in inventory of $6.7 million, an increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $1.0 million, and a decrease in accounts payable and other liabilities of $1.1 million, all of which were partially offset by an increase in accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $1.4 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in operating activities was $33.5 million, resulting from our net loss of $40.5 million and net cash used in connection with changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $9.7 million partially offset by non-cash charges of $16.6 million. Net cash used in connection with changes in our operating assets and liabilities includes an increase in inventory of $11.1 million, an increase in accounts receivable of $4.7 million, an increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $0.6 million and a decrease in other liabilities of $0.9 million, all of which were partially offset by an increase in accounts payable of $4.7 million and an increase of accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $2.9 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2018, net cash used in operating activities was $60.6 million, resulting from our net loss of $64.8 million and net cash used in connection with changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $16.7 million partially offset by non-cash charges of $20.9 million. Net cash used in connection with changes in our operating assets and liabilities includes a decrease in accrued interest on affiliate debt of $9.2 million, an increase in accounts receivable of $7.1 million, an increase in inventory of $1.5 million, an increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $1.4 million, all of which were partially offset by an increase in accrued expenses and other liabilities of $2.7 million.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we used $24.8 million of cash in investing activities consisting of capital expenditures of $21.1 million, payment of $5.8 million related to the acquisition of CPN, partially offset by notes receivable repayment of $2.1 million from our former executives.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we used $6.2 million of cash in investing activities consisting primarily of capital expenditures and an intangible asset purchase.
During the year ended December 31, 2018, we used $1.9 million of cash in investing activities consisting primarily of capital expenditures.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $42.5 million. This consisted primarily of $59.1 million in net proceeds from the issuance of Class A common stock and $2.8 million in proceeds from the exercise of options. The net cash provided by financing activities was partially offset by the payment of capital lease obligations of $2.4 million, the payment of $3.5 million related to the NuTech Medical deferred acquisition consideration and the net debt repayment of $13.5 million under our 2019 Credit Agreement.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities was $78.7 million that consisted primarily of $56.1 million in net proceeds from the 2019 Credit Agreement, $47.4 million in net proceeds from the issuance of Class A common stock and $0.9 million in proceeds from the exercise of warrants and options. The net cash provided by financing activities was partially offset by the payment of the put option on redeemable Class A common stock of $6.8 million, repayment of the ML Agreement of $17.6 million, and payment of capital lease obligations of $1.3 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2018, net cash provided by financing activities was $81.5 million that consisted primarily of $91.7 million in net proceeds from the issuance of Class A common stock, $15 million proceeds from affiliate debt, $8.7 million in net borrowings under our 2017 Credit Agreement and $0.1 million in proceeds from the exercise of stock options. The net cash provided by financing activities was partially offset by payment of recapitalization costs of $11.2 million, affiliate debt repayments of $22.7 million, and the payment of capital lease obligations of $0.1 million.
Indebtedness
2019 Credit Agreement
On March 14, 2019, we and our subsidiaries entered into a credit agreement with SVB and several other lenders, which we refer to as the 2019 Credit Agreement. Capitalized terms used herein and not otherwise defined are defined as set forth in the 2019 Credit Agreement.
The 2019 Credit Agreement, as amended, provides for a revolving credit facility (the “Revolving Facility”) of up to the lesser of $40.0 million and the amount determined by the Borrowing Base. Additionally, we entered into a $60.0 million term loan (the “Term Loan Facility”) structured in three tranches. The first tranche of $40.0 million was made available to us and fully funded on March 14, 2019; (ii) the second tranche of $10.0 million was made available to us and fully funded in September 2019; and (iii) the third tranche of $10.0 million was made available to us and fully funded in March 2020.
We are required to comply with certain covenants and restrictions under the 2019 Credit Agreement. If we fail to comply with these requirements, the lenders will be entitled to exercise certain remedies, including the termination of the lending commitments and the acceleration of the debt payments under either or both of the Revolving Facility and the Term Loan Facility. We are also required to achieve certain financial covenants, including Minimum Trailing Twelve Month Consolidated Revenue and Non-PuraPly Revenue, tested quarterly. The Minimum Trailing Twelve Month Consolidated Revenue thresholds for the year ending December 31, 2020 were agreed to and the covenant requiring Trailing Twelve Month Non-PuraPly Revenue beginning with the quarter ending September 30, 2020 was added in connection with the third amendment to the 2019 Credit Agreement entered into on March 26, 2020. The Minimum Trailing Twelve Month Consolidated Revenue requirements for the year ending December 31, 2020 were set at the following levels: $235.0 million for the trailing twelve months ending March 31, 2020; $253.0 million for the trailing twelve months ending June 30, 2020; $260.0 million for the trailing twelve months ending September 30, 2020; and $262.0 million for the trailing twelve months ending December 31, 2020. The Trailing Twelve Month Non-PuraPly Revenue requirements were set at the following levels: $136.5 million for the trailing twelve months ending September 30, 2020; and $145.0 million for the trailing twelve months ending December 31, 2020. The minimum revenue covenant levels for the periods ending March 31, 2021 and thereafter shall be determined with the lenders no later than March 31 of each applicable fiscal year. We are also required to maintain Minimum Liquidity equal to the greater of (i) 6 months Monthly Burn and (ii) $10.0 million.
As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with the financial covenants under the 2019 Credit Agreement and we had outstanding borrowings under the Revolving Facility and Term Loan Facility of the 2019 Credit Agreement of $10.0 million and $60.0 million, respectively.
2017 Credit Agreement
In March 2017, we entered into a credit agreement with SVB, which we refer to as the 2017 Credit Agreement. The 2017 Credit Agreement, as amended, provided for a revolving credit facility of up to $30.0 million and a term loan of up to $5.0 million. The term loan was repaid in full in December 2018. Upon entering into the 2019 Credit Agreement, the outstanding amount due under the 2017 Credit Agreement was fully repaid and terminated.
Master Lease Agreement
In April 2017, we entered into the Master Lease Agreement (the “ML Agreement”) with Eastward Fund Management LLC. In March 2019, upon entering into the 2019 Credit Agreement, we paid an aggregate amount of $17.6 million due under the ML Agreement with proceeds from the 2019 Credit Agreement, and the ML Agreement was terminated. Upon termination of the ML Agreement, we recognized $1.9 million as loss on the extinguishment of the loan.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 and the effects that such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods:
(1) Amounts in the table reflect minimum payments due for our leased space and vehicles under operating leases that expire between 2021 and 2031.
(2) Amounts in the table reflect the total cash payments on our capital lease obligations primarily related to the office and laboratory space in Canton, Massachusetts, including accrued interest of $2.9 million for rent in arrears discussed in Note “18. Commitments and Contingencies”. The leases have a ten-year term and expire in December 2022 but due to the subordination agreement, rent in arrears will be paid in 2024 upon maturity of the 2019 Credit Agreement.
(3) Amounts in the table reflect the contractually required principal and interest payable as of December 31, 2020 pursuant to outstanding borrowings under the 2019 Credit Agreement. For the Term Loan Facility, the table reflects interest-only payments through February 2021 at an interest rate of 9.25%, as well as a final payment of $3.9 million due upon repayment of all outstanding amounts. For the Revolving Facility, the table reflects interest payments relating to the outstanding principal due in March 2024, calculated using an interest rate of 5.5%, which was the applicable interest rate as of December 31, 2020.
(4) Amounts in the table reflect purchase commitments to suppliers for raw materials and consumables to be utilized in the manufacturing process.
(5) Amount in the table reflects the remaining settlement payments to sellers of NuTech Medical for the settlement of deferred acquisition consideration dispute according to the settlement agreement reached in February 2020. See Note “18. Commitments and Contingencies.”
(6) Amount in the table reflects the remaining payments due related to the acquisition of an intangible asset.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, and the disclosure at the date of the financial statements, as well as revenue and expenses recorded during the reporting periods. Management bases its estimates, assumptions and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors that it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances. Different assumptions and judgments would change the estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements, which, in turn, could materially change our results from those reported. Management evaluates its estimates, assumptions and judgments on an ongoing basis. Historically, our critical accounting estimates have not differed materially from actual results. However, if our assumptions change, especially given the risks and uncertainties related to COVID-19, we may need to revise our estimates or take other corrective actions, either of which may also have a material adverse effect on our consolidated statements of operations, liquidity and financial condition.
We believe the following critical accounting policies involve significant areas where management applies judgments and estimates in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue through the sale of Advanced Wound Care and Surgical & Sports Medicine products. There is a single performance obligation in all of our contracts, which is our promise to transfer our product to customers based on specific payment and shipping terms in the arrangement. The entire transaction price is allocated to this single performance obligation. Product revenue is recognized when a customer obtains control of our product which occurs at a point in time and may be upon shipment, procedure date, or delivery, based on the terms of the contract. Revenue is recorded net of a reserve for returns, discounts and GPO rebates, which represent a direct reduction to the revenue we recognize. These reductions are accrued at the time revenue is recognized, based upon historical experience and specific circumstances.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable are stated at invoice value less estimated allowances for sales returns and doubtful accounts. We estimate the allowance for sales returns based on a historical percentage of returns over a twelve-month trailing average of sales. We continually monitor customer payments and maintain a reserve for estimated losses resulting from our customers’ inability to make required payments. We consider factors such as historical experience, credit quality, age of the accounts receivable balances, geography-related risks and economic conditions that may affect a customer’s ability to pay. In cases where there are circumstances that may impair a specific customer’s ability to meet its financial obligations, a specific allowance is recorded against amounts due, and thereby reduces the net recognized receivable to the amount reasonably believed to be collectible. Accounts receivables are written off when deemed uncollectible. Recoveries of accounts receivables previously written off are recorded when received.
Inventory
Inventory is stated at the lower of cost (determined under the first-in first-out method) or net realizable value. Inventory includes raw materials, work in process and finished goods. It also includes cell banks and the cost of tests mandated by regulatory agencies, of the materials to qualify them for production.
We regularly review inventory quantities on hand and record a provision to write down excess and obsolete inventory to its estimated net realizable value based upon management’s assumptions of future material usage, yields and obsolescence, which are a result of future demand and market conditions and the effective life of certain inventory items. Our excess and obsolete inventory review process includes analysis of sales forecasts and historical sales as compared to inventory, and working with operations to maximize recovery of excess inventory. The estimate of excess quantities is subjective and primarily dependent on our estimate of future demand for a particular product. If the estimate of future demand is inaccurate based on actual sales, we may increase the write-down for excess inventory for that component.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price of an acquired business over the fair value of the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Goodwill is not amortized but is tested for impairment at least annually (as of December 31), or more frequently if events or circumstances indicate the carrying value may no longer be recoverable and that an impairment loss may have occurred. Circumstances that could trigger an impairment test include, but are not limited to, a significant adverse change in the business climate or legal factors, an adverse action or assessment by a regulator, or unanticipated competition. We operate as one segment, which is considered to be the sole reporting unit, and therefore goodwill is tested for impairment at the consolidated level.
In accordance with ASC Topic 350, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other, we first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is necessary to perform the quantitative goodwill impairment test. If after assessing the totality of events or circumstances, we determine that it is more likely than not (i.e. greater than 50% likelihood) that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then the quantitative test is required. Otherwise, no further testing is required. The quantitative goodwill impairment test requires us to estimate and compare the fair value of the reporting unit with its carrying value. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds the carrying value of the net assets, goodwill is not impaired. If the fair value of the reporting unit is less than the carrying value, the difference is recorded as an impairment loss up to the amount of goodwill.
Application of the goodwill impairment test requires judgments, including identification of the reporting units, assigning goodwill to reporting units, a qualitative assessment to determine whether there are any impairment indicators, and determining the fair value of each reporting unit which often involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including assumptions with respect to future cash inflows and outflows, discount rates, asset lives and market multiples, among other items. There is no assurance that the actual future earnings or cash flows of the reporting unit will not decline significantly from the projections used in the impairment analysis. Goodwill impairment charges may be recognized in future periods to the extent changes in factors or circumstances occur, including deterioration in the macroeconomic environment and industry, deterioration in the Company’s performance or its future projections, or changes in plans for its reporting unit.
There were no impairments of goodwill recorded during 2020, 2019, and 2018.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We review other long-lived assets (including identifiable definite lived intangible assets) for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the useful life is shorter than originally estimated or the carrying amount of an asset or asset group may not be recoverable. If such facts and circumstances exist, we assess the recoverability of the identified assets by comparing the projected undiscounted net cash flows associated with the related asset or group of assets over their remaining lives to their respective carrying amounts. Impairments, if any, are based on the excess of the carrying amount over the fair value of those assets and occur in the period in which the impairment determination is made.
There were no impairments of long-lived assets recorded during 2020, 2019, and 2018.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using an asset and liability approach. Deferred income taxes reflect the net tax effects of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income tax purposes. Deferred taxes are determined using enacted tax rates in effect in the year in which the differences are expected to settle. Valuation allowances are provided when necessary to reduce net deferred tax assets to an amount that is more likely than not to be realized.
In determining whether a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets is necessary, we analyze both positive and negative evidence related to the realization of deferred tax assets and inherent in that, assess the likelihood of sufficient future taxable income. We also consider the expected reversal of deferred tax liabilities and analyze the period in which these liabilities would be expected to reverse to determine whether the taxable temporary difference amounts serve as an adequate source of future taxable income to support the realizability of the deferred tax assets. In addition, we consider whether it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by taxing authorities based on the technical merits of the position. Based on a consideration of the factors discussed above, including the fact that through the year ended December 31, 2020, our results reflected a three-year cumulative loss position, we have determined that a valuation allowance is necessary against the full amount of our net deferred tax assets, excluding alternative minimum tax credits. As a result of the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act and the 2020 CARES Act, alternative minimum tax credits were refunded on the 2018 and 2019 tax returns in full.
Valuation of Contingent Purchase Earnout
In connection with our acquisition of CPN Biosciences, LLC (“CPN”), we recognized a non-current liability of $3,782, for the fair value of the contingent consideration (the “Earnout”). The Earnout liability is classified as a Level 3 measurement for which fair value is derived from inputs that are unobservable and significant to the overall fair value measurement. The fair value of such Earnout liability is estimated using a Monte Carlo simulation model that utilizes key assumptions including forecasted revenues and volatilities of the underlying financial metrics during the Earnout period. We assess the fair value of the Earnout liability at each reporting period. Any subsequent changes in the estimated fair value of the liability are reflected in selling, general and administrative expenses until the liability is settled.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure stock-based awards granted based on the fair value of the awards on the date of grant and recognize compensation expense for those awards over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. Forfeitures are estimated at the time of grant and revised, if necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates. Generally, we issue stock-based awards with only service-based vesting conditions and record the expense for these awards using the straight-line method. We have not issued any stock-based awards with performance-based vesting conditions.
We recognize stock-based compensation expense within selling, general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statement of operations for all share-based payments based upon the estimated grant-date fair value for the awards expected to ultimately vest.
The fair value of each restricted stock unit is based on the fair market value of our Class A common stock on the date of grant. The fair value of each stock option grant is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. We have been a public company for a short period of time, have limited public float and lack company-specific historical and implied volatility information for our Class A common stock. Therefore, we estimate our expected stock price volatility based on the historical volatility of publicly traded peer companies and expect to continue to do so until such time as we have adequate historical data regarding the volatility of our own traded stock price. The expected term of our stock options has been determined utilizing the “simplified” method for awards that qualify as “plain-vanilla” options. The risk-free interest rate is determined by reference to the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant of the award for time periods approximately equal to the expected term of the award. Expected dividend yield is based on the fact that we have never paid cash dividends on Class A common stock and do not expect to pay any cash dividends in the foreseeable future.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
For a description of recently issued accounting pronouncements, including the expected dates of adoption and the estimated effects, if any, on our consolidated financial statements, see Note “2. Significant Accounting Policies” to our consolidated financial statements appearing at the end of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.