ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is intended to provide information necessary to understand our audited consolidated financial statements for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 and highlight certain other information which, in the opinion of management, will enhance a reader’s understanding of our financial condition, changes in financial condition and results of operations. In particular, the discussion is intended to provide an analysis of significant trends and material changes in our financial position and the operating results of our business during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019. This discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. These historical financial statements may not be indicative of our future performance. This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains numerous forward-looking statements, all of which are based on our current expectations and could be affected by the uncertainties and risks described throughout this filing, particularly in “Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition, will depend on future developments that are uncertain, including as a result of new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19 and the actions taken to contain it or treat COVID-19, as well as the economic impact on local, regional, national and international customers and markets. We have made estimates of the impact of COVID-19 within our financial statements, and although there is currently no major impact, there may be changes to those estimates in future periods. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Corporate Overview
Orgenesis Inc., a Nevada corporation, is a global biotech company working to unlock the potential of cell and gene therapies in an affordable and accessible format (“CGTs”).
CGTs can be centered on autologous (using the patient’s own cells) or allogenic (using master banked donor cells) and are part of a class of medicines referred to as advanced therapy medicinal products (ATMPs). We mostly focus on autologous therapies, with processes and systems that are developed for each therapy using a closed and automated processing system approach that is validated for compliant production near the patient at their point of care for the treatment of patients. This approach has the potential to overcome the limitations of traditional commercial manufacturing methods that do not translate well to commercial production of advanced therapies due to their cost prohibitive nature and complex logistics to deliver the treatments to patients (ultimately limiting the number of patients that can have access to, or can afford, these therapies).
To achieve these goals, we have developed a Point of Care Platform comprised of three enabling components: a pipeline of licensed POCare Therapies that are designed to be processed and produced in closed, automated POCare Technology systems across a collaborative POCare Network. Via a combination of science, technology, engineering, and networking, we are working to provide a more efficient and scalable pathway for advanced therapies to reach patients more rapidly at lowered costs. We also draw on extensive medical expertise to identify promising new autologous therapies to leverage within the POCare Platform either via ownership or licensing.
The POCare Network brings together patients, doctors, industry partners, research institutes and hospitals worldwide with a goal of achieving harmonized, regulated clinical development and production of the therapies.
POCare Platform Operations via Subsidiaries
We currently conduct our core business operations ourselves and through our subsidiaries which are all wholly-owned except as otherwise stated below (collectively, the “Subsidiaries”). The Subsidiaries are as follows:
United States
● Orgenesis Maryland Inc. (the “U.S. Subsidiary”) is the center of activity in North America and is currently focused on setting up the POCare Network.
● Koligo Therapeutics Inc. (“Koligo”) is a Kentucky corporation that we acquired in 2020 and is currently focused on developing the POCare network and therapies. .
Europe
● Orgenesis Belgium SRL (the “Belgian Subsidiary”) is the center of activity in Europe and is currently focused on process development and the preparation of European clinical trials.
● Orgenesis Switzerland Sarl (the “Swiss Subsidiary”), was incorporated in October 2020, and is currently focused on providing management services to us.
Asia
● Orgenesis Ltd. in Israel (the “Israeli Subsidiary”) is a provider of regulatory, clinical and pre-clinical services.
● Orgenesis Biotech Israel Ltd. (“OBI”), is a provider of cell-processing services in Israel.
● Korea: Orgenesis Korea Co. Ltd. (the “Korean Subsidiary”), is a provider of processing and pre-clinical services in Korea. We own 94.12% of the Korean Subsidiary.
Corporate History
We were incorporated in the state of Nevada on June 5, 2008 under the name Business Outsourcing Services, Inc. Effective August 31, 2011, we completed a merger with our subsidiary, Orgenesis Inc., a Nevada corporation, which was incorporated solely to effect a change in its name. As a result, we changed our name from “Business Outsourcing Services, Inc.” to “Orgenesis Inc.”
On October 11, 2011, we incorporated Orgenesis Ltd. as our wholly-owned subsidiary under the laws of Israel. On February 2, 2012, Orgenesis Ltd. signed and closed a definitive agreement to license from Tel Hashomer - Medical Research, Infrastructure and Services Ltd. (“THM”), a private company duly incorporated under the laws of Israel for the development of AIP (Autologous Insulin Producing) cells.
On November 6, 2014, we entered into an agreement with the shareholders of MaSTherCell S.A. to acquire MaSTherCell S.A. On March 2, 2015, we closed on the acquisition of MaSTherCell whereby it became an independent, and wholly-owned subsidiary of Orgenesis INC. Through MaSTherCell, we became engaged in the CDMO business.
On June 28, 2018, we, Masthercell Global, Great Point Partners, LLC, a manager of private equity funds focused on growing small to medium sized heath care companies (“Great Point”), and certain of Great Point’s affiliates, entered into a series of definitive strategic agreements intended to finance, strengthen and expand our CDMO business. In connection therewith, we, Masthercell Global and GPP-II Masthercell, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“GPP-II”) and an affiliate of Great Point, entered into a Stock Purchase Agreement (the “SPA”) pursuant to which GPP-II purchased 378,000 shares of newly designated Series A Preferred Stock of Masthercell Global (the “Masthercell Global Preferred Stock”), representing 37.8% of the issued and outstanding share capital of Masthercell Global, for cash consideration to be paid into Masthercell Global of up to $25 million, subject to certain adjustments (the “Consideration”). At such time, we held 622,000 shares of Masthercell Global’s Common Stock, representing 62.2% of the issued and outstanding equity share capital of Masthercell Global. An initial cash payment of $11.8 million of the Consideration was remitted at closing by GPP-II, with a follow up payment of $6,600,000 made in each of years 2018 and 2019, or an aggregate of $13.2 million (the “Future Payments”), if (a) Masthercell Global achieved specified EBITDA and revenues targets during each of these years, and (b) the Orgenesis’ shareholders approved certain provisions of the Stockholders’ Agreement referred to below on or before December 31, 2020. Both of these conditions were met and we received both milestone payments.
Contemporaneous with the execution of the SPA, we and Masthercell Global entered into a Contribution, Assignment and Assumption Agreement pursuant to which we contributed to Masthercell Global our assets relating to the CDMO Business (as defined below), including the CDMO subsidiaries (the “Corporate Reorganization”). In furtherance thereof, Masthercell Global, as our assignee, acquired all of the issued and outstanding share capital of OBI, our Israel based CDMO partner since May 2016, and 94.12% of the share capital of the Korean Subsidiary, our Korea based CDMO partner since March 2016.
On August 7, 2019, we, Masthercell Global and GPP (the “Parties”) entered into a Transfer Agreement (the “Transfer Agreement”). As a result of the Transfer Agreement, Masthercell Global transferred all of its equity interests of OBI and the Korean Subsidiary to us in exchange for one dollar ($1.00). The Transfer Agreement also contains agreements made with respect to certain intercompany loans. We accounted for the Transfer Agreement as a transaction with non-controlling interest.
Discontinued Operations
Until December 31, 2019, we operated the POCare Platform as one of two business separate business segments.
Historically, the second separate business segment was operated as a Contract Development and Manufacturing Organization (“CDMO”) platform, providing third party contract manufacturing and development services for biopharmaceutical companies (the “CDMO Business”). The CDMO platform was historically operated mainly through majority owned Masthercell Global (which consisted of the following two subsidiaries: MaSTherCell S.A. in Belgium (“MaSTherCell”), and Masthercell U.S., LLC in the United States (“Masthercell U.S.”) (collectively, the “Masthercell Global Subsidiaries”)).
In February 2020, we and GPP-II Masthercell LLC (“GPP”) sold 100% of the outstanding equity interests of Masthercell (the “Masthercell Business”), which comprised the majority of our CDMO Business, to Catalent Pharma Solutions, Inc. for an aggregate nominal purchase price of $315 million, subject to customary adjustments (the “Masthercell Sale”). After accounting for GPP’s liquidation preference and equity stake in Masthercell as well as other investor interests in our Belgian subsidiary MaSTherCell, distributions to Masthercell option holders and transaction costs, we received approximately $126.7 million. We incurred an additional approximately $5.6 million in transaction costs.
We determined that the Masthercell Business (“Discontinued Operation”) meets the criteria to be classified as a discontinued operation as of the first quarter of 2020. The Discontinued Operation includes the vast majority of the previous CDMO Business, including majority-owned Masthercell, including MaSTherCell, Masthercell U.S. and all of the Masthercell Global Subsidiaries.
Since the Masthercell Sale, we entered into new joint venture agreements with new partners in various jurisdictions. This has allowed us to grow our infrastructure and expand our processing sites into new markets and jurisdictions. In addition, we have engaged some of these joint venture partners to perform research and development services to further develop and adapt our systems and devices for specific purposes. We have been investing manpower and financial resources to focus on developing, manufacturing and rolling out several types of OMPULs to be used and/or distributed through our POCare Network of partners, collaborators, and joint ventures.
The Chief Executive Officer (“CEO”) is our chief operating decision-maker who reviews financial information prepared on a consolidated basis. Effective from the first quarter of 2020, all of our continuing operations are in the point-of-care business via our POCare Platform. Therefore, no segment report has been presented.
Orgenesis Inc., a Nevada corporation, is a global biotech company working to unlock the potential of cell and gene therapies (“CGT”s) in an affordable and accessible format.
CGTs can be centered on autologous (using the patient’s own cells) or allogenic (using master banked donor cells) and are part of a class of medicines referred to as advanced therapy medicinal products (ATMP). We mostly focus on autologous therapies, with processes and systems that are developed for each therapy using a closed and automated processing system approach that is validated for compliant production near the patient at their point of care. This approach has the potential to overcome the limitations of traditional commercial manufacturing methods that do not translate well to commercial production of advanced therapies due to their cost prohibitive nature and complex logistics to deliver the treatments to patients (ultimately limiting the number of patients that can have access to, or can afford, these therapies).
To achieve these goals, we have developed a Point of Care Platform comprised of three enabling components: a pipeline of licensed POCare Therapies that are designed to be processed and produced in closed, automated POCare Technology systems across a collaborative POCare Network. Via a combination of science, technology, engineering, and networking, we are working to provide a more efficient and scalable pathway for advanced therapies to reach patients more rapidly at lowered costs. We also draw on extensive medical expertise to identify promising new autologous therapies to leverage within the POCare Platform either via ownership or licensing. The POCare Network brings together patients, doctors, industry partners, research institutes and hospitals worldwide with a goal of achieving harmonized, regulated clinical development and production of the therapies.
Material Developments During Fiscal 2020
Acquisitions and Dispositions
As mentioned above, on February 2, 2020, we entered into a Purchase Agreement with GPP, Masthercell and Catalent Pharma Solutions, Inc. pursuant to which the Sellers sold 100% of the outstanding equity interests of our Masthercell Business for an aggregate nominal purchase price of $315 million, subject to customary adjustments. After accounting for GPP’s liquidation preference and equity stake in Masthercell as well as other investor interests in its Belgian subsidiary MaSTherCell, S.A. (“MaSTherCell”), distributions to Masthercell option holders and transaction costs, we received approximately $126.7 million. We incurred an additional approximately $5.6 million in transaction costs.
On April 7, 2020, we entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement (the “Tamir Purchase Agreement”) with Tamir Biotechnology, Inc. (“Tamir” or “Seller”), pursuant to which we agreed to acquire certain assets and liabilities of Tamir related to the discovery, development and testing of therapeutic products for the treatment of diseases and conditions in humans, including all rights to ranpirnase and use for antiviral therapy (collectively, the “Purchased Assets and Assumed Liabilities” and such acquisition, the “Tamir Transaction”). The Tamir Transaction closed on April 23, 2020. As aggregate consideration for the acquisition, we paid $2.5 million in cash and issued an aggregate of 3,400,000 shares (the “Shares”) of Common Stock to Tamir resulting in a total consideration of $20.2 million.
On September 26, 2020, we entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger and Reorganization (the “Merger Agreement”) by and among ourselves, Orgenesis Merger Sub, Inc., a Delaware corporation and a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company (“Merger Sub”), Koligo Therapeutics Inc., a Kentucky corporation (“Koligo”), the shareholders of Koligo (collectively, the “Shareholders”), and Long Hill Capital V, LLC (“Long Hill”), solely in its capacity as the representative, agent and attorney-in-fact of the Shareholders. The Merger Agreement provides for the acquisition of Koligo by us through the merger of Merger Sub with and into Koligo, with Koligo surviving as our wholly-owned subsidiary (the “Merger”). The Merger was announced in a Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on October 1, 2020, to which a copy of the Merger Agreement, along with copies of certain other ancillary agreements, were annexed as exhibits. The Merger closed on October 15, 2020.
Koligo was a privately-held US regenerative medicine company. Koligo’s first commercial product is KYSLECEL® (autologous pancreatic islets) for chronic and acute recurrent pancreatitis. Koligo’s 3D-V technology platform incorporates the use of advanced 3D bioprinting techniques and vascular endothelial cells to support development of transformational cell and tissue products for serious diseases.
In addition, according to the agreement between the parties, we also funded an additional cash consideration of $500 thousand (with $100 thousand of such reducing the ultimate consideration payable to Koligo) for the acquisition of the assets of Tissue Genesis, LLC (“Tissue Genesis”) by Koligo that was consummated on October 14, 2020. The Tissue Genesis assets include the entire inventory of Tissue Genesis Icellator® devices, related kits and reagents, a broad patent portfolio to protect the technology, registered trademarks, clinical data, and existing business relationships for commercial and development stage use of the Icellator technology.
Private Placement
On January 20, 2020, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with certain investors pursuant to which we issued and sold, in a private placement, 2,200,000 shares of Common Stock at a purchase price of $4.20 per share and warrants to purchase up to 1,000,000 shares of Common Stock at an exercise price of $5.50 per share which are exercisable between June 2021 and January 2023. We received gross proceeds of approximately $9.24 million before deducting related offering expenses in the amount of $0.8 million.
Other Developments and Agreements During Fiscal 2020
Joint Ventures, Collaborations and License Agreements During Fiscal 2020
During 2020, we entered into joint venture agreements (“JVA”) or amended existing JVAs (“AJVA”) (which superseded previous JVAs), master service agreements for POC development revenue (“MSA DEV”) and master service agreements for procured services (“MSA PS”), with third parties as per the following table:
Name of Party (and country of origin)
Nature of
Agreement
Territory
Notes
Theracell Advanced Biotechnology
AJVA
Greece, Turkey, Cyprus, Israel, and Balkans
(1)
Broaden Bioscience and Technology Corp
AJVA
Certain projects in China and the Middle East
(1)
Mircod LLC
(US)
JVA
Russia
(2)
Image Securities FZC (UAE)
(a related party)
AJVA &
MSA PS
India
(1)
Cure Therapeutics
JVA
Korea and Japan
Kidney Cure Ltd
JVA
N/A
(5)
Sescom Ltd
JVA
N/A
(6)
Educell D.O.O
(Slovenia)
AJVA &
MSA PS &
MSA DEV
Croatia, Serbia and Slovenia
(1)
Med Centre for Gene and
Cell Therapy FZ-LLC (UAE)
AJVA &
MSA PS &
MSA DEV
UAE
(1)
Mida Biotech B.V. (Netherlands)
AJVA &
MSA PS &
MSA DEV
Netherlands, Lithuania, Spain, Switzerland,
Germany, Belgium and other countries
within West Europe
(7)
Butterfly Biosciences Sarl
JVA
N/A
(8)
Notes:
(1) The parties will collaborate in POC processing, regulatory and therapy development including the setting up one or more point of care processing facilities in institutions or hospitals in the territory, the supply of our products and services within the Territory, and the clinical development and commercialization of the relevant third-party products worldwide.
(2) The parties will collaborate in POC processing, regulatory and therapy development including the setting up one or more point of care processing facilities in institutions or hospitals in the territory, the supply of our products and services within the Territory and clinical, regulatory, development and commercialization of cell and gene therapies in the Territory.
(5) The parties will collaborate in the (i) implementation of a point-of-care strategy; (ii) assessment of the options for development and manufacture of various cell-based types (including kidney derived cells, MSC cells, exosomes, gene therapies) development; and (iii) development of protocols and tests for kidney therapies.
(6) The parties will collaborate in (i) the assessment of relevant tools and technologies to be used in our information security system (the “ISS”); (ii) the implementation of the ISS within the Company and in our point-of-care network; and (iii) the operation and maintenance of the ISS.
(7) The parties will collaborate in POC processing, regulatory and therapy development including the setting up one or more point of care processing facilities in institutions or hospitals in the territory and the establishment of an induced pluripotent stem cells R&D and automation platforms and other early-stage development activities.
(8) We and Kidney Cure Ltd own 49% and 51%, respectively, of Butterfly Biosciences Sarl (“BB”). BB is the entity through which the Kidney Cure JVA activities will be completed.
Other License Agreements
We are now working on the completion of all the IND enabling requirements in order to get into Phase I studies under the Sponsored Research Agreement (the “SRA”) and Exclusive License Agreement between ourselves and the Trustees of Columbia University in the City of New York, a New York corporation (“Columbia University”). In 2019, we entered into an SRA with Columbia University whereby we will provide financial support for studying the utility of serological tumor marker for tumor dynamics monitoring. Also in 2019, we and Columbia University entered into an Exclusive License Agreement (the “Columbia License Agreement”) whereby Columbia University granted to us an exclusive license to discover, develop, manufacture and sell product in the field of cancer therapy. In consideration of the licenses granted under the Columbia License Agreement, we shall pay to Columbia University (i) a royalty of 5% of net sales of any patented product sold and (ii) 2.5% of net sales of other products.
On May 15, 2019, we entered into a Joint Venture Agreement with SBH Sciences, Inc., a Massachusetts corporation (“SBH”), for the establishment of a joint venture with SBH for the purpose of collaborating in the field of gene and cell therapy development, process and services of bio-exosome therapy products and services in the areas of diabetes, liver cells and skin applications, including wound healing.
In October 2019, we concluded a license agreement with Caerus Therapeutics Corporation (a related party), a Virginia company (“Caerus”), pursuant to which Caerus granted us, among others, an exclusive license to all Caerus IP relating to Advance Chemeric Antigen Vectors for Targeting Tumors for the development and/or commercialization of certain licensed products. In consideration for the license granted to us under this agreement, we shall pay Caerus feasibility fees, annual maintenance fees and royalties of sales of up to 5% and up to 18% of sub-license fees. Through this joint venture, the parties co-develop a novel CART and CAR-NK platform for the treatment of solid tumors. The development is at a pre-clinical stage.
On December 20, 2019, we and the Regents of the University of California (“University”) entered into a joint research agreement in the field of therapies and processing technologies according to an agreed upon work plan. According to the agreement, we will pay the University royalties of up to 5% (or up to 20% of sub-licensing sales) in the event of sales that includes certain types of University owned IP.
During the third quarter of 2020, we purchased the IP and related EV technology from a service provider (the “Service Provider”) pursuant to an EV agreement (the “EV agreement”). According to the EV agreement, the Service Provider sold to us all of its rights in the EV technology that it had produced, in the amount of $500 thousand, to be paid in installments over the next 12 months from September 2020. In addition, the Service Provider granted us an exclusive worldwide license to use the EV IP technology for any purpose.
Included in the purchased assets of the Tamir Biotechnology Inc. acquisition was the assumption by us of a worldwide license to a private company of certain Tamir technologies in the field of treatment, amelioration, mitigation or prevention of diseases or conditions of the eye and its adnexa in return for certain development and sales milestone payments to be paid to Tamir. This license fee and the right to receive future milestone payments (of up to $11 million assuming that certain milestones are reached) and royalties (of up to $35 million based on net sales milestones), were assumed by us in connection with the Tamir Purchase Agreement together with a less than 10% share interest. To date, no milestones have been reached.
As mentioned above, included in the Koligo acquisition were the assets of Tissue Genesis, LLC (“Tissue Genesis”). We are committed to paying the previous owners of Tissue Genesis up to $500 thousand upon the achievement of certain performance milestones and earn-out payments on future sales provided that in no event will the aggregate of the earn-out payments exceed $4 million.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2020 to the Year Ended December 31, 2019.
Our financial results for the year ended December 31, 2020 are summarized as follows in comparison to the year ended December 31, 2019:
Revenues
The following table shows our revenues by major revenue streams:
Our revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $7,652 thousand, as compared to $3,899 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing an increase of 96%. The increase in revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 is mainly attributable to increased POC services revenue.
POC services are mainly the result of agreements between us and our joint venture partners (See note 11). Pursuant to the agreements, we provide certain services in support of partners’ activity. We have signed master services agreements partners in the aggregate amount of over $38 million for services to be provided from 2021 to 2022.
A breakdown of the revenues per customer that constituted at least 10% of revenues is as follows:
Research and Development and Research and Development Services, net:
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $83,986 thousand, as compared to $14,014 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing an increase of 499%.
The increase is mainly attributable to the following:
● expansion of our pipeline of licensed CGTs with a harmonized pathway for regulatory approval;
● expansion of our POC capacity globally;
● investment in automated processing units & processes;
● developing owned and licensed advanced therapies to enable commercial production;
● works with partners to enable efficient closed processing system technologies addressing POCare needs;
● an increase in salaries and related expenses and other research and development expenses. Additional R&D staff were hired as we expanded our research and development to the evaluation and development of new cell therapies and related technologies in the field of immune-oncology (our novel CD19 CAR-T and CD19.22 CAR-T programs, cellular vaccination for solid cancers, advanced tumor infiltrating lymphocyte, NK-based therapies, etc.), liver pathologies, stem cell-based therapies and other cell-based technologies such as the novel delivery system, Bioxomes. We invested in converting biological processes to GMP-compliant processes as these therapies progress to clinical stage;
● In 2020 we made significant investments in the development of several types of Orgenesis Mobile Processing Units and Labs (OMPULs) with the expectation of use and/or distribution through our POCare Network of partners, collaborators, and joint ventures. OMPULs are designed for the purpose of validation, development, performance of clinical trials, manufacturing and/or processing of potential or approved cell and gene therapy products in a safe, reliable, and cost-effective manner at the point of care, as well as the manufacturing of such CGTs in a consistent and standardized manner in all locations. The design delivers a potential industrial solution for us to deliver CGTs to practically any clinical institution at the point of care; and
● The Tamir purchase agreement (See Note 4).
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $18,973 thousand, as compared to $11,451 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing an increase of 66%. The increase for the year ended December 31, 2020 is primarily attributable to:
(i) An increase in salaries and related expenses of $1,047 thousand, as a result of additional managerial appointments and increased salaries;
(ii) An increase in accounting and legal fees of $4,558 thousand, which is mainly attributable to additional legal fees incurred for recent business and collaboration agreements; and
(iii) An increase in business development of $2,329 thousand, as a result of increased activities to establish our presence in new markets.
Financial Expenses, net
Financial expenses, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $1,061 thousand, as compared to $843 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing an increase of 26%. The increase for the year ended December 31, 2020 is primarily attributable to an increase in interest expense on convertible loans and loans of $756 thousand.
Tax income
Tax income, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $1,609 thousand, as compared to $229 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing an increase of 603%. The increase for the year ended December 31, 2020 is primarily attributable due to the release of a tax asset up to the amount of Koligo’s net tax liability. See Note 4.
Discontinued Operations
Discontinued operations relate to the Masthercell Business. The following table presents the financial results associated with the Masthercell Business operation as reflected in our Consolidated Comprehensive loss:
Revenues are attributable to the extension of existing customer service contracts with biotechnology clients and from revenues generated from existing manufacturing agreements. Cost of revenues were in line with the growth in revenues and employment of additional operational staff. Selling, general and administrative expenses included additional managerial appointments, increased professional fees, additional rental space including in the U.S., and an increase of business development expenses.
Working Capital
Current assets decreased by $28,271 thousand between December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2020, which was primarily attributable to the following: (i) an increase in cash and cash equivalents due the Masthercell sale; and (ii) an increase in accounts receivable as a result of POC revenues.
Current liabilities decreased by $26,149 thousand between December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2020, which was primarily attributable to the following: (i) an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses due to expanded operations, (ii) an increase in current maturities of convertible loans.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On February 2, 2020, we entered into a Stock Purchase Agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with GPP-II Masthercell LLC (“GPP” and together with us, the “Sellers”), Masthercell Global Inc. (“Masthercell”) and Catalent Pharma Solutions, Inc. (the “Buyer”). Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Purchase Agreement, on February 10, 2020 the Sellers sold 100% of the outstanding equity interests of Masthercell to Buyer (the “Masthercell Sale”) for an aggregate nominal purchase price of $315 million, subject to customary adjustments. After accounting for GPP’s liquidation preference and equity stake in Masthercell as well as SFPI - FPIM’s interest in MaSTherCell S.A., distributions to Masthercell option holders and transaction costs, we received approximately $126.7 million, of which $7.2 million was used for the repayment of intercompany loans and payables.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $78 million, as compared to net cash used in operating activities of approximately $13 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Since the Masthercell Sale, we entered into new joint venture agreements with new partners in various jurisdictions. This has allowed us to grow our infrastructure and expand our processing sites into new markets and jurisdictions. In addition, we engaged some of these joint venture partners to perform research and development services to further develop and adapt our systems and devices for specific purposes. We invested manpower and financial resources to focus on developing, manufacturing and rolling out several types of OMPULs to be used and/or distributed through our POCare Network of partners, collaborators, and joint ventures.
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $106 million, as compared to net cash used in investing activities of approximately $14 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This was mainly attributable to the Masthercell sale.
Liquidity and Capital Resources Outlook
Based on our current cash resources and commitments, we believe that we will be able to maintain our current planned activities and expected level of expenditures for at least 12 months from the date of the issuance of the financial statements. If increases are incurred in operating costs in general and administrative expenses for facilities expansion, research and development, commercial and clinical activity or if we experience decreases in revenues from customers, we may need to seek additional financing. In addition, additional funds may be necessary to finance some of our collaborations and joint ventures.
In December 2018, we entered into a Controlled Equity Offering Sales Agreement, or Sales Agreement, with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co., or Cantor, pursuant to which we may offer and sell, from time to time through Cantor, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $25.0 million. We will pay Cantor a commission rate equal to 3.0% of the aggregate gross proceeds from each sale. Shares sold under the Sales Agreement will be offered and sold pursuant to our Shelf Registration Statement on Form S-3 (Registration No. 333-223777) that was declared effective by the Securities and Exchange Commission on March 28, 2018, or the Shelf Registration Statement, and a prospectus supplement and accompanying base prospectus that we filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on December 20, 2018. We have not yet sold any shares of our common stock pursuant to the Sales Agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the notes to our financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. We believe that the accounting policies below are critical for one to fully understand and evaluate our financial condition and results of operations.
Business Combination
We allocate the purchase price of an acquired business to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based upon our estimated fair values on the acquisition date. Any excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill. Acquired in-process backlog, customer relations, brand name know, technology and IPR&D how are recognized at fair value. The purchase price allocation process requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially at the acquisition date with respect to intangible assets. Direct transaction costs associated with the business combination are expensed as incurred. The allocation of the consideration transferred in certain cases may be subject to revision based on the final determination of fair values during the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date. We include the results of operations of the business that we have acquired in our consolidated results prospectively from the date of acquisition.
If the business combination is achieved in stages, the acquisition date carrying value of the acquirer’s previously held equity interest in the acquiree is re-measured to fair value at the acquisition date; any gains or losses arising from such re-measurement are recognized in profit or loss.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of consideration transferred over the value assigned to the net tangible and identifiable intangible assets of businesses acquired. Goodwill is allocated to reporting units expected to benefit from the business combination. Goodwill is not amortized but rather tested for impairment at least annually in the fourth quarter, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that goodwill may be impaired. Following the sale of Masthercell, we manage the business as one operating segment and one reporting unit. Goodwill impairment is recognized when the quantitative assessment results in the carrying value exceeding the fair value, in which case an impairment charge is recorded to the extent the carrying value exceeds the fair value.
There were no impairment charges to goodwill during the periods presented.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets
We will periodically evaluate the carrying value of long-lived assets to be held and used when events and circumstances warrant such a review. The carrying value of a long-lived asset is considered impaired when the anticipated undiscounted cash flow from such asset is separately identifiable and is less than its carrying value. In that event, a loss is recognized based on the amount by which the carrying value exceeds the fair value of the long-lived asset. Fair value is determined primarily using the anticipated cash flows discounted at a rate commensurate with the risk involved. Losses on long-lived assets to be disposed of are determined in a similar manner, except that fair values are reduced for the cost to dispose.
Income Taxes
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are computed for differences between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities that will result in taxable or deductible amounts in the future based on enacted tax laws and rates applicable to the periods in which the differences are expected to affect taxable income. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized. Income tax expense is the tax payable or refundable for the period plus or minus the change during the period in deferred tax assets and liabilities.
In addition, our management performs an evaluation of all uncertain income tax positions taken or expected to be taken in the course of preparing our income tax returns to determine whether the income tax positions meet a “more likely than not” standard of being sustained under examination by the applicable taxing authorities. This evaluation is required to be performed for all open tax years, as defined by the various statutes of limitations, for federal and state purposes.
ASC 606 - Revenue from Contracts with Customers
Our agreements are primarily service contracts that range in duration. We recognize revenue when control of these services is transferred to the customer for an amount, referred to as the transaction price, which reflects the consideration to which we are expected to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services.
A contract with a customer exists only when:
● the parties to the contract have approved it and are committed to perform their respective obligations;
● we can identify each party’s rights regarding the distinct goods or services to be transferred (“performance obligations”);
● we can determine the transaction price for the goods or services to be transferred; and
● the contract has commercial substance and it is probable that we will collect the consideration to which it will be entitled in exchange for the goods or services that will be transferred to the customer.
For the majority of our contracts, we receive non-refundable upfront payments. We do not adjust the promised amount of consideration for the effects of a significant financing component since we expect, at contract inception, that the period between the time of transfer of the promised goods or services to the customer and the time the customer pays for these goods or services to be generally one year or less. Our credit terms to customers are in average between thirty and ninety days.
We do not disclose the value of unsatisfied performance obligations for contracts with original expected duration of one year or less.
Disaggregation of Revenue
The following table disaggregates our revenues by major revenue streams:
Nature of Revenue Streams
We have two main revenue streams being cell process development services and POC development services which includes and hospital supplies.
POC Development Services
Revenue recognized under contracts for POC development services may, in some contracts, represent multiple performance obligations (where promises to the customers are distinct) in circumstances in which the work packages are not interrelated or the customer is able to complete the services performed.
For arrangements that include multiple performance obligations, the transaction price is allocated to the identified performance obligations based on their relative standalone selling prices.
We recognize revenue when, or as, it satisfies a performance obligation. At contract inception, we determine whether the services are transferred over time or at a point in time. Performance obligations that have no alternative use and that we have the right to payment for performance completed to date, at all times during the contract term, are recognized over time. All other Performance obligations are recognized as revenues by the company at point of time (upon completion).
Included in POC development services is hospital supplies revenue which is derived principally from the sale or lease of products and the performance of services to hospitals or other medical providers. Revenue is earned and recognized when product and services are received by the customer.
Significant Judgement and Estimates
Significant judgment is required to identifying the distinct performance obligations and estimating the standalone selling price of each distinct performance obligation, and identifying which performance obligations create assets with alternative use to us, which results in revenue recognized upon completion, and which performance obligations are transferred to the customer over time.
Cell Process Development Services (mainly discontinued operations)
Revenue recognized under contracts for cell process development services may, in some contracts, represent multiple performance obligations (where promises to the customers are distinct) in circumstances in which the work packages and milestones are not interrelated or the customer is able to complete the services performed independently or by using our competitors. In other contracts when the above circumstances are not met, the promises are not considered distinct and the contract represents one performance obligation. All performance obligations are satisfied over time, as there is no alternative use to the services it performs, since, in nature, those services are unique to the customer, which retain the ownership of the intellectual property created through the process. Additionally, due to the non-refundable upfront payment the customer pays, together with the payment term and cancellation fine, it has a right to payment (which include a reasonable margin), at all times, for work completed to date, which is enforceable by law.
For arrangements that include multiple performance obligations, the transaction price is allocated to the identified performance obligations based on their relative standalone selling prices. For these contracts, the standalone selling prices are based on our normal pricing practices when sold separately with consideration of market conditions and other factors, including customer demographics and geographic location.
We measure the revenue to be recognized over time on a contract by contract basis, determining the use of either a cost-based input method or output method, depending on whichever best depicts the transfer of control over the life of the performance obligation.
Tech Transfer Services (discontinued operations)
Revenue recognized under contracts for tech transfer services are considered a single performance obligation, as all work packages (including data collection, GMP documentation, validation runs) and milestones are interrelated. Additionally, the customer is unable to complete services of work performed independently or by using our competitors. Revenue is recognized over time using a cost-based input method where progress on the performance obligation is measured by the proportion of actual costs incurred to the total costs expected to complete the contract.
Cell Manufacturing Services (discontinued operations)
Revenues from cell manufacturing services represent a single performance obligation which is recognized over time. The progress towards completion will continue to be measured on an output measure based on direct measurement of the value transferred to the customer (units produced).
Reimbursed Expenses
We include reimbursed expenses in revenues and costs of revenue as we are primarily responsible for fulfilling the promise to provide the specified service, including the integration of the related services into a combined output to the customer, which are inseparable from the integrated service. These costs include such items as consumable, reagents, transportation and travel expenses, over which we have discretion in establishing prices.
Change Orders
Changes in the scope of work are common and can result in a change in transaction price, equipment used and payment terms. Change orders are evaluated on a contract-by-contract basis to determine if they should be accounted for as a new contract or as part of the existing contract. Generally, services from change orders are not distinct from the original performance obligation. As a result, the effect that the contract modification has on the contract revenue, and measure of progress, is recognized as an adjustment to revenue when they occur.
Costs of Revenue (Discontinued Operations)
Costs of revenue include (i) compensation and benefits for billable employees and personnel involved in production, data management and delivery, and the costs of acquiring and processing data for our information offerings; (ii) costs of staff directly involved with delivering services offerings and engagements; (iii) consumables used for the services; and (iv) other expenses directly related to service contracts such as courier fees, laboratory supplies, professional services and travel expenses.
Contract Assets and Liabilities
Contract assets are mainly comprised of trade receivables net of allowance for doubtful debts, which includes amounts billed and currently due from customers.
The activity for trade receivables is comprised of:
The activity for contract liabilities is comprised of:
See note 2(z).
See note (x).
See note 2(y).
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to stockholders.