Item 7 - Management Analysis of Financial Position and Results of Operations
($ in Millions, Except Share Data)
OVERVIEW
This management analysis of financial position and results of operations pertains to the consolidated accounts of Old Republic International Corporation ("Old Republic", "ORI" or "the Company"). The Company conducts its operations principally through three major regulatory segments, namely, its General (property and liability), Title, and the RFIG Run-off Business. A small life and accident insurance business, accounting for .2% of consolidated operating revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 and .6% of consolidated assets as of that date, is included within the corporate and other caption of this report.
The consolidated accounts are presented in conformity with the Financial Accounting Standards Board's ("FASB") Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") of accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ("GAAP"). As a publicly held company, Old Republic utilizes GAAP largely to comply with the financial reporting requirements of the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC"). From time to time the FASB and the SEC issue various releases, most of which require additional financial statement disclosures and provide related application guidance. Of particular relevance to the Company's financial statements is guidance recently issued by the FASB relative to recognition and measurement of financial instruments including the addition of equity security unrealized gains and losses in periodic income statements, lease accounting, and accounting for credit losses on financial instruments, all of which are discussed further in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
As a state regulated financial institution vested with the public interest, however, business of the Company's insurance subsidiaries is managed pursuant to the laws, regulations, and accounting practices of the various states in the U.S. and those of a small number of other jurisdictions outside the U.S. in which they operate. In comparison with GAAP, the statutory accounting practices reflect greater conservatism and comparability among insurers, and are intended to address the primary financial security interests of policyholders and their beneficiaries. Additionally, these practices also affect a significant number of important factors such as product pricing, risk bearing capacity and capital adequacy, the determination of Federal income taxes payable currently among ORI's tax-consolidated entities, and the upstreaming of dividends by insurance subsidiaries to the parent holding company. The major differences between these statutory financial accounting practices and GAAP are summarized in Note 1(a) to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report.
The insurance business is distinguished from most others in that the prices (premiums) charged for various insurance products are set without certainty of the ultimate benefit and claim costs that will emerge, often many years after issuance and expiration of a policy. This basic fact casts Old Republic as a risk-taking enterprise managed for the long run. Management therefore conducts the business with a primary focus on achieving favorable underwriting results over cycles, and on the maintenance of financial soundness in support of the insurance subsidiaries' long-term obligations to policyholders and their beneficiaries. To achieve these objectives, adherence to insurance risk management principles is stressed, and asset diversification and quality are emphasized. In addition, Management engages in an ongoing assessment of operating risks, such as cybersecurity risks, that could adversely affect the Company's business and reputation.
In addition to income arising from Old Republic's basic underwriting and related services functions, significant investment income is earned from invested funds generated by those functions and from capital resources. Investment management aims for stability of income from interest and dividends, protection of capital, and for sufficiency of liquidity to meet insurance underwriting and other obligations as they become payable in the future. Securities trading and the realization of capital gains are not primary objectives. The investment philosophy is therefore best characterized as emphasizing value, credit quality, and relatively long-term holding periods. The Company's ability to hold both fixed maturity and equity securities for long periods of time is in turn enabled by the scheduling of maturities in contemplation of an appropriate matching of assets and liabilities, and by investments in large capitalization, highly liquid equity securities.
In light of the above factors, the Company's affairs are managed for the long run and without significant regard to the arbitrary strictures of quarterly or even annual reporting periods that American industry must observe. In Old Republic's view, such short reporting time frames do not comport well with the long-term nature of much of its business. Management therefore believes that the Company's operating results and financial condition can best be evaluated by observing underwriting and overall operating performance trends over succeeding five- or preferably ten-year intervals. A ten-year period in particular can likely encompass at least one economic and/or underwriting cycle and thereby provide an appropriate time frame for such cycle to run its course, and for premium rate changes and reserved claim costs to be quantified and emerge in financial results with greater finality and effect.
This management analysis should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the footnotes appended to them.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Old Republic International Corporation reported the following consolidated results:
Growth in 2020's net income, exclusive of all investment gains and (losses) was driven by greater profitability in both the General and Title Insurance segments. Overall, the business produced a consolidated combined ratio of 93.3%, improved from 95.3% and 94.9% registered in 2019 and 2018, respectively. Total and per share net income continue to be significantly impacted by changes in the fair value of equity securities.
The COVID-19 pandemic and the associated governmental responses continued to have a widespread impact on the U.S. economy. A majority of Old Republic's approximately 9,000 associates are working remotely. The pandemic's impact on employment levels, businesses, and other economic activities contributed to a slight reduction in earned premiums in the General Insurance segment. The Title Insurance segment experienced strong growth in premium and fee revenues. The RFIG Run-off business produced a small underwriting loss due to elevated delinquencies and the continuing decline in net earned premiums.
Net investment income decreased in 2020 as the ongoing moderate growth in the invested asset base was more than offset by lower investment yields whereas 2019 investment income growth was fueled by higher dividends on equity securities. Financial market performance experienced significant volatility and reductions in market values in the last several weeks of 2020's first quarter, but continued to improve throughout the remainder of the year. The favorable valuation of the investment portfolio, coupled with positive earnings, outpaced cash dividends to shareholders, resulting in book value per share rising to $20.75 at December 31, 2020 compared to $19.98 at December 31, 2019.
The economic impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic could affect future premium and fee revenues in the General Insurance and Title Insurance segments, and conversely underwriting expense ratios could rise. In the RFIG Run-off business, future claims experience could depend upon the continued, mitigating effects of loan forbearance programs mandated by the Federal government, and the rate at which employment levels recover. These outcomes notwithstanding, management firmly believes that the Company’s strong financial condition will enable it to weather these challenges, and most importantly allow its insurance subsidiaries to meet their obligations to customers, policyholders and their beneficiaries.
Old Republic's business is necessarily managed for the long run. In this context management's key objectives are to achieve a continuous, long-term improvement in operating results, and to ensure balance sheet strength for the primary needs of the insurance subsidiaries' underwriting and related services business. In this view, the evaluation of periodic and long-term results excludes consideration of all investment gains and (losses). Under GAAP, however, net income (loss), which includes all specifically defined realized and unrealized investment gains and (losses), is the measure of total profitability.
In management's opinion, the focus on income (loss) excluding all investment gains and losses provides a better way to realistically analyze, evaluate, and establish accountability for the results and benefits that arise from the basic operations of the business. The inclusion of realized investment gains and (losses) in net income (loss) can mask the reality and trends in the fundamental operating results of the insurance business. That is because their realization is, more often than not, highly discretionary. It is usually affected by such randomly occurring factors as the timing of individual securities sales, tax-planning considerations, and modifications of investment management judgments about the direction of securities markets or the prospects of individual investees or industry sectors. Moreover, the inclusion of unrealized investment gains and (losses) in equity securities can further distort such operating results and trends therein and thus lead to even greater period-to-period fluctuations in reported net income (loss). The impact of the continuous volatility in stock market valuations is most evident in its net of tax effect on net income (loss) for the periods reported upon.
(a) Certain reclassification adjustments were made to increase 2019 and 2018 periods' net premiums and fees earned with a corresponding increase to sales and general expenses to conform all prior periods to the presentation adopted in 2020. See Note 1(c) to the accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. (b) Includes special cash dividends of $1.00 per share declared in December 2020 and September 2019.
Management believes the information in sections A to G and J of the table on the following page highlight the most meaningful, realistic indicators of ORI's segmented and consolidated financial performance. The information underscores the necessity of reviewing reported results by separating the inherent volatility of securities markets and their above-noted impact on reported net income (loss).
(a) Includes consolidation/elimination entries. (b) The effective tax rates applicable to pretax income excluding investment gains and (losses) were 19.2%, 19.2% and 17.4% for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. (c) See Note (a) in RFIG Run-off Results. (d) Certain reclassification adjustments were made to increase 2019 and 2018 periods' net premiums and fees earned with a corresponding increase to sales and general expenses to conform all prior periods to the presentation adopted in 2020. See Note 1(c) to the accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
General Insurance Segment Results
__________________
Effective July 1, 2019, the results of the CCI run-off business are being classified in the General Insurance Segment for and all future periods.
General Insurance net premiums earned were down slightly for 2020. The economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and tightened underwriting standards were mitigated by strong premium rate increases for most insurance products. Declining workers' compensation and general liability premiums were largely offset by rising premiums in commercial auto, financial indemnity and property coverages. With few exceptions, 2019 premiums grew for most types of coverages and markets served. The largest contributions principally stemmed from commercial automobile (trucking), national accounts, and executive indemnity coverages. Net investment income decreased by 1.2% for 2020 and increased by 4.5% in 2019.
The consolidated General Insurance claim ratio generally trended down in all periods presented and for 2020 was primarily driven by better performance in most coverages, primarily due to prior periods' favorable reserve developments. Expense ratios remained relatively consistent with the comparable 2019 and 2018 periods and are generally reflective of ongoing coverage mix dynamics and the variability of sales and general expenses among such coverages. Together, these factors produced significantly greater pretax operating income for 2020.
The following table shows recent annual claim ratios and the effects of claim development trends:
Annual claim ratios and trends may not be particularly meaningful indicators of future outcomes for an insurance company with a liability-oriented coverage mix and its relatively long claim payment patterns. Management's long-term targets, assuming the current coverage mix, are for annually reported claim ratio averages in the high 60% to low 70% range, expense ratio averages of 25% or below, and a combined ratio ranging between 90% and 95%.
Title Insurance Segment Results
__________________
(a) Certain reclassification adjustments were made to increase net premiums and fees earned with a corresponding increase to sales and general expenses of $246.8 and $237.0 in the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. These adjustments were made to conform all prior periods to the presentation adopted in 2020 to reflect such revenues gross of applicable commission expense and had no impact on segmented pretax operating income (loss) in any period presented. See Note 1(c) to the accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Title Insurance operating revenues were up 19.8% and 6.3% for 2020 and 2019, respectively. This performance was driven by a robust real estate market supported by a continued low interest rate environment, resulting in an increase in home sales and refinance activity. Net investment income increased slightly for 2020 and 6.6% for 2019.
The Title Insurance claim ratio trends reflect the varying effects of favorable development of prior years' claim reserve estimates. Underwriting expense ratios improved in 2020 resulting from greater leverage of this segment's expense structure on significantly higher premium and fee volume. Title Insurance produced significantly greater pretax operating income for 2020.
The following table shows recent annual and interim periods’ claim ratios and the effects of claim development trends:
RFIG Run-off Segment Results
__________________
(a) Results for the CCI run-off are expected to be immaterial in the remaining run-off periods. Effective July 1, 2019, these results have been re-classified to General Insurance for all future periods.
Pretax operating results of RFIG Run-off reflect the expected, continuing drop in net earned premiums from declining risk in force. Claim costs for 2020 reflect greater reserve provisions necessitated by elevated delinquencies and the evolving economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. Investment income declined primarily as a result of a lower invested asset base and lower investment yields.
As shown in the accompanying tables, the 2020 claim ratio reflects the aforementioned increase in reported delinquencies, a declining proportion of which remain under forbearance as compared to earlier 2020 periods. Prior period favorable development is primarily the result of improving trends in claim severity.
Prior to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, as indicated in the far right column of the following table, the RFIG Run-off claim ratios had experienced a fairly consistent decline in recent annual periods largely due to a combination of declining new loan defaults and stable-to-improving cure rates for outstanding delinquent loans.
Corporate and Other Operating Results
This segment includes the combination of a small life and accident insurance business and the net costs associated with the parent holding company and its internal corporate services subsidiaries. The segment tends to produce highly variable results stemming from volatility inherent to the small scale of the life and accident insurance line, net investment income, and net interest charges (credits) pertaining to external and intra-system financing arrangements.
Summary Consolidated Balance Sheet
Cash, Invested Assets, and Shareholders' Equity
Old Republic's invested assets portfolio is directed in consideration of enterprise-wide risk management objectives. Most importantly, these are intended to ensure solid funding of the insurance subsidiaries' long-term obligations to policyholders and other beneficiaries, as well as the long-term stability of the subsidiaries’ capital accounts. To this end, the investment portfolio contains no significant insurance risk-correlated asset exposures to real estate, mortgage-backed securities, collateralized debt obligations ("CDO's"), derivatives, hybrid securities, or illiquid private equity and hedge fund investments. Moreover, the Company does not engage in hedging or securities lending transactions, nor does it invest in securities whose values are predicated on non-regulated financial instruments exhibiting amorphous or unfunded counter-party risk attributes.
As of December 31, 2020, the consolidated investment portfolio reflected an allocation of approximately 74% to fixed-maturity (bonds and notes) and short-term investments, and 26% to equity securities (common stock). The fixed-maturity portfolio continues to be the basic anchor for the insurance underwriting subsidiaries' obligations. The maturities are stratified and conservatively matched to the expected timing of future years' payments of those obligations. The quality of the investment portfolio has remained at high levels.
For the past several years, a significant portion of ORI's investable funds have been directed toward purchasing high-quality common stocks of U.S. companies (currently limited to fewer than 100 issues). We favor those with long-term records of reasonable earnings growth and steadily increasing dividends. Periodic stress tests of this portfolio are made pursuant to enterprise risk management guidelines and controls. Their purpose is to gain reasonable assurance that periodic downdrafts in market prices would not seriously undermine ORI's financial strength and the long-term continuity and prospects of the business.
Changes in shareholders' equity per share are reflected in the following table. As shown, these resulted mostly from net income excluding net investment gains (losses), realized and unrealized investment gains (losses), and dividend payments to shareholders.
__________________
(a) Includes special cash dividends of $1.00 per share declared in December 2020 and September 2019.
Capitalization
DETAILED MANAGEMENT ANALYSIS
This section of the Management Analysis of Financial Position and Results of Operations is additive to and should be read in conjunction with the Executive Summary which precedes it.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
The Company's annual financial statements incorporate a large number and types of estimates relative to matters which are highly uncertain at the time the estimates are made. The estimation process required of an insurance enterprise such as Old Republic is by its very nature highly dynamic inasmuch as it necessitates a continuous evaluation, analysis, and quantification of factual data as it becomes known to the Company. As a result, actual experienced outcomes can differ from the estimates made at any point in time and thus affect future periods' reported revenues, expenses, net income or loss, and financial condition.
Old Republic believes that its most critical accounting estimates relate to: a) the determination of other-than-temporary impairments ("OTTI") in the value of fixed maturity investments; b) the recoverability of reinsured outstanding losses; and c) the establishment of reserves for losses and loss adjustment expenses. The major assumptions and methods used in setting these estimates are discussed in the pertinent sections of this Management Analysis and are summarized as follows:
(a) Other-than-temporary impairments in the value of fixed maturity investments:
The Company completes a detailed analysis each quarter to assess whether the decline in the value of any fixed maturity investment below its cost basis is deemed other-than-temporary. This assessment is subject to a great deal of judgment and all securities in an unrealized loss position are reviewed. The decline in value of a security deemed OTTI is included as a realized investment loss in the determination of net income and effective January 1, 2020 is established as an allowance for credit loss for financial reporting purposes.
The Company recognized no OTTI adjustments or allowances for credit losses for the year ended December 31, 2020. OTTI adjustments of $2.0 and $- were recorded during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
(b) The recoverability of reinsured outstanding losses
Assets consisting of balance sheet date reserve estimates recoverable from assuming reinsurers in future periods as gross losses are settled and paid, are established at the same time as the gross losses are recorded as reserves. Accordingly, these assets are subject to the same estimation processes and valuations as the related gross amounts as is discussed below. As of the three most recent year ends, outstanding reinsurance recoverable balances ranged between 31.7% and 34.2% and averaged 32.9% of the related gross reserves. See Part I, Item 1(d) for further discussion regarding recoverability of the Company's reinsurance balances.
(c) The reserves for losses and loss adjustment expenses
As discussed in pertinent sections of this management analysis, the reserves for losses and related loss adjustment expenses are based on a wide variety of factors and calculations. Among these the Company believes the most critical are:
•The establishment of expected claim ratios for at least the two to five most recent accident years, particularly for so-called long-tail coverages as to which information about covered losses emerges and becomes more accurately quantifiable over long periods of time. Long-tail coverages generally include workers' compensation, commercial automobile (trucking) liability, general liability, errors and omissions and directors and officers' liability, as well as title insurance. Gross loss reserves related to such long-tail coverages ranged between 94.6% and 95.2%, and averaged 95.0% of gross consolidated claim reserves as of the three most recent year ends. Net of reinsurance recoverables, such reserves ranged between 94.4% and 95.0% and averaged 94.7% as of the same dates.
•Loss trends that are considered when establishing the above noted expected claim ratios which take into account such variables as: judgments and estimates relative to premium rate trends and adequacy, current and expected interest rates, current and expected social and economic inflation trends, and insurance industry statistical claim trends. The Company applies these expected claim ratios to earned premiums when estimating the periodic reserve for losses and loss adjustment expenses.
•Loss development factors, expected claim rates and average claim costs, all of which are based on Company and/or industry statistics may also be used to project reported and unreported losses for each accounting period.
Consolidated claim costs developed favorably in the three most recent calendar years. This development had the consequent effect of reducing consolidated annual loss costs for the three most recent years within a range of 1.2% and 3.3%, or by an average of approximately 2.5% per annum. As a percentage of each of these years' consolidated
earned premiums and fees, the favorable developments have ranged between .5% and 1.3%, and have averaged 1.0%. The variances in prior years' positive or negative claim developments are further discussed within the Incurred Loss Experience section of this document.
In all the above regards the Company anticipates that future periods' financial statements will continue to reflect changes in estimates. As in the past such changes generally result from altered circumstances, the continuum of newly emerging information and its effect on past assumptions and judgments, the effects of securities markets valuations, and changes in inflation rates and future economic conditions beyond the Company's control. As a result, Old Republic cannot predict, quantify, or guaranty the likely impact that probable changes in estimates will have on its future financial condition or results of operations.
COVID-19 PANDEMIC AND OLD REPUBLIC'S BUSINESS
The COVID-19 pandemic and the associated governmental responses (“COVID-19” or “the pandemic”) had a widespread impact on the U.S. economy beginning in the final weeks of March 2020. While that impact continued throughout the year, economic activity increased as activity restrictions intended to reduce or slow the spread of COVID-19 relaxed to a degree. However, recent increases in COVID-19 infection rates illustrate the persistent nature of the pandemic and the likelihood that it will continue to have a significant economic impact in future periods until widespread vaccinations occur.
Old Republic’s continuing response to the pandemic includes many of the significant operational changes instituted earlier this year. A majority of Old Republic's approximately 9,000 associates are working remotely.
The pandemic's impact on employment levels, businesses and other economic activities contributed to a slight reduction in earned premiums in the General Insurance segment. The Title Insurance segment experienced strong growth in premium and fee revenues. The RFIG Run-off business produced a small underwriting loss due to elevated levels of reported delinquencies.
Financial market performance experienced significant volatility and reductions in market values in the last several weeks of 2020's first quarter, but continued to improve throughout the remainder of the year. The favorable valuation of the investment portfolio, coupled with positive earnings, outpaced cash dividends to shareholders, resulting in book value per share rising to $20.75 at December 31, 2020 compared to $19.98 at December 31, 2019.
The economic impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic could affect future premium and fee revenues in the General Insurance and Title Insurance segments, and conversely underwriting expense ratios could rise. In the RFIG Run-off business, future claims experience could depend upon the continued, mitigating effects of loan forbearance programs mandated by the Federal government, and the rate at which employment levels recover as well as trends in home prices and mortgage interest rates. These outcomes notwithstanding, management firmly believes that the Company’s strong financial condition will enable it to weather these challenges, and most importantly allow its insurance subsidiaries to meet their obligations to customers, policyholders and their beneficiaries.
Old Republic - Consolidated
Impact on business operations. Old Republic’s concern for the health of its associates continues to result in the reduction in activity at many of the Company’s offices. Throughout the second half of the year, relaxed governmental restrictions meant that several of Old Republic’s business operations were permitting more associates to return to the office. Even so, most of Old Republic’s associates continue to work remotely. Old Republic experienced no meaningful interruption in its ability to continue to service the needs of customers.
Cash and Invested Assets. Old Republic’s investment portfolio is managed in consideration of its enterprise-wide risk management objectives. The portfolio emphasis has been on selecting high quality issuers and to ensure the reliable funding of the insurance subsidiaries’ obligations to policyholders and the long-term stability of the subsidiaries’ capital accounts. Old Republic does not have any material investments in illiquid alternative or real estate investments.
Influenced by concerns around COVID-19, U.S. equity markets experienced significant volatility and reductions in market values in the last several weeks of the first quarter. Since then, financial markets have partially rebounded. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the equity portfolio has recognized a $156.2 unrealized loss. Old Republic’s fixed maturity securities portfolio experienced an increase in fair value of $342.7 during the year and no other-than-temporary impairments were identified as of December 31, 2020.
Even with the broad improvement in financial markets, volatility could continue as long as the economy is impacted by COVID-19 and major sectors of the U.S. economy remain under significant pressure. The Company continues to review its fixed maturity investments to monitor the creditworthiness of the issuer. This is especially important in the current environment, where even highly rated issuers are subject to unprecedented stress and certain sectors may be more impacted than others. Old Republic’s portfolio includes exposure to the energy sector, and as a result of reduced energy demand arising from COVID-19, many issuers in this sector are experiencing financial and operating stresses. While these investments remain consistent with the Company’s investment philosophy, they are subject to regular and on-going review.
Old Republic has historically performed stress-testing of the investment portfolio, modeling the impact of significant declines in overall market values on the capital and surplus of its insurance subsidiaries. The investment portfolio’s performance through the pandemic has been largely in-line with the results of these stress tests, and surplus levels remain strong. Old Republic does not contemplate any changes to its investment strategy as a result of COVID-19 and expects the composition of its investment portfolio to remain consistent with the long-term needs of the business.
Capital and Liquidity. Old Republic believes that its current liquidity position is sufficient to meet its obligations, including claim payments, operating expenses, interest and scheduled repayments on outstanding indebtedness and expected cash dividend payments. The Company’s ability to meet ongoing obligations is supported not only by premium revenue, but also by the expected interest and dividend income associated with Old Republic’s fixed maturity and equity investments. While dividends associated with certain equity investments have been reduced or eliminated as a result of the pandemic, the Company’s investment income was not materially affected.
Given Old Republic’s current capital and liquidity position, the Company does not currently expect to need to raise additional capital, in the form of either debt or equity, to meet expected future obligations. The Company’s nearest debt maturity is $400.0 of senior notes maturing in October 2024. Old Republic believes that it could access debt capital markets in the present environment on reasonable terms, given the Company’s current debt to total capitalization ratio of 13.5% and expected levels of operating income.
Internal Controls. Old Republic maintains a system of internal controls designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with GAAP. While certain updates have been made to reflect a primarily remote work environment, the Company's internal controls over financial reporting have not materially changed.
General Insurance
Operating environment and product demand. The primary coverages in the General Insurance segment, as measured on year-to-date 2020 net premiums earned, are commercial auto (38.4%), workers’ compensation (25.4%), inland marine and property (8.7%), financial indemnity (8.0%) and general liability (6.0%).
Demand for each of these coverages is related to overall economic conditions and this macroeconomic effect can be compounded (or mitigated) by exposure to sectors that are more (or less) affected by the particular economic environment. For example, premiums associated with workers' compensation coverage typically fall with reductions in payroll. However, the Company’s exposure to many of the most significantly affected sectors, such as small business, hospitality, restaurants and travel, is limited, which reduces to a degree Old Republic’s COVID-19 exposure. During 2020, the impact of COVID-19 on demand for General Insurance products continued to be relatively modest. However, the full impact of the pandemic will not be known until all policy premiums are audited in connection with the annual policy term expiration. The magnitude of the effect of COVID-19 on demand in future periods will continue to depend on the duration and severity of the pandemic.
Claims. Claims experience reflects changes in pricing and risk selection together with variability in loss severity and frequency trends. The overall impact of COVID-19 on 2020 claims experience was not significant as increased workers’ compensation claims were largely offset by reduced frequency and severity of non-COVID related claims.
Claims activity for certain coverages is correlated with U.S. economic activity, therefore claims frequency and severity for these coverages could both be affected by COVID-19. However, as noted below, Old Republic’s risk sharing arrangements should mitigate the negative effects of increases in frequency and severity.
Reserves. Establishing claims reserves for the General Insurance business is a complex and dynamic process that requires a significant amount of judgment in an ordinary operating environment. That process and the judgment involved are made more complicated by the disruptions caused by COVID-19. Old Republic has not made significant changes to reserves or reserving practices during the year. That approach may change as clarity emerges over time about the actual effects of COVID-19 on the various businesses. The Company may adjust its expected claims rates, loss development factors and average claim costs for certain products if those factors look to be significantly impacted by COVID-19. To the extent any such loss development factor adjustments cause a change to reserves, earnings could be impacted in the period of such change.
Reinsurance and Retention Limits. Old Republic uses external reinsurance and other risk-sharing arrangements to limit the maximum losses for which it may be liable under its policies. Old Republic has risk-sharing arrangements in place for many of the coverages that have been impacted by COVID-19. In addition, Old Republic’s reinsurance arrangements may limit the negative impact of the pandemic for certain other coverages.
Consistent with its existing practices, Old Republic monitors on an on-going basis the financial condition of its assuming reinsurers and assureds who purchase its retrospectively rated or self-insured deductible policies and obtains sufficient collateral in the form of letters of credit, securities and other financial instruments. Old Republic continuously monitors the sufficiency of this collateral and the credit risk of its counterparties.
Regulation. Old Republic’s insurance company subsidiaries are subject to on-going regulation by state insurance departments. In response to COVID-19, insurance departments have been active in publishing additional guidance and other regulatory actions that impact the business. This regulatory guidance primarily relates to the collection of
premium, the cancellation or non-renewal of policies, presumption of coverage and notice periods relating to claims. These regulatory initiatives did not have a significant impact on Old Republic during 2020.
Title Insurance
Operating environment and product demand. In 2020, net premium and fees earned in the Title segment reached all-time full year highs. Notwithstanding the severe impact on the U.S. economy caused by COVID-19, the demand for title insurance coverage was strong during the year.
The demand for title insurance products is correlated with the strength of the residential and commercial real estate markets. While COVID-19 and the resulting restrictions on in-person gatherings and reduction in business activity had a negative impact on the broader U.S. economy, the residential real estate markets, and thus the demand for title insurance, remained robust during 2020. The impact continues to be felt however in the commercial real estate markets with COVID-19 uncertainties creating a reduction in business activity. Many of the key indicators used to evaluate the Title business, such as open orders, were at elevated levels at December 31, 2020. However, if COVID-19 continues to have a negative effect on the U.S. economy, it could lead to an eventual reduction in demand for our products and lower operating revenues.
Regulation. The housing market and the real estate lending industry are heavily regulated and there have been regulatory responses to the pandemic. These regulatory initiatives include those targeted at aiding consumers, which may ultimately have a significant impact on mortgage lenders and investors in pooled mortgage products. This could decrease the availability of mortgage funding, negatively impacting the housing market and thus the demand for Title insurance. While these initiatives have not had a significant effect on the Title business at December 31, 2020, they may have an increasing effect in subsequent quarters.
Claims. The effects of COVID-19 on the U.S. real estate market did not materially affect claims experience for the year ended December 31, 2020.
RFIG Run-Off Business
Operating environment and product demand. As noted elsewhere, Old Republic’s RFIG run-off business, led by its principal insurance carriers Republic Mortgage Insurance Company ("RMIC") and Republic Mortgage Guaranty Insurance Corporation ("RMGIC"), ceased writing new mortgage guaranty insurance in 2011. The operating results for all periods presented reflect the expected, continuing drop in net earned premiums from declining risk in force.
Regulation. The North Carolina Department of Insurance ("NCDOI") performs regulatory oversight of RMIC and RMGIC. Based on their capital position as of December 31, 2019 and on updated projections as to future operating results and capital levels, RMIC and RMGIC sought and received approval from the NCDOI to pay extraordinary dividends amounting to $37.5 to ORI, its ultimate parent, during the first quarter of 2020. Neither company has paid dividends subsequent to the first quarter of 2020.
Capital. As of December 31, 2020, total statutory capital for the group, inclusive of a contingency reserve, totaled $435.2. Old Republic continually monitors its capital position based on financial estimates of operating results over the remaining run-off period. Given the adverse effects of COVID-19 on the U.S. economy, unemployment levels, and housing markets, it could be necessary to retain more capital in the mortgage insurance business than previously thought until the true effects on operations and capital become more apparent. In any event, the payment of future extraordinary dividends will require regulatory approval from the NCDOI.
Claims. The economic impact of COVID-19 led to an increase in the number of reported delinquencies resulting in higher claim reserves and incurred losses, although such trends stabilized in the latter half of the year. Changes in U.S. employment levels and in the residential real estate markets could affect mortgage insurance claims. Future claim experience will depend on factors such as, among others, the mitigating effects of extensive loan forbearance programs mandated by the Federal government under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or CARES Act, future governmental stimulus initiatives, and the rate at which the overall economy, and in particular employment levels, recover once extensive mandates intended to mitigate the transmission of COVID-19 are revised or lifted.
FINANCIAL POSITION
The Company's financial position at December 31, 2020 reflected increases in assets, liabilities and common shareholders' equity of 8.3%, 10.3% and 3.1%, respectively, when compared to the immediately preceding year-end. Cash and invested assets represented 68.1% and 68.9% of consolidated assets as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of year-end 2020, the cash and invested asset base increased by 6.9% to $15,535.3.
Investments - During 2020 and 2019, the Company committed the majority of investable funds to short to intermediate-term fixed maturity securities and higher yielding publicly traded large capitalization equity securities. Old Republic continues to adhere to its long-term policy of investing primarily in investment grade, marketable securities. At both December 31, 2020 and 2019, nearly all of the Company's investments consisted of marketable securities. The investment portfolio contains no significant insurance risk-correlated asset exposures to real estate, mortgage-backed securities, collateralized debt obligations ("CDO's"), derivatives, hybrid securities, or illiquid private equity and hedge fund investments. Moreover, the Company does not engage in hedging or securities lending transactions, nor
does it invest in securities whose values are predicated on non-regulated financial instruments exhibiting amorphous or unfunded counter-party risk attributes. At December 31, 2020, the Company had no fixed maturity investments in default as to principal and/or interest.
Short-term maturity investment positions reflect a large variety of seasonal and intermediate-term factors including current operating needs, expected operating cash flows, seasonality of quarterly cash flow, debt maturities, and investment strategy considerations. Accordingly, the future level of short-term investments will vary and respond to the interplay of these factors and may, as a result, increase or decrease from current levels.
The Company does not own or utilize derivative financial instruments for the purpose of hedging, enhancing the overall return of its investment portfolio, or reducing the cost of its debt obligations. With regard to its equity portfolio, the Company does not own any options nor does it engage in any type of option writing. Traditional investment management tools and techniques are employed to address the yield and valuation exposures of the invested assets base. The long-term fixed maturity investment portfolio is managed so as to limit various risks inherent in the bond market. Credit risk is addressed through asset diversification and the purchase of investment grade securities. Reinvestment rate risk is reduced by concentrating on non-callable issues, and by taking asset-liability matching considerations into account. Purchases of mortgage and asset backed securities, which have variable principal prepayment options, are generally avoided. Market value risk is limited through the purchase of bonds of intermediate maturity. The combination of these investment management practices is expected to produce a more stable long-term fixed maturity investment portfolio that is not subject to extreme interest rate sensitivity and principal deterioration.
The fair value of the Company's long-term fixed maturity investment portfolio is sensitive, however, to fluctuations in the level of interest rates, but not materially affected by changes in anticipated cash flows caused by any prepayments. The impact of interest rate movements on the long-term fixed maturity investment portfolio generally affects net unrealized gains or losses. As a general rule, rising interest rates enhance currently available yields but typically lead to a reduction in the fair value of existing fixed maturity investments. By contrast, a decline in such rates reduces currently available yields but usually serves to increase the fair value of the existing fixed maturity investment portfolio. All such changes in fair value of available for sale securities are reflected, net of deferred income taxes, directly in the shareholders' equity account, and as a separate component of the statement of comprehensive income. Fixed maturity securities classified as held to maturity are carried at amortized cost, and therefore, fluctuations in unrealized gains and losses do not impact shareholders' equity. Given the Company's inability to forecast or control the movement of interest rates, Old Republic sets the maturity spectrum of its fixed maturity securities portfolio within parameters of estimated liability payouts, and focuses the overall portfolio on high quality investments. By so doing, Old Republic believes it is reasonably assured of its ability to hold securities to maturity as it may deem necessary in changing environments, and of ultimately recovering their aggregate cost.
Possible future declines in fair values for Old Republic's available for sale fixed maturity portfolio would negatively affect the common shareholders' equity account at any point in time, but would not necessarily result in the recognition of realized investment losses. The status and fair value changes of each of the fixed maturity investments are reviewed at least once per quarter during the year, and estimates of other-than-temporary impairments in the portfolio's value are evaluated and established at each quarterly balance sheet date. In reviewing investments for other-than-temporary impairment, the Company, in addition to a security's market price history, considers the totality of such factors as the issuer's operating results, financial condition and liquidity, its ability to access capital markets, credit rating trends, most current audited financial statements, industry and securities markets conditions, and analyst expectations to reach its conclusions. Sudden fair value declines caused by such adverse developments as newly emerged or imminent bankruptcy filings, issuer default on significant obligations, or reports of financial accounting developments that bring into question the validity of the issuer's previously reported earnings or financial condition, are recognized as realized losses as soon as credible publicly available information emerges to confirm such developments. In the event the Company's estimate of other-than-temporary impairments is insufficient at any point in time, future periods' net income (loss) would be affected adversely by the recognition of additional impairment losses, but its financial condition would not necessarily be affected adversely inasmuch as such losses, or a portion of them, could have been recognized previously as unrealized losses in shareholders' equity.
The following tables show certain information relating to the Company's fixed maturity and equity portfolios as of the dates shown:
__________
(a) Credit quality ratings referred to herein are a blend of those assigned by the major credit rating agencies for U.S. and Canadian Governments, Agencies, Corporates and Municipal issuers, which are converted to the above ratings classifications.
(b) "All other" includes non-investment grade or non-rated issuers.
__________
(c) Represents 0.3% of the total fixed maturity portfolio.
__________
(d) Represents 7.3% of the total fixed maturity portfolio.
__________
(e) Represents 30.5% of the total equity portfolio.
(f) Represents 7.4% of the cost of the total equity portfolio, while gross unrealized gains represent 31.4% of the equity portfolio.
__________
(g) At December 31, 2020 the number of issues in an unrealized loss position represent 4.1% of the total number of such fixed maturity issues held by the Company.
The aging of issues with unrealized losses employs balance sheet date fair value comparisons with an issue's cost. The percentage reduction from such cost reflects the decline as of a specific point in time (December 31, 2020 in the above table) and, accordingly, is not indicative of a security's value having been consistently below its cost at the percentages shown nor throughout the periods shown.
___________
(h) Duration is used as a measure of bond price sensitivity to interest rate changes. A duration of 3.8 as of December 31, 2020 implies that a 100 basis point parallel increase in interest rates from current levels would result in a possible decline in the fair value of the long-term fixed maturity investment portfolio of approximately 3.8%.
___________
(i) Unrealized gains and losses from changes in fair value of equity securities are included in total realized and unrealized investment gains (losses) in the consolidated statements of income.
Other Assets - Among other major assets, substantially all of the Company's receivables are not past due. Reinsurance recoverable balances on paid or estimated unpaid losses are deemed recoverable from solvent reinsurers or have otherwise been reduced by allowances for estimated credit losses. Deferred policy acquisition costs are estimated by taking into account the direct costs relating to the successful acquisition of new or renewal insurance contracts and evaluating their recoverability on the basis of recent trends in claims costs. The Company's deferred policy acquisition cost balances have not fluctuated substantially from period-to-period, and do not represent significant percentages of assets or shareholders' equity.
Liquidity - The parent holding company meets its liquidity and capital needs principally through dividends and interest on intercompany financing arrangements paid by its subsidiaries. The insurance subsidiaries' ability to pay
cash dividends to the parent company is generally restricted by law or subject to approval of the insurance regulatory authorities. The Company can receive up to $699.3 in dividends from its subsidiaries in 2021 without the prior approval of regulatory authorities. The liquidity achievable through such permitted dividend payments is considered sufficient to cover the parent holding company's currently expected cash outflows represented mostly by interest and scheduled repayments on outstanding debt, reasonably anticipated cash dividend payments to shareholders, modest operating expenses, and the near-term capital needs of its operating subsidiaries.
Capitalization - Old Republic's total capitalization of $7,153.1 at December 31, 2020 consisted of debt of $966.4 and common shareholders' equity of $6,186.6. Changes in the common shareholders' equity account reflect primarily net income excluding net investment gains (losses), realized and unrealized gains (losses), and dividend payments to shareholders for the year then ended.
Old Republic has paid a cash dividend without interruption since 1942 (79 years), and it has raised the annual cash dividend payment for each of the past 39 years. The dividend rate is reviewed and approved by the Board of Directors on a quarterly basis each year. In establishing each year's cash dividend rate the Company does not follow a strict formulaic approach. Rather, it favors a gradual rise in the annual dividend rate that is largely reflective of long-term consolidated operating earnings trends. Accordingly, each year's dividend rate is set judgmentally in consideration of such key factors as the dividend paying capacity of the Company's insurance subsidiaries, the trends in average annual statutory and GAAP earnings for the five to ten most recent calendar years, and management's long-term expectations for the Company's consolidated business and its individual operating subsidiaries. The Company's Board of Directors declared special cash dividends of $1.00 per share in December 2020 (payable on January 15, 2021), September 2019 and December 2017 (paid on January 31, 2018).
Under state insurance regulations, the Company's three mortgage guaranty insurance subsidiaries are required to hold minimum amounts of capital based on specified formulas. Since the Company's mortgage insurance subsidiaries have discontinued writing new business the risk-to-capital ratio considerations are therefore no longer of consequence.
Contractual Obligations - The following table shows certain information relating to the required reporting of contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
__________
(a) Represents estimated minimum funding of contributions for the Old Republic International Salaried Employees Retirement Plan. Funding of the plan is dependent on a number of factors including actual performance versus actuarial assumptions made at the time of the actuarial valuation, as well as the maintenance of certain funding levels relative to regulatory requirements.
(b) Amounts are reported gross of reinsurance. As discussed herein with respect to the nature of loss reserves and the estimating process utilized in their establishment, the Company's loss reserves do not have a contractual maturity date. Estimated gross loss payments are based primarily on historical claim payment patterns, are subject to change due to a wide variety of factors, do not reflect anticipated recoveries under the terms of reinsurance contracts, and cannot be predicted with certainty. Actual future loss payments may differ materially from the current estimates shown in the table above.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Revenues: Premiums & Fees
Pursuant to GAAP applicable to the insurance industry, revenues are recognized as follows:
Substantially all general insurance premiums pertain to annual policies and are reflected in income on a pro-rata basis in association with the related benefits, claims and expenses. Earned but unbilled premiums are generally taken into income on the billing date, while adjustments for retrospective premiums, commissions and similar charges or credits are accrued on the basis of periodic evaluations of current underwriting experience and contractual obligations.
Title premium and fee revenues stemming from the Company's direct operations (which include branch offices of its title insurers and wholly owned agency subsidiaries) represent approximately 25% of 2020 consolidated title business revenues. Such premiums are generally recognized as income at the escrow closing date which approximates the policy effective date. Fee income related to escrow and other closing services is recognized when the related services have been performed and completed. The remaining 75% of consolidated title premium and fee revenues is produced by independent title agents and underwritten title companies. Rather than making estimates that could be subject to significant variance from actual premium and fee production, the Company recognizes revenues from those sources upon receipt. Such receipts can reflect a three to four month lag relative to the effective date of the underlying title policy, and are offset concurrently by production expenses and claim reserve provisions.
The Company's mortgage guaranty premiums primarily stem from monthly installments paid on long-duration, guaranteed renewable insurance policies. Such premiums are written and earned in the month coverage is effective. With respect to relatively few annual or single premium policies, earned premiums are largely recognized on a pro-rata basis over the terms of the policies.
The major sources of Old Republic's consolidated earned premiums and fees for the periods shown were as follows:
__________
(*) Reclassification adjustments were made to certain Title segment revenues and expenses in prior periods to conform to the presentation adopted in 2020. See Note 1(c) to the accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
General insurance net premiums earned were down slightly for 2020. The economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and tightened underwriting standards were mitigated by strong premium rate increases for most insurance products. Declining workers' compensation and general liability premiums were largely offset by rising premiums in commercial auto, financial indemnity and property coverages. With few exceptions, 2019 premiums grew for most types of coverages and markets served. The largest contributions principally stemmed from commercial automobile (trucking), national accounts and executive indemnity coverages.
Title Group premium and fee revenues grew by 20.1% and 6.3% in 2020 and 2019, respectively. This performance was driven by a robust real estate market supported by a continued low interest rate environment, resulting in an increase in home sales and refinancing activity.
RFIG Run-off earned premium volume has reflected a continuing decline due to the natural outcome of a run-off book of business devoid of new premium production since 2011.
The percentage allocation of net premiums earned for major insurance coverages in the General Insurance Group was as follows:
The following table shows the percentage distribution of Title Group premium and fee revenues by production sources:
__________
(*) Reclassification adjustments were made to certain Title segment revenues and expenses in prior periods to conform to the presentation adopted in 2020. See Note 1(c) to the accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
The following tables provide information on production and related risk exposure trends for Old Republic's mortgage guaranty insurance operation:
The Company's flagship mortgage guaranty insurance carrier ceased the underwriting of new policies effective August 31, 2011 and the existing book of business was placed in run-off operating mode.
While there is no consensus in the marketplace as to the precise definition of "sub-prime", Old Republic generally views loans with credit (FICO) scores less than 620, loans underwritten with reduced levels of documentation and loans with loan to value ratios in excess of 95% as having a higher risk of default. Risk in force concentrations by these attributes are disclosed in the following tables for both traditional primary and bulk production. Premium rates for loans exhibiting greater risk attributes are typically higher in anticipation of potentially greater defaults and claim costs. Additionally, bulk insurance policies, which represent 8.2% of total net risk in force as of year-end 2020, are frequently subject to deductibles and aggregate stop losses which serve to limit the overall risk on a pool of insured loans.
__________
(a) Bulk pool risk in-force, which represented 6.8% of total bulk risk in-force at December 31, 2020, has been allocated pro-rata based on insurance in-force.
(b) The LTV distribution reflects base LTV ratios which are determined prior to the impact of single premiums financed and paid at the time of loan origination.
Risk in Force Distribution By Top Ten States:
__________
(a) Bulk pool risk in-force, which represented 6.8% of total bulk risk in-force at December 31, 2020, has been allocated pro-rata based on insurance in-force.
Revenues: Net Investment Income
Net investment income is affected by trends in interest and dividend yields for the types of securities in which the Company's funds are invested during each reporting period. The following tables reflect the segmented and consolidated invested asset bases as of the indicated dates, and the investment income earned and resulting yields on such assets. Since the Company can exercise little control over fair values, yields are evaluated on the basis of investment income earned in relation to the cost of the underlying invested assets, though yields based on the fair values of such assets are also shown in the statistics below.
__________
(a) The December 31, 2019 balance includes fixed maturity securities classified as held to maturity which are reported and reflected herein at amortized cost.
Consolidated net investment income decreased by 2.6% in 2020 and increased 4.4% in 2019. This revenue source is affected by changes in the invested asset base which are mainly driven by consolidated operating cash flows, by a concentration of investable assets in interest-bearing securities, and by changes in market rates of return. The yields for 2020 reflect a lower interest rate environment whereas previous years' reflect an increasingly greater commitment to high quality dividend paying equity securities.
Revenues: Net Investment Gains (Losses)
The Company's investment policies are not designed to maximize or emphasize the realization of investment gains. Rather, these policies aim for a stable source of income from interest and dividends, protection of capital, and the providing of sufficient liquidity to meet insurance underwriting and other obligations as they become payable in the future. Dispositions of fixed maturity securities generally arise from scheduled maturities and early calls; in 2020, 2019, and 2018, 76.2%, 54.0% and 76.3%, respectively, of all such dispositions resulted from these occurrences. The realization of investment gains or losses can be highly discretionary and can be affected by such randomly occurring factors as the timing of individual securities sales, the recording of estimated losses from write-downs of impaired securities, tax-planning and tax-rate change considerations, and modifications of investment management judgments regarding the direction of securities markets or the future prospects of individual investees or industry sectors.
The following table reflects the composition of net investment gains or losses for the periods shown.
Expenses: Benefits and Claims
The Company records the benefits, claims and related settlement costs that have been incurred during each accounting period. Total claim costs are affected by the amount of paid claims and the adequacy of reserve estimates established for current and prior years' claim occurrences at each balance sheet date.
The following table shows a breakdown of gross and net of reinsurance claim reserve estimates for major types of insurance coverages as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
The Company's reserve for loss and loss adjustment expenses represents the accumulation of estimates of ultimate losses payable, including incurred but not reported losses and loss adjustment expenses. The establishment of claim reserves by the Company's insurance subsidiaries is a reasonably complex and dynamic process influenced by a large variety of factors as further discussed below. Consequently, reserves established are a reflection of the opinions of a large number of persons, of the application and interpretation of historical precedent and trends, of expectations as to future developments, and of management's judgment in interpreting all such factors. At any point in time, the Company is exposed to the possibility of higher or lower than anticipated claim costs and the resulting changes in estimates are recorded in operations of the periods during which they are made. Increases to prior reserve estimates are often referred to as unfavorable development whereas any changes that decrease previous estimates of the Company's ultimate liability are referred to as favorable development.
Overview of Loss Reserving Process
Most of Old Republic's consolidated claim and related expense reserves stem from its general insurance business. At December 31, 2020, such reserves accounted for 93.5% and 90.1% of consolidated gross and net of reinsurance reserves, respectively, while similar reserves at December 31, 2019 represented 93.3% and 90.1% of the respective consolidated amounts.
The Company's reserve setting process reflects the nature of its insurance business and the operationally decentralized basis upon which it is conducted. Old Republic's general insurance operations encompasses a large variety of coverages or classes of commercial insurance; it has negligible exposure to personal insurance coverages such as homeowners or private passenger automobile insurance that exhibit wide diversification of risks, significant frequency of claim occurrences, and high degrees of statistical credibility. Additionally, the Company's insurance subsidiaries do not provide significant amounts of insurance protection for premises; most of its property insurance exposures relate to cargo, incidental property, and insureds' inland marine assets. Consequently, the wide variety of policies issued and commercial insurance customers served require that loss reserves be analyzed and established in the context of the unique or different attributes of each block or class of business produced by the Company. For example, accident liability claims emanating from insured trucking companies or from general aviation customers become known relatively quickly, whereas claims of a general liability nature arising from the building activities of a construction company may emerge over extended periods of time. Similarly, claims filed pursuant to errors and omissions or directors and officers' liability coverages are usually not prone to immediate evaluation or quantification inasmuch as many such claims may be litigated over several years and their ultimate costs may be affected by the vagaries of judge or jury verdicts. Approximately 91% of the general insurance group's claim reserves stem from liability insurance coverages for commercial customers which typically require more extended periods of investigation and at times protracted litigation before they are finally settled. As a consequence of these and other factors, Old Republic does not utilize a single, overarching loss reserving approach.
The Company prepares periodic analyses of its loss reserve estimates for its significant insurance coverages. It establishes point estimates for most losses on an insurance coverage line-by-line basis for individual subsidiaries, sub-classes, individual accounts, blocks of business or other unique concentrations of insurance risks such as directors and officers' liability, that have similar attributes. Actuarially or otherwise derived ranges of reserve levels are not utilized as such in setting these reserves. Instead the reported reserves encompass the Company's best point estimates at each reporting date and the overall reserve level at any point in time therefore represents the compilation of a very large number of reported reserve estimates and the results of a variety of formula calculations largely driven by analysis of historical data. Favorable or unfavorable developments of prior year reserves are implicitly covered by the point estimates incorporated in total reserves at each balance sheet date. The Company does not project future variability or make an explicit provision for uncertainty when determining its best estimate of loss reserves. Over the most recent decade actual incurred losses have developed within a reasonable range of their original estimates.
Aggregate loss reserves consist of liability estimates for claims that have been reported ("case") to the Company's insurance subsidiaries and reserves for claims that have been incurred but not yet reported ("IBNR") or whose ultimate costs may not become fully apparent until a future time. Additionally, the Company establishes unallocated loss adjustment expense reserves for loss settlement costs that are not directly related to individual claims. Such reserves are based on prior years' cost experience and trends, and are intended to cover the unallocated costs of claim departments' administration of case and IBNR claims over time. Long-term, disability-type workers' compensation reserves are discounted to present value based on interest rates that generally range from 3.0% to 4.0%. The amount of discount reflected in the year-end net reserves totaled $196.9, $209.6 and $216.5 as of December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. Interest accretion of $35.7, $34.5, and $49.0 for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively, was recognized as unfavorable development of prior year reserves within benefits, claims and settlement expenses in the consolidated statements of income.
A large variety of statistical analyses and formula calculations are utilized to provide for IBNR claim costs as well as additional costs that can arise from such factors as monetary and social inflation, changes in claims administration processes, changes in reinsurance ceded and recoverability levels, and expected trends in claim costs and related ratios. Typically, such formulas take into account so-called link ratios that represent prior years' patterns of incurred or paid loss trends between succeeding years, or past experience relative to progressions of the number of claims reported over time and ultimate average costs per claim.
Overall, reserves pertaining to several hundred large individual commercial insurance accounts that exhibit sufficient statistical credibility, and at times may be subject to retrospective premium rating plans or the utilization of varying levels or types of self-insured retentions through captive insurers and similar risk management mechanisms are established on an account by account basis using case reserves and applicable formula-driven methods. Large account reserves are usually set and analyzed for groups of coverages such as workers' compensation, commercial automobile (trucking) and general liability that are typically underwritten jointly for many customers. For certain so-called long-tail categories of insurance such as retained or assumed excess liability or excess workers' compensation, officers and directors' liability, and commercial umbrella liability relative to which claim development patterns are particularly long, more volatile, and immature in their early stages of development, the Company judgmentally establishes the most current accident years' loss reserves on the basis of expected claim ratios. Such expected claim ratios typically reflect currently estimated claim ratios from prior accident years, adjusted for the effect of actual and anticipated rate changes, actual and anticipated changes in coverage, reinsurance, mix of business, and other anticipated changes in external factors such as trends in loss costs or the legal and claims environment. Expected claim ratios are generally used for the two to three most recent accident years depending on the individual class or category of business. As actual claims data emerges in succeeding interim and annual periods, the original accident year claim ratio assumptions are validated or otherwise adjusted sequentially through the application of statistical projection techniques such as the Bornhuetter/Ferguson method which utilizes data from the more mature experience of prior years to arrive at a likely indication of more recent years' loss trends and costs.
Title insurance and related escrow services loss and loss adjustment expense reserves are established as point estimates to cover the projected settlement costs of known as well as IBNR losses related to premium and escrow service revenues of each reporting period. Reserves for known claims are based on an assessment of the facts available to the Company during the settlement process. The point estimates covering all claim reserves take into account IBNR claims based on past experience and evaluations of such variables as changing trends in the types of policies issued, changes in real estate markets and interest rate environments, and changing levels of loan refinancing, all of which can have a bearing on the emergence, number, and ultimate costs of claims.
RFIG Run-off mortgage guaranty insurance reserves for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses are recognized only upon an instance of default, defined as an insured mortgage loan for which two or more consecutive monthly payments have been missed. Loss reserves are based on statistical calculations that take into account the number of reported insured mortgage loan defaults as of each balance sheet date, as well as experience-based estimates of loan defaults that have occurred but have not as yet been reported. Further, the loss reserve estimating process takes into account a large number of variables including trends in claim severity, potential salvage recoveries, expected cure rates for reported loan delinquencies at various stages of default, the level of coverage rescissions and claims denials due to material misrepresentation in key underwriting information or non-compliance with prescribed underwriting guidelines, and management judgments relative to future employment levels, housing market activity, and mortgage loan interest costs, demand, and extensions.
The Company has the legal right to rescind mortgage insurance coverage unilaterally as expressly stated in its policy. Moreover, two federal courts that have considered that policy wording have each affirmed that right (See First Tennessee Bank N.A. v. Republic Mortg. Ins. Co., Case No. 2:10-cv-02513-JPM-cgc (W.D. Tenn., Feb. 25, 2011) and JPMorgan Chase Bank N.A. v. Republic Mortg. Ins. Co., Civil Action No. 10-06141 (SRC) (D. NJ, May 4, 2011), each decision citing supporting state law legal precedent). RMIC's mortgage insurance policy provides that the insured represents that all statements made and information provided to it in an application for coverage for a loan, without regard to who made the statements or provided the information, have been made and presented for and on behalf of the insured; and that such statements and information are neither false nor misleading in any material respect, nor omit any fact necessary to make such statements and information not false or misleading in any material respect. According to the policy, if any of those representations are materially false or misleading with respect to a loan, the Company has the right to cancel or rescind coverage for that loan retroactively to commencement of the coverage. Whenever the Company determines that an application contains a material misrepresentation, it either advises the insured in writing of its findings prior to rescinding coverage or exercises its unilateral right to rescind coverage for that loan, stating the reasons for that action in writing and returning the applicable premium. The rescission of coverage in instances of materially faulty representations or warranties provided in applications for insurance is a necessary and
prevailing practice throughout the insurance industry. In the case of mortgage guaranty insurance, rescissions have occurred regularly over the years but have been generally immaterial. During the period of the great recession, the Company experienced a much greater incidence of rescissions due to increased levels of observed fraud and misrepresentations in insurance applications pertaining to business underwritten between 2004 and the first half of 2008. As a result, the Company has incorporated certain assumptions regarding the expected levels of coverage rescissions and claim denials in its reserving methodology since 2008. Such estimates, which are evaluated at each balance sheet date, take into account observed as well as historical trends in rescission and denial rates. The table below shows the estimated effects of coverage rescissions and claim denials on loss reserves and settled and incurred losses.
As noted above, the estimated reduction in ending loss reserves reflects, in large measure, a variety of judgments relative to the level of expected coverage rescissions and claim denials on loans that are in default as of each balance sheet date. The provision for insured events of the current year resulted from actual and anticipated rescissions and claim denials attributable to newly reported delinquencies in each respective year. The provision for insured events of prior years resulted from actual rescission and claim denial activity, reinstatement of previously rescinded or denied claims, or revisions in assumptions regarding expected rescission or claim denial rates on outstanding prior year delinquencies. The trends since 2010 reflect a continuing reduction in the level of actual and anticipated rescission and claim denial rates on total outstanding delinquencies. Claims not paid by virtue of rescission or denial represent the Company's estimated contractual risk, before consideration of the impacts of any reinsurance and deductibles or aggregate loss limits, on cases that are settled by the issuance of a rescission or denial notification. Variances between the estimated rescission and actual claim denial rate are reflected in the periods during which they occur.
Although the insured has no right under the policy to appeal a Company claim decision, the insured may, at any time, contest in writing the Company's findings or action with respect to a loan or a claim. In such cases, the Company considers any additional information supplied by the insured. This consideration may lead to further investigation, retraction or confirmation of the initial determination. If the Company concludes that it will reinstate coverage, it advises the insured in writing that it will do so immediately upon receipt of the premium previously returned. Reserves are not adjusted for potential reversals of rescissions or adverse rulings for loans under dispute since such reversals of claim rescissions and denials have historically been immaterial to the reserve estimation process.
Incurred Loss Experience
Management believes that the Company's overall reserving practices have been consistently applied over many years. For at least the past ten years, previously established aggregate reserves have produced reasonable estimates of the cumulative ultimate net costs of claims incurred. However, there are no guarantees that such outcomes will continue, and, accordingly, no representation is made that ultimate net claim and related costs will not develop in future years to be greater or lower than currently established reserve estimates. In management's opinion, however, such potential development is not likely to have a material effect on the Company's consolidated financial position, although it could affect materially its consolidated results of operations for any one annual or interim reporting period. See further discussion in this Annual Report on Form 10-K under Item 1A - Risk Factors.
A summary of changes in aggregate reserves for claims and related costs is included in Note 1(h) of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The percentage of net claims, benefits and related settlement expenses incurred as a percentage of premiums and related fee revenues of the Company's three major operating segments and for consolidated operations were as follows:
__________
(*) Reclassification adjustments were made to certain Title segment revenues and expenses in prior periods to conform to the presentation adopted in 2020. See Note 1(c) to the accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
The consolidated claim ratio reflects the changing effects of period-to-period contributions of each segment to consolidated results, and this ratio's variances within each segment. For the three most recent calendar years, the above table indicates that the one-year development of consolidated reserves at the beginning of each year produced favorable developments in 2020, 2019, and 2018 which on average decreased the consolidated claim ratio by 1.0%.
The percentage of net claims, benefits and related settlement expenses measured against premiums earned by major types of general insurance coverage were as follows:
The general insurance claim ratio trended down in both periods presented and for 2020 was primarily driven by better performance in most coverages, primarily due to prior periods' favorable reserve developments as more fully described in the Executive Summary of the Management Analysis of Financial Position and Results of Operations.
Unfavorable asbestosis and environmental ("A&E") claim developments, although not material in any of the periods presented, are typically attributable to periodic re-evaluations of such reserves as well as subsequent reclassifications of other coverages' reserves, most often workers' compensation, deemed assignable to A&E category of losses. Except for a small portion that emanates from ongoing primary insurance operations, a large majority of the A&E claim reserves posted by Old Republic stem mainly from its participations in assumed reinsurance treaties and insurance pools which were discontinued during the 1980's and have since been in run-off status. With respect to the primary portion of gross A&E reserves, Old Republic administers the related claims through its claims personnel as well as outside attorneys, and posted reserves reflect its best estimates of ultimate claim costs. Claims administration for the assumed portion of the Company's A&E exposures is handled by the claims departments of unrelated primary or ceding reinsurance companies. While the Company performs periodic reviews of certain claim files managed by third parties, the overall A&E reserves it establishes respond to the paid claim and case reserve activity reported to the Company as well as available industry statistical data such as so-called survival ratios. Such ratios represent the number of years' average paid losses for the three or five most recent calendar years that are encompassed by an insurer's A&E reserve level at any point in time. According to this simplistic appraisal of an insurer's A&E loss reserve level, Old Republic's average five year paid loss survival ratios stood at 6.3 years (gross) and 7.1 years (net of reinsurance) as of December 31, 2020 and 6.3 years (gross) and 7.2 years (net of reinsurance) as of December 31, 2019. Fluctuations in this ratio between years can be caused by the inconsistent pay out patterns associated with these types of claims. Incurred net losses for A&E claims have averaged .3% of general insurance group net incurred losses for the five years ended December 31, 2020.
A summary of reserve activity, including estimates for IBNR, relating to A&E claims at December 31, 2020 and 2019 is as follows:
Title insurance claim ratios have remained in the single digits for a number of years due to a continuation of favorable trends in claims frequency and severity. Favorable developments of reserves established in prior years continued to reduce the claim ratios as more fully described in the Executive Summary of the Management Analysis of Financial Position and Results of Operations.
The RFIG Run-off 2020 claim ratio reflects greater reserve provisions necessitated by elevated delinquencies and the evolving economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. Prior period favorable development is primarily the result of improving trends in claim severity as further discussed in the Executive Summary of the Management Analysis of Financial Position and Results of Operations.
Certain mortgage guaranty average claim-related trends are listed below:
__________
(a) Amounts are in whole dollars.
__________
(b) As determined by risk in force as of December 31, 2020, these 10 states represent approximately 55.1% of total risk in force.
Volatility of Reserve Estimates and Sensitivity
There is a great deal of uncertainty in the estimates of loss and loss adjustment expense reserves, and unanticipated events can have both a favorable or unfavorable impact on such estimates. The Company believes that the factors most responsible, in varying and continually changing degrees, for such favorable or unfavorable development are as follows:
General insurance net claim reserves can be affected by lower than expected frequencies of claims incurred but not reported, the effect of reserve discounts applicable to workers' compensation claims, higher than expected severity of litigated claims in particular, governmental or judicially imposed retroactive conditions in the settlement of claims such as noted elsewhere in this document in regard to black lung disease claims, greater than anticipated inflation rates applicable to repairs and the medical benefits portion of claims, and higher than expected IBNR due to
the slower and highly volatile emergence patterns applicable to certain types of claims such as those stemming from litigated, assumed reinsurance, or the A&E types of claims noted above.
Title insurance loss reserve levels can be impacted adversely by such developments as reduced loan refinancing activity, the effect of which can be to lengthen the period during which title policies remain exposed to loss emergence. Such reserve levels can also be affected by reductions in either property values or the volume of transactions which, by virtue of the speculative nature of some real estate developments, can lead to increased occurrences of fraud, defalcations or mechanics' liens.
RFIG Run-off net claim reserve levels can be influenced adversely by several factors. These include changes in the mix of insured business toward loans that have a higher probability of default, increases in the average risk per insured loan, the levels of estimated rescission and claim denial activity, the deterioration of regional or national economic conditions leading to a reduction in borrowers' income and thus their ability to make payments on outstanding loans, and reductions in housing values and/or increases in housing supply that can raise the rate at which defaults evolve into claims and affect their overall severity.
With respect to Old Republic's small life and accident insurance operations, reserve adequacy may be impacted adversely by greater than anticipated medical care cost inflation as well as greater than expected frequency and severity of claims. In life insurance, as in general insurance, concentrations of insured lives coupled with a catastrophic event would represent the Company's largest exposure.
On a consolidated basis, which includes all coverages provided by the Company, the cumulative development on prior year loss reserves over the past ten years through December 31, 2020 has ranged from 8.5% unfavorable in 2010 to 8.4% favorable in 2015 and averaged 3.1% favorable. Although management does not have a practical business reason for making projections of likely outcomes of future loss developments, its analysis and evaluation of Old Republic's existing business mix, current aggregate loss reserve levels, and loss development patterns suggests a reasonable likelihood that 2020 year-end loss reserves could ultimately develop within a range of +/- 5%. The most significant factors impacting the potential reserve development for each of the Company's insurance segments is discussed above. Old Republic has generally experienced favorable overall loss developments for the latest ten-year period. While General Insurance has experienced unfavorable developments of previously established reserves during four of the last five years, the current analysis of loss development factors and economic conditions influencing the Company's insurance coverages point to a position of reserve adequacy. In management's opinion, the other segments' loss reserve development patterns (most notably those associated with title and mortgage insurance) show greater variability due to changes in economic conditions which cannot be reasonably anticipated. Consequently, management believes that using a 5% potential range of reserve development provides a reasonable benchmark for a sensitivity analysis of the Company's consolidated reserves as of December 31, 2020.
Reinsurance Programs
To maintain premium production within its capacity and limit maximum losses and risks for which it might become liable under its policies, Old Republic may cede a portion or all of its premiums and liabilities on certain classes of insurance, individual policies, or blocks of business to other insurers and reinsurers. Further discussion of the Company's reinsurance programs can be found in Part 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Subsidiaries within the general insurance segment have generally obtained reinsurance coverage from independent insurance or reinsurance companies pursuant to excess of loss agreements. Under excess of loss reinsurance agreements the Company is generally reimbursed for claim costs exceeding contractually agreed-upon levels. During the three year period ended December 31, 2020, the Company's net retentions have risen gradually within the general insurance segment; however, such changes have not had a material impact on the Company's consolidated financial statements.
Except for relatively few facultative reinsurance cessions covering large risks, the title insurance segment does not utilize a significant amount of reinsurance to manage its insurance risk.
RFIG Run-off insurance risk was historically reinsured through excess of loss contracts with insurers owned by or affiliated with lending institutions and financial and other intermediaries whose customers are insured by Old Republic's mortgage insurance subsidiaries. Effective December 31, 2008, the Company discontinued excess of loss reinsurance cessions to lenders' captive insurance companies for all new production originated subsequent to the effective date.
The Company does not anticipate any significant changes in its reinsurance programs during 2021.
Expenses: Underwriting Acquisition and Other Expenses
The following table sets forth the expense ratios registered by each major business segment and in consolidation for the periods shown:
__________
(*) Reclassification adjustments were made to certain Title segment revenues and expenses in prior periods to conform to the presentation adopted in 2020. See Note 1(c) to the accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Variations in the Company's consolidated expense ratios reflect a continually changing mix of coverages sold and attendant costs of producing business in the Company's three largest operating segments. To a significant degree, expense ratios for both the general and title insurance segments are mostly reflective of variable costs, such as commissions or similar charges, that rise or decline along with corresponding changes in premium and fee income. Moreover, general operating expenses can contract or expand in differing proportions due to varying levels of operating efficiencies and expense management opportunities in the face of changing market conditions.
Expenses: Total
The combined ratios of the above summarized net claims, benefits and underwriting expenses that reflect the sum total of all the factors enumerated above have been as follows:
__________
(*) Reclassification adjustments were made to certain Title segment revenues and expenses in prior periods to conform to the presentation adopted in 2020. See Note 1(c) to the accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Expenses: Income Taxes
The effective consolidated income tax rates were 18.9%, 20.1%, and 15.4% in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. The rates for each year reflect primarily the varying proportions of pretax operating income (loss) derived from partially tax sheltered investment income (principally tax-exempt interest and dividend income), the combination of fully taxable investment income, investment gains or losses, underwriting and service income and adjustments regarding the recoverability of deferred tax assets.
OTHER INFORMATION
Reference is here made to "Information About Segments of Business" appearing elsewhere herein.
Historical data pertaining to the operating results, liquidity, and other performance indicators applicable to an insurance enterprise such as Old Republic are not necessarily indicative of results to be achieved in succeeding years. In addition to the factors cited below, the long-term nature of the insurance business, seasonal and annual patterns in premium production and incidence of claims, changes in yields obtained on invested assets, changes in government policies and free markets affecting inflation rates and general economic conditions, and changes in legal precedents or the application of law affecting the settlement of disputed and other claims can have a bearing on period-to-period comparisons and future operating results. Furthermore, due to the financial market and economic disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and the associated governmental responses, it is therefore possible that Old Republic's operating results, business and financial condition could be adversely affected in subsequent periods depending on the length and severity of these disruptions.
Some of the oral or written statements made in the Company's reports, press releases, and conference calls following earnings releases, can constitute "forward-looking statements" within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Of necessity, any such forward-looking statements involve assumptions, uncertainties, and risks that may affect the Company's future performance. With regard to Old Republic's General Insurance segment, its results can be particularly affected by the level of market competition, which is typically a function of available capital and expected returns on such capital among competitors, the levels of investment yields and inflation rates, and periodic changes in claim frequency and severity patterns caused by natural disasters, weather conditions, accidents, illnesses, work-related injuries, and unanticipated external events. Title Insurance and RFIG Run-off results can be affected by similar factors and by changes in national and regional housing demand and values, the availability and cost of mortgage loans, employment trends, and default rates on mortgage loans. Life and accident insurance earnings are exposed to the variability of employment and consumer spending, changes in mortality and health trends, and alterations in policy lapsation rates. At the parent holding company level, operating earnings or losses are generally reflective of the amount of debt outstanding and its cost, interest income on temporary holdings of short-term investments, and period-to-period variations in the costs of administering the Company's widespread operations.
The General Insurance, Title Insurance and Corporate and Other Segments and the RFIG Run-off business maintain customer information and rely upon technology platforms to conduct their business. As a result, each of them and the Company are exposed to cyber risk. Many of the Company's operating subsidiaries, maintain separate IT systems which are deemed to reduce enterprise-wide risks of potential cybersecurity incidents. However, given the potential magnitude of a significant breach, the Company continually evaluates on an enterprise-wide basis its IT hardware, security infrastructure and business practices to respond to these risks and to detect and remediate in a timely manner significant cybersecurity incidents or business process interruptions.
A more detailed listing and discussion of the risks and other factors which affect the Company's risk-taking insurance business are included in Part I, Item 1A - Risk Factors, of this Annual Report to the Securities and Exchange Commission, which Item is specifically incorporated herein by reference.
Any forward-looking statements or commentaries speak only as of their dates. Old Republic undertakes no obligation to publicly update or revise any and all such comments, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, and accordingly they may not be unduly relied upon.