Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ($ in thousands)
The following discussion and analysis is intended to help the reader understand our business, financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and capital resources. This discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and the description of the Company’s Business in Item 1 above. Unless the context otherwise indicates or requires, the terms “we”, “our” and “the Company” as used herein refer to Oak Street Health, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries, including Oak Street Health, LLC, which is Oak Street Health, Inc.’s predecessor for financial reporting purposes for periods presented prior to August 10, 2020.
In addition to historical data, the discussion contains forward-looking statements about the business, operations and financial performance of the Company based on our current expectations that involves risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Actual results could differ materially from those discussed in or implied by forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed above in “Forward-Looking Statements,” and Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors.”
Overview
Oak Street Health, Inc. (collectively referred to as “Oak Street Health,” “OSH,” “we,” “us,” “our,” or the “Company”) was formed as a Delaware corporation on October 22, 2019 for the purpose of completing a public offering and related restructuring transactions (collectively referred to as the “IPO”) in order to carry on the business of Oak Street Health, LLC (“OSH LLC”) and its affiliates. As the managing member of OSH LLC, Oak Street Health, Inc. operates and controls all of the business affairs of OSH LLC and its affiliates. For further discussion related to the IPO, see Note 1 in Part IV, Item 15. Our common stock trades on the New York Stock Exchange (“NYSE”) under the ticker symbol “OSH.”
The Company operates primary care centers within the United States serving Medicare beneficiaries. The Company, through its centers and management services organization, combines an innovative care model with superior patient experience. The Company invests resources into primary care to prevent unnecessary acute events and manage chronic illnesses. The Company engages Medicare eligible patients through the use of an innovative community outreach approach. Once patients are engaged, the Company integrates population health analytics, social support services and primary care into the care model to drive improved outcomes. The Company contracts with health plans to generate medical costs savings and realize a return on its investment in primary care. As of December 31, 2020, the Company operated 79 centers in 16 markets across 11 states, which provided care for approximately 97,000 patients. We, together with our affiliated physician practice organizations, employed approximately 3,200 team members, including approximately 300 primary care providers. Our operations are organized and reported under one segment.
COVID-19 Update on our Business
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization designated COVID-19 as a global pandemic. The rapid spread of COVID-19 around the world and throughout the United States has altered the behavior of businesses and people, with significant negative effects on federal, state and local economies, the duration of which is unknown at this time. Various policies were implemented by federal, state and local governments in response to the COVID-19 pandemic that caused many people to remain at home and forced the closure of or limitations on certain businesses, as well as suspended elective procedures by health care facilities. While some of these restrictions have been eased across the U.S. and most states have lifted moratoriums on non-emergent procedures, some restrictions remain in place, and many state and local governments are re-imposing certain restrictions due to the increasing rates of COVID-19 cases. The virus disproportionately impacts older adults, especially those with chronic illnesses, which describes many of our patients.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic during the year ended December 31, 2020, we took the following actions to ensure the safety of our employees and their families and to address the physical, mental and social health of our patients:
•
Created a COVID-19 Response Team in March 2020 that is supported by team members from across our organization to ensure a coordinated response to the pandemic;
•
Temporarily closed all of our corporate offices and enabled our entire corporate work force to work remotely;
•
Implemented travel restrictions for non-essential business;
•
Transitioned much of our center-based care to be delivered by our providers virtually through newly developed telehealth capabilities, including video and telephone through June 2020 but have transitioned our business back to a more normal operating cadence as of July 2020, including seeing a larger proportion of our patients via in-center visits (with a corresponding reduction in telehealth visits) while maintaining stringent safety protocols to minimize the potential transmission of COVID-19. We expect to leverage our telehealth capabilities as a means of interacting with our patients to the extent an in-person visit is not required or preferred;
•
Made operational changes to the staffing and operations of our centers, which remain open as “essential” businesses, to minimize potential exposure to and transmission of COVID-19;
•
Temporarily delayed planned openings of new centers through August 2020 but have restarted our growth efforts through patient outreach and starting August 2020, we resumed opening new centers. As of December 31, 2020, we operated 79 centers;
•
Temporarily halted community outreach and other marketing initiatives which drive new patients to our platform through June 2020 but have recommenced marketing initiatives during the third quarter of 2020;
•
Acquired and deployed significantly greater amounts of personal protective equipment to ensure the safety of our employees and patients;
•
Created a program called “COVID Care” to actively monitor our patients for suspected COVID-19 infections with the goal of managing those symptoms to keep our patients safely out of the hospital unless and until necessary due to the potential infection risks in the hospital environment;
•
Redeployed our contracted and employed drivers, who typically transport patients to our centers, to deliver food from food pantries to our patients to address food supply issues or challenges;
•
Provided free rapid COVID-19 tests to all members of the Chicago community; and
•
Launched an effort in January 2021 to vaccinate frontline healthcare workers (both employees of Oak Street Health and non-employees), our patients, and other eligible members of our communities. While this work is critically important for our communities, we also expect our agile vaccination efforts will result in greater brand awareness and loyalty and incremental patient growth.
The COVID-19 pandemic did not have a material impact on our results of operations, cash flows and financial position as of year ended December 31, 2020; although our decisions to defer center openings and limit patient outreach and marketing initiatives resulted in slower growth than we would have otherwise experienced in 2020. Over 96% of our total revenues are recurring, consisting of fixed monthly per-patient-per-month capitation payments we receive from MA plans.
We do expect COVID-19 to impact both our per-patient capitated revenue due to lower risk scores for new patients and our medical claims expense. Although we expect risk scores for existing Oak Street Health patients to be consistent with our historical experience, due to a lack of availability of care and inadequate documentation as discussed in more detail below, we expect lower risk scores for new patients in 2021, which will result in lower per-patient capitated revenue. As future patients not served by Oak Street Health in 2020 were unable to access the healthcare system for several months in 2020 due to local COVID-19 restrictions and therefore had fewer interactions with healthcare providers than a typical year, we expect the risk scores for these new patients in 2021 to be lower than they have been historically.
As we are financially responsible for essentially all of the healthcare costs associated with our at-risk patients whether we provide that care or a third party provides that care, we suspect that the healthcare costs of patients infected with COVID-19 will be greater than had COVID-19 not occurred. It is impossible, however, to know what other healthcare issues these patients may have encountered in their pre-COVID-19 lives and whether the COVID-19 costs are or will be greater or lesser than the costs these patients would otherwise incur. Additionally, because of the extraordinary measures taken by local governments in our markets particularly in the second quarter of 2020, all of our patients had more limited access to healthcare services, including healthcare specialists such as cardiologists or orthopedists, to schedule both inpatient and outpatient surgeries, and to some extent hospital care. Beginning in late March 2020 and extending through most of the second quarter of 2020, our patients who were not infected with COVID-19 incurred lower healthcare costs than we would have otherwise expected, which will result in lower medical claims expense that we incur. We expect the vast majority of these costs are just delayed and will be incurred at future points in time and it is possible that the deferral of healthcare services could cause additional health problems in our existing patients, which could increase our costs in the future. In the third and fourth quarters of 2020, we did experience an increase in medical costs to levels above historical norms. Because of the COVID-19 related volatility in medical cost data in 2020, we do not believe that our 2020 medical cost data can serve as a reliable basis for estimating our 2021 performance and given the fact that we do not know what the impact to medical costs will be as a result of the surge in COVID-19 cases at the end of 2020 and the beginning of 2021. Given these factors, per-patient medical costs may be greater in 2021 than the levels we experienced in our recent historical results. Furthermore, given the time it takes for medical claims to be submitted to MA plans, adjudicated, and sent to us, we believe it will be several quarters before we will be able to accurately calculate the impact on medical claims expense from the COVID-19 pandemic. We do believe, however, that the impact of on per-patient revenue and medical claims related to COVID-19 that we expect to experience will not have a materially detrimental effect on our long-term financial performance.
The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, future results of operations and financial condition will depend on future factors that are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, including new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19 including the impact of new variants of the virus, the actions taken to contain it or treat its impact and
the economic impact on our markets. Such factors include, but are not limited to, the scope and duration of stay-at-home practices and business closures and restrictions, government-imposed or recommended suspensions of elective procedures, and expenses required for supplies and personal protective equipment. Because of these and other uncertainties, we cannot estimate the length or severity of the impact of the pandemic on our business. Furthermore, because of our business model, the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic may not be fully reflected in our results of operations and overall financial condition until future periods. We will continue to closely evaluate and monitor the nature and extent of these potential impacts to our business, results of operations and liquidity.
For additional information on the various risks posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, please read the Risk Factors included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
•
Adding New Patients in Existing Centers: Our ability to add new patients is a key indicator of the market’s recognition of the attractiveness of the Oak Street Platform, both to our patients and MA plan partners, and a key growth driver for the business. As we add patients to our existing centers, we expect these patients to contribute significant incremental economics to Oak Street Health as we leverage our fixed cost base at each center. We grow our patient base through our own internal sales and marketing efforts, which drive most of our new patient growth, as well as assignments from our MA plan partners. We grew our patient base from approximately 79,000 patients as of December 31, 2019 to approximately 97,000 as of December 31, 2020. Our growth during this period was more modest than we would have anticipated due to the measures we took to limit our outreach and marketing activities in response to the COVID-19 pandemic (see - COVID-19 Update on our Business).
•
Expand our Center Base within Existing and New Markets: We believe that we currently serve less than 3% of the total patients in the markets where we currently have centers. As a result, there is significant opportunity to expand in our existing markets through the acquisition of new patients to existing centers and addition of new centers. For the long term, these strategically developed new sites allow us to access additional neighborhoods while leveraging our established brand and infrastructure in a market. Our existing markets today represent a small fraction of the overall market opportunity. Based upon our experience to date, we believe our care model can scale nationally, and we therefore expect to selectively and strategically expand into new geographies.
•
Contract with Payors: Our economic model relies on our capitated partnerships with payors which manage and market MA plans across the United States. In our short history, we have been able to establish strategic value-based relationships with 25 different payors as of December 31, 2020, including each of the top 5 national payors by number of MA patients. These existing contracts and relationships and our partners’ understanding of the value of our model reduces the risk of entering into new markets as we typically have payor contracts before entering a new market. Maintaining, supporting, and growing these relationships, particularly as we enter new geographies, is critical to our long-term success.
•
Effectively Manage the Cost of Care for Our Patients: The capitated nature of our contracting with payors requires us to prudently manage the medical expense of our patients. Our care model focuses on leveraging the primary care setting as a means of avoiding costly downstream healthcare costs, such as acute hospital admissions. Our patients, however, retain the freedom to seek care at emergency rooms or hospitals; we do not restrict their access to care beyond the limits of their MA plan. Therefore, we are liable for potentially large medical claims should we not effectively manage our patients’ health.
•
Center-Level Contribution Margin: We endeavor to expand our number of centers and number of patients at each center over time. Due to the significant fixed costs associated with operating and managing our centers and the increases we experience in patient contribution on a per-patient basis the longer a patient is part of the Oak Street Platform, we generate significantly better center-level contribution margins (defined as (i) patient revenue, excluding Medicare Part D revenue minus (ii) the sum of (a) medical claims expense, excluding Medicare Part D related expenses, and (b) cost of care, excluding depreciation and amortization) as the patient base within our centers increases and matures and our costs decrease as a percent of revenue. As a result, the value of a center to our business increases over time.
•
Seasonality to our Business: Our operational and financial results, including at-risk patient growth, per-patient revenue, and medical costs, will experience some variability depending upon the time of year in which they are measured. We typically experience the largest portion of our at-risk patient growth during the first quarter, when plan enrollment selections made during the prior Annual Enrollment Period (“AEP”) from October 15th through December 7th of the prior year take effect. Our per-patient revenue will generally decline over the course of the year. As the year progresses, our per-patient revenue declines as new patients join us typically with less complete or accurate documentation (and therefore lower risk-adjustment scores) and our attrition skews towards our higher-risk (and therefore greater revenue) patients. Finally, medical costs will vary seasonally depending on a number of factors, including the weather which can be a driver of certain illnesses, such as the influenza virus. We would therefore expect to see higher levels of per-patient medical costs in the first and fourth quarters. Medical costs also depend upon the number of business days in a period as periods with fewer business days will have lower medical costs all else equal.
•
Investments in Growth: We expect to continue to focus on long-term growth through investments in our centers, care model and sales and marketing. In addition, we expect our corporate, general and administrative expenses to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future to support our growth and because of additional costs of being a public company.
Executive Summary
The following table presents key financial statistics for the Company for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
Includes stock and unit-based compensation as shown in the table in the Results of Operations section below
See “-Non-GAAP Reconciliations” below for reconciliations to the most directly comparable financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP and related disclosures
Centers
We define our centers as those primary care centers open for business and attending to patients at the end of a particular period. Our centers are leased or licensed by OSH MSO or an affiliated entity and, pursuant to the terms of certain contractual relationships between OSH MSO and our affiliated medical practices, made available for use by the medical practices in the provision of primary care services.
Total Patients
Total patients includes both at-risk Medicare Advantage patients (those patients for whom we are financially responsible for their total healthcare costs) as well as fee-for-service Medicare patients (those patients for whom our affiliated medical groups submit claims to the federal government for direct reimbursement under the Medicare program or to MA plans which we do not have value-based arrangements). We define our total at-risk patients as at-risk patients who have selected one of our affiliated medical groups as their provider of primary care medical services as of the end of a particular period. We define our total fee-for-service Medicare patients as fee-for-service Medicare patients who come to one of our centers for medical care at least once per year. A fee-for-service patient continues to be included in our patient count until the earlier to occur of (a) more than one year since the patient’s last visit, (b) the patient communicates a desire to stop receiving care from us or (c) the patient passes away.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We utilize certain financial measures that are not calculated based on GAAP. Certain of these financial measures are considered “non-GAAP” financial measures within the meaning of Item 10 of Regulation S-K promulgated by the SEC. We believe that non-GAAP financial measures provide an additional way of viewing aspects of our operations that, when viewed with the GAAP results, provide a more complete understanding of our results of operations and the factors and trends affecting our business. These non-GAAP financial measures are also used by our management to evaluate financial results and to plan and forecast future periods. However, non-GAAP financial measures should be considered as a supplement to, and not as a substitute for, or superior to, the corresponding measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. Non-GAAP financial measures used by us may differ from the non-GAAP measures used by other companies, including our competitors.
To supplement our consolidated financial statements presented on a GAAP basis, we disclose the following Non-GAAP measures: patient contribution, platform contribution and Adjusted EBITDA as these are performance measures that our management uses to assess our operating performance. Because patient contribution, platform contribution and Adjusted EBITDA facilitate internal comparisons of our historical operating performance on a more consistent basis, we use these measures for business planning purposes and in evaluating acquisition opportunities.
Patient and platform contributions are reconciled to loss from operations as the most directly comparable GAAP measure as set forth in the below tables under “Non-GAAP Reconciliations.” Adjusted EBITDA is reconciled to net loss as the most directly comparable GAAP measure as set forth in the below table under “Non-GAAP Reconciliations.”
Our definitions of patient contribution, platform contribution and Adjusted EBITDA may differ from the definition used by other companies and therefore comparability may be limited. In addition, other companies may not publish this or similar metrics. Thus, our Non-GAAP Financial Measures should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for, or in isolation from, measures prepared in accordance with GAAP, such as net loss and loss from operations.
We provide investors and other users of our financial information with reconciliations of patient contribution, platform contribution and Adjusted EBITDA to loss from operations and net loss, respectively. We encourage investors and others to review our financial information in its entirety, not to rely on any single financial measure and to view patient contribution, platform contribution and Adjusted EBITDA in conjunction with loss from operations and net loss, respectively.
Patient Contribution
We define patient contribution as capitated revenue less medical claims expense. We view patient contribution as all of the dollars available for us to manage our business, including providing care to our patients, investing in marketing to attract new patients to the Oak Street Platform and supporting the organization through our central corporate infrastructure. We expect that patient contribution will grow year-over-year in absolute dollars as our at-risk patient base continues to grow. We would also expect that our patient contribution per-patient-per-month economics on our at-risk patients will continue to improve the longer our patients are part of the Oak Street Platform as we better understand their health conditions and the patients better engage with our care model. We would expect, however, that our aggregate patient contribution per-patient-per-month economics on our at-risk patients may decrease at an aggregate level to the extent our patient growth skews our mix of patients towards patients newer to the Oak Street Platform. We would also expect to experience seasonality in patient contribution per-patient-per-month with the first quarter generally generating the greatest patient contribution per-patient-per-month, decreasing for the rest of the year. This seasonality is primarily driven by our adding new patients to the Oak Street Platform throughout the year, who generally have lower per-patient capitated revenue compared to our existing patient base.
Platform Contribution
We define platform contribution as total revenues less the sum of medical claims expense and cost of care, excluding depreciation and amortization. We believe this metric best reflects the economics of our care model as it includes all medical claims expense associated with our patients’ care as well as the costs we incur to care for our patients via the Oak Street Platform. As a center matures, we expect the platform contribution from that center to increase both in terms of absolute dollars as well as a percent of capitated revenue. This increase will be driven by improving patient contribution economics over time as well as our ability to generate operating leverage on the costs of our centers. Our aggregate platform contribution may not increase despite improving economics at our existing centers should we open new centers at a pace that skews our mix of centers towards newer centers. We would expect to experience seasonality in platform contribution due to seasonality in our patient contribution.
Adjusted EBITDA
We define adjusted EBITDA as net loss excluding other income (expense), income taxes, depreciation and amortization, transaction/offering related costs and stock and unit-based compensation. We include adjusted EBITDA in this Annual Report because it is an important measure upon which our management assesses and believes investors should assess our operating performance. We also consider adjusted EBITDA to be an important measure because it helps illustrate underlying trends in our business and our historical operating performance on a more consistent basis.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data for the periods indicated:
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the periods presented as a percentage of our total revenues for those periods. Percentages presented in the following tables may not sum due to rounding.
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Total revenues
Capitated revenue was $851,275 for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $311,366, or 58%, compared to $539,909 for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was driven primarily by a 34% increase in total patients under capitated arrangements and an increase of approximately 17% in capitated revenue rates primarily due to increased premiums from patients with a higher average level of acuity. For the quarter ended December 31, 2020, we recognized approximately $3,000 of total capitated revenue from one-time events related to settlements with health plans and $9,000 of capitated revenue that was earned throughout the year ended December 31, 2020 but was booked entirely in the quarter ended December 31, 2020.
Other patient service revenue was $31,490 for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $14,795, or 89%, compared to $16,695 for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was driven primarily by higher care coordination and care management services revenue resulting from our increased patient base and number of centers that we operate. For the quarter ended December 31, 2020, we recognized approximately $4,200 of other revenue from one-time events, of which $2,199 was from the HHS Provider Relief Funds to offset lost fee-for-service revenues as a result of the COVID pandemic. For the quarter ended December 31, 2020, we also recognized approximately $2,400 of total other patient service revenue that was earned throughout the year ended December 31, 2020 but was booked entirely in the quarter ended December 31, 2020.
Operating Expenses
Medical claims expense was $617,845 or 70% of total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $231,847, or 60%, compared to $385,998 or 69% of total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to a 34% increase in total patients under capitated arrangements and a 19% increase in cost per patient. Additionally, medical claims expense of $11,000, or 2% of total medical claims expense, for the year ended December 31, 2020 was the result of an increase in prior period incurred claims related to fiscal year 2019. For the quarter ended December 31, 2020, we recognized approximately $6,483 of medical claims expense from one-time events related to settlements with health plans and a reserve against potential incurred but not reported COVID-19 claims relating to 2020 dates of service, offset by favorable prior period development and approximately $500 that was incurred throughout the year ended December 31, 2020 but was booked entirely in the quarter ended December 31, 2020.
Cost of care, excluding depreciation and amortization was $187,510 or 21% of total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $46,657, or 33%, compared to $140,853 or 25% of total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was driven by increases in salaries and benefits of $36,759, occupancy costs of $10,521, and medical supplies of $4,383, due to increases in both the number of centers we operate and our patient base, offset by the recognition of CARES Act provider relief funds of $(5,420) to reimburse us for COVID-19 related expenses.
Sales and marketing expense was $64,211 or 7% of total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $18,022, or 39%, compared to $46,189 or 8% of total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was driven by greater advertising spend of $11,732 to drive new patients to our clinics and greater salaries and benefits of $5,704, which includes an increase in stock and unit-based compensation expense of $1,321.
Corporate, general and administrative expense was $185,495 or 21% of total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $105,903, or 133%, compared to $79,592 or 14% of total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by greater salaries and benefits of $98,126, which includes an increase in stock and unit-based compensation expense of $73,192 primarily due to the modification of vesting terms for existing equity awards that occurred post IPO and pre-IPO equity issuances; and greater occupancy, insurance, and other costs of $7,777 to support the growth of our business.
Depreciation and amortization expense was $11,225 or 1% of total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $3,377, or 43%, compared to $7,848 or 1% of total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to capital expenditures purchased to support the continued growth of our business.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest expense was $(8,712) for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $(3,061) compared to $(5,651) for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to the payoff of outstanding debt and related interest from the Hercules Loan Agreement on August 11, 2020.
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
See discussion of the comparison of the year ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 in the Company’s latest Prospectus dated February 11, 2021, section Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition Results of Operations.
Non-GAAP Reconciliations
The following table provides a reconciliation of loss from operations, the most closely comparable GAAP financial measure, to platform contribution:
The following table provides a reconciliation of loss from operations, the most closely comparable GAAP financial measure, to patient contribution.
The following table provides a reconciliation of net loss, the most closely comparable GAAP financial measure, to Adjusted EBITDA:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
To date, we have financed our operations through private placements of our equity securities, payments received from various payors, through the issuance of a note payable to Hercules Capital, Inc., and most recently, the IPO. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash,
restricted cash and cash equivalents of $419,725. Our cash and cash equivalents primarily consist of highly liquid investments in money market funds and cash. Since our inception and through December 31, 2020, we have generated significant operating losses from our operations as reflected in our accumulated deficit and negative cash flows from operations. Upon the closing of our IPO in August 2020, we received $351,229 in net proceeds, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses.
We expect to continue to incur operating losses and generate negative cash flows from operations for the foreseeable future due to the investments we intend to continue to make in expanding our operations and sales and marketing and due to additional general and administrative costs we expect to incur in connection with operating as a public company. As a result, we may require additional capital resources to execute strategic initiatives to grow our business.
We believe, however, that the proceeds from the IPO described above are sufficient to satisfy our anticipated cash requirements for the next twelve months even with the uncertainty arising from the COVID-19 pandemic. Our assessment of the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support our operations is a forward-looking statement and involves risks and uncertainties. Our actual results and our future capital requirements could vary because of, many factors, including our growth rate, the timing and extent of spending to open new centers and expand into new markets and the expansion of sales and marketing activities. We may in the future enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services and technologies, including intellectual property rights. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, or if we cannot expand our operations or otherwise capitalize on our business opportunities because we lack sufficient capital, our business, results of operations, and financial condition would be adversely affected.
Cash Flows
The following table presents a summary of our consolidated cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the periods indicated.
Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $(77,219), an increase of $(21,673) compared to net cash used in operating activities of $(55,546) for the year ended December 31, 2019. The principal contributors to the year-over-year change in the operating cash flows were as follows:
•
A net increase in cash outflows of $(1,661) related to our net loss and non-cash charges and credits, primarily due to an increase in net loss for the business, as noted above under “Results of Operations” offset by increased stock and unit-based compensation, amortization of debt issuance costs and depreciation and amortization; and
•
A net increase of $(20,012) in cash outflows related to operating assets and liabilities resulting from
o
Changes in accrued compensation and benefits due to the timing of payments of employee bonuses and $3,475 in deferred payroll tax amounts in 2020 related to the CARES Act;
o
Changes in liability for unpaid claims due to the timing of payments and growth in the number of at-risk patients;
o
Changes in accounts payable due to timing of payments to vendors; and
o
Changes in other current and long-term liabilities as well as deferred rent liabilities primarily due to new center openings and $3,475 in deferred payroll tax amounts in 2020 related to the CARES Act.
Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $(21,633), a decrease of $6,238 compared to net cash used in investing activities of $(27,871) for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to a slowdown in capital expenditures at the beginning of 2020 related to the deferral of opening dates for new centers as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $476,324 primarily due to IPO net proceeds of $351,229, $224,362 of net proceeds from the issuance of redeemable investor units and $5,943 of capital contributions from non-controlling interests, partially offset by the $19,393 payment for repurchases of units as a result of the completed tender offer in 2020 and the $85,779 in debt payments.
Cash provided by financing activities was $53,603 during the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to proceeds of long-term debt of $49,457.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The Company’s contractual obligations are made up of future payments for our operating leases and license fees to Humana for the Company’s provision of health care services in certain centers owned or leased by Humana. The Company’s contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 were as follows ($ in thousands):
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the JOBS Act. The JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. This provision allows an emerging growth company to delay the adoption of some accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to use the extended transition period under the JOBS Act until the earlier of the date we (1) are no longer an emerging growth company or (2) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Critical Accounting Policies
Management prepared the consolidated financial statements of the Company under accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The application of these principles requires the use of estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenue and expenses and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. We believe that our estimates, judgments and assumptions are reasonable based upon available information and our past experience; we evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis. Accordingly, actual results could materially differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions, impacting our reported results of operations and financial condition. We refer to accounting estimates of this type as critical accounting policies, which we further discuss below.
Please see Note 2, “Significant Accounting Policies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Part IV, Item 15) for a summary of our significant accounting policies.
Capitated Revenue
The transaction price for our capitated payor contracts is variable as it primarily includes per patient, per month (“PPPM”) fees associated with unspecified membership. PPPM fees can fluctuate throughout the contract based on the health status (acuity) of each
individual enrollee. In certain contracts, PPPM fees also include “risk adjustments” for items such as performance incentives, performance guarantees and risk shares. The capitated revenues are recognized based on the estimated PPPM earned net of projected performance incentives, performance guarantees, risk shares and rebates because we are able to reasonably estimate the ultimate PPPM payment of these contracts. We recognize revenue in the month in which eligible members are entitled to receive healthcare benefits. Subsequent changes in PPPM fees and the amount of revenue to be recognized are reflected through subsequent period adjustments to properly recognize the ultimate capitation amount. We also assess the profitability of our capitation arrangements to identify contracts where current operating results or forecasts indicate probable future losses. If anticipated future variable costs exceed anticipated future revenues, a premium deficiency reserve is recognized.
Certain third party payor contracts include a Medicare Part D payment related to pharmacy claims, which is subject to risk sharing through accepted risk corridor provisions. Under certain agreements the fund risk allocation is established whereby we, as the contracted provider, receive only a portion of the risk and the associated surplus or deficit. We estimate and recognize an adjustment to Part D capitated revenues related to these risk corridor provisions based upon pharmacy claims experience to date, as if the annual risk contract were to terminate at the end of the reporting period.
For our capitated revenue arrangements, we evaluate whether we are the principal, and report revenues on a gross basis, or an agent, and report revenues on a net basis. In this assessment, we consider if we obtain control of the specified services before they are transferred to our customers, as well as other indicators such as the party primarily responsible for fulfillment.
Medical Claims Expense
Medical claims expenses are costs for third party healthcare service providers that provide medical care to our patients for which we are contractually obligated to pay through our full-risk capitation arrangements. The estimated reserve for our liability for incurred and not reported claims is included in the liability for unpaid claims in the consolidated balance sheets. Actual claims expense will differ from the estimated liability due to factors in estimated and actual member utilization of health care services, the amount of charges and other factors. We assess our estimates with an independent actuarial expert to ensure our estimates represent the best, most reasonable estimate given the data available to us at the time the estimates are made. The actuarial models consider factors such as time from date of service to claim processing, seasonal variances in medical care consumption, health care professional contract rate changes, medical care utilization and other medical cost trends, membership volume and demographics, the introduction of new technologies and benefit plan changes.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of consideration paid over the fair value of net assets acquired through business acquisitions. Goodwill is not amortized but is tested for impairment at least annually. We test goodwill for impairment annually on October 1st or more frequently if triggering events occur or other impairment indicators arise which might impair recoverability. These events or circumstances would include a significant change in the business climate, legal factors, operating performance indicators, competition, sale, disposition of a significant portion of the business or other factors.
ASC 350, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other (“ASC 350”) allows entities to first use a qualitative approach to test goodwill for impairment. ASC 350 permits an entity to first perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not (a likelihood of greater than 50%) that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value. When the reporting units where we perform the quantitative goodwill impairment are tested, we compare the fair value of the reporting unit, which we primarily determine using an income approach based on the present value of discounted cash flows, to the respective carrying value, which includes goodwill. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, the goodwill is not considered impaired. If the carrying value is higher than the fair value, the difference would be recognized as an impairment loss. There were no goodwill impairments recorded during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Stock and Unit Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation is recognized for our stock options and restricted stock units (“RSUs”) in the income statement utilizing the grant date fair value. We estimate the fair value of our stock options using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. Assumptions for volatility, expected option life and risk free interest rate are used in the model. We estimate the fair value of our RSUs based on the fair value of the underlying common stock.
Prior to the IPO, under our unit-based incentive plan, we rewarded employees with various types of awards, including but not limited to profits interests on a service-based or performance-based schedule. These awards also contained market conditions. We used a combination of the income and market approaches to estimate the fair value of each award as of the grant date. For performance-vesting units, we recognized unit-based compensation expense when it was probable that the performance condition would be achieved. We analyzed if a performance condition was probable for each reporting period through the settlement date for awards subject to performance vesting. For service-vesting units, we recognized unit-based compensation expense over the requisite service period for each separately vesting portion of the profits interest as if the award was, in substance, multiple awards.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements (Part IV, Item 15) “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-Recent Accounting Pronouncements” for more information.