ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations (“MD&A”) is intended to help the reader understand our results of operations and financial condition. MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our financial statements and the accompanying notes.
Overview
We are a vertically integrated designer and manufacturer of specialized electronic systems and components for critical applications. We sell our products and provide related services in diversified markets, including homeland security, healthcare, defense and aerospace. We have three operating divisions: (a) Security, providing security and inspection systems and turnkey security screening solutions; (b) Healthcare, providing patient monitoring, diagnostic cardiology, and connected care systems and associated accessories; and (c) Optoelectronics and Manufacturing, providing specialized electronic components for our Security and Healthcare divisions, as well as to third parties for applications in the defense and aerospace markets, among others.
Security Division. Through our Security division, we provide security screening products and services globally, as well as turnkey security screening solutions. These products and services are used to inspect baggage, parcels, cargo, people, vehicles and other objects for weapons, explosives, drugs, radioactive and nuclear materials and other contraband. Revenues from our Security division accounted for 55% of our total consolidated revenues for fiscal 2021.
As a result of terrorist attacks and smuggling operations against the U.S. and in other locations worldwide, security and inspection products have increasingly been used at a wide range of facilities other than airports, such as border crossings, railways, seaports, cruise line terminals, freight forwarding operations, sporting venues, government and military installations and nuclear facilities. We believe that our wide-ranging product portfolio together with our ability to provide turnkey screening solutions position us to competitively pursue security and inspection opportunities as they arise throughout the world.
Currently, the U.S. federal government is discussing various options to address the U.S. federal government’s overall fiscal challenges and we cannot predict the outcome of these efforts. While we believe that national security spending will continue to be a priority, U.S. government budget deficits and the national debt have created increasing pressure to examine and reduce spending across many federal agencies. Additionally, there continues to be volatility in international markets that has impacted international security spending. We believe that the diversified product portfolio and international customer mix of our Security division position us well to withstand the impact of these uncertainties and even benefit from specific initiatives within various governments. However, depending on how future budgetary reductions may be implemented and how the U.S. federal government and our other international customers manage their fiscal challenges, including the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, we believe that these actions could have a material, adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Healthcare Division. Through our Healthcare division, we design, manufacture, market and service patient monitoring, diagnostic cardiology, and connected care systems globally for sale primarily to hospitals and medical centers. Our products monitor patients in critical, emergency and perioperative care areas of the hospital and provide information, through wired and wireless networks, to physicians and nurses who may be at the patient’s bedside, in another area of the hospital or even outside the hospital. Revenues from our Healthcare division accounted for 19% of our total consolidated revenues for fiscal 2021.
The healthcare markets in which we operate are highly competitive. We believe that our customers choose among competing products on the basis of product performance, functionality, value and service. Although there has been an increase in demand for patient monitoring products due to the COVID-19 pandemic, there is continued uncertainty regarding the U.S. federal government budget and the Affordable Care Act, either of which may impact hospital spending, third-party payer reimbursement and fees to be levied on certain medical device revenues, any of which could adversely affect our business and results of operations. In addition, hospital capital spending appears to have been impacted by strategic uncertainties surrounding the Affordable Care Act and economic pressures. We also believe that global economic uncertainty has caused some hospitals and healthcare providers to delay purchases of our products and services. During this period of uncertainty, sales of our healthcare products may be negatively impacted. A prolonged delay could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Optoelectronics and Manufacturing Division. Through our Optoelectronics and Manufacturing division, we design, manufacture and market optoelectronic devices and flex circuits and provide electronics manufacturing services globally for use in a broad range of applications, including aerospace and defense electronics, security and inspection systems, medical imaging and diagnostics, telecommunications, office automation, computer peripherals, industrial automation, and consumer products. We also provide our optoelectronic devices and electronics manufacturing services to OEM customers, and our own Security and Healthcare divisions. Revenues from external customers in our Optoelectronics and Manufacturing division accounted for 26% of our total consolidated revenues for fiscal 2021.
Consolidated Results
Discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for fiscal 2019 has been omitted from this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and is available in Item 7 of Part II, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended June 30, 2020.
Fiscal 2021 Compared with Fiscal 2020. We reported consolidated sales of $1,146.9 million in fiscal 2021, a 1.6% decrease compared to the prior year, which drove a year-over-year decrease in gross profit of $0.7 million. Our income from operations increased by 10% from the prior year to $115.4 million in fiscal 2021. This increase in profitability was driven primarily by a decrease in operating expenses due to strong cost controls.
Acquisitions. We acquired several businesses during fiscal years 2021 and 2020 as described in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements, none of which were considered material.
Trends and Uncertainties
The following is a discussion of certain trends and uncertainties that we believe have influenced, and may continue to influence, our results of operations.
Coronavirus Pandemic. The coronavirus disease 2019 (“COVID-19”) pandemic has dramatically impacted the global health and economic environment, with millions of confirmed cases, business slowdowns and shutdowns, and market volatility. The COVID-19 pandemic has caused, and is likely to continue to cause, significant economic disruptions and has impacted, and is expected to continue to impact, our operations and the operations of our suppliers, logistics providers and customers as a result of quarantines, facility closures and travel and logistics restrictions. Our ability to continue to operate without significant negative impacts will in part depend on our ability to protect our employees and our supply chain and to keep our manufacturing facilities open and operating effectively. We have endeavored to implement government and health authority recommendations to protect our employees worldwide. While we do not expect these pandemic-related impacts to be long-term, there is substantial uncertainty regarding the duration and ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Our Healthcare division has experienced increased demand for certain products as a result of COVID-19. In our Security division, during the latter part of fiscal 2020 and in fiscal 2021, receipt of certain orders was delayed, most notably with respect to our aviation and cargo products, and our revenues were adversely impacted as a result of the pandemic. During fiscal 2021, bookings accelerated, but as many customers of our Security division continue to be impacted by the pandemic, we have received and could receive further requests to delay deliveries of equipment and modify service arrangements or the scheduling of factory or site acceptance tests, which has impacted, and could further impact, timing of revenue recognition. In addition, as a result of COVID-19 related government regulations, certain of our global manufacturing facilities have had to limit operations and might have to limit operations in the future. If these business interruptions resulting from COVID-19 were to be prolonged or expanded in scope, our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows would be materially and adversely impacted. We intend to continue to actively monitor the situation and may take further actions that alter our business operations as may be required by federal, state or local authorities or that we determine are in our best interests and the best interests of our employees, suppliers and customers. For a further discussion of potential risks to our business from the COVID-19 pandemic, see Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” in this annual report on Form 10-K.
Global Economic Considerations. Our products and services are sold in numerous countries worldwide, with a large percentage of our sales generated outside the United States. Therefore, we are exposed to and impacted by global macroeconomic factors, U.S. and foreign government policies and foreign exchange fluctuations. In addition to the COVID-19 pandemic, these other global macroeconomic factors, coupled with the U.S. political climate, have created uncertainty and impacted demand for certain of our products and services. We do not know how long this uncertainty will continue. These factors could have a material negative effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition.
Global Trade. In addition to the COVID-19 pandemic, the current domestic and international political environment, including in relation to recent and further potential changes by the U.S. and other countries in policies on global trade and tariffs, have resulted in uncertainty surrounding the future state of the global economy and global trade. This uncertainty is exacerbated by sanctions imposed by the U.S. government against certain businesses and individuals in select countries. Continued or increased uncertainty regarding global trade due to these or other factors may require us to modify our current business practices and could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition.
Healthcare Considerations. As described above, our Healthcare division has experienced some increased demand for its patient monitoring products as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Increased healthcare capital purchases made in prior periods may result in fewer capital purchases in subsequent periods. The pandemic may also impact our ability to manufacture product needed to timely fill orders if we experience supply chain disruptions or need to close any manufacturing facility due to employee COVID-19 cases or local government regulations.
European Union Threat Detection Standards. The EU has implemented regulations for all airports within the EU that use explosive detection systems to have hold baggage screening systems that are compliant with the European Civil Aviation Conference (ECAC) Standard 3. The deadline for compliance with this mandate was initially set for September 2020. Given the uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 situation, the EU revised the regulations, and the date by which airports using explosive detection systems for hold baggage screening must meet Standard 3 has been changed to March 2024, with certain larger airports required to meet earlier installation dates. Our Security division’s real time tomography (RTT) product has passed the ECAC explosive detection system Standard 3 threat detection requirement.
Government Policies. Our results of operations and cash flows could be materially affected by changes in U.S. or foreign government legislative, regulatory or enforcement policies, including U.S. and foreign government policies to manage the COVID-19 pandemic, such as travel restrictions or site closures.
Changes in Costs. Our costs are subject to fluctuations, particularly due to changes in raw material, component, and logistics costs. Our manufacturing and supply chain operations, including freight and shipping activities, have been and may continue to be impacted by increased vendor costs. This increased cost environment has been exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic. Although we strive to implement, achieve, and sustain cost containment measures, including supply chain optimization and general overhead and workforce optimization, if we are unable to mitigate the impact of increased costs through pricing or other actions, there could be a negative impact on our business, results of operations, and financial condition.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”). Our preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make judgments and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. As a result, actual results may differ from such estimates. Our senior management has reviewed these critical accounting policies and related disclosures with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors. The following summarizes our critical accounting policies and significant estimates used in preparing our consolidated financial statements:
Revenue Recognition. Product Sales. We recognize revenue from sales of products upon shipment or delivery when control of the product transfers to the customer, depending on the terms of each sale, and when collection is probable. In the circumstance where terms of a product sale include subjective customer acceptance criteria, revenue is deferred until we have achieved the acceptance criteria unless the customer acceptance criteria are perfunctory or inconsequential. We generally offer customers payment terms of less than one year. In cases when payment terms extend beyond one year, we consider whether the contract has a significant financing component.
Service Revenue. Revenue from services includes installation and implementation of products and turnkey security screening services and after-market services. Generally, revenue from services is recognized over time as the services are performed. Revenues from out of warranty service maintenance contracts are recognized ratably over the respective terms of such contracts. Deferred revenue for such services arises from payments received from customers for services not yet performed.
Contract Revenue. Sales agreements with customers can be project specific, cover a period of time, and can be renewable periodically. The contracts may contain terms and conditions with respect to payment, delivery, installation, services, warranty and other rights. In certain instances, we consider an accepted customer order, governed by a master sales agreement, to be the contract with the customer when legal rights and obligations exist. Contracts with customers may include the sale of products and services, as discussed in the paragraphs above. In certain instances, contracts can contain multiple performance obligations as discussed in the paragraph below. According to the terms of a sale contract, we may receive consideration from a customer prior to transferring goods to the customer, and we record these prepayments as a contract liability. We also record deferred revenue, typically related to service contracts, when consideration is received before the services have been performed. We recognize contract liabilities and deferred revenue as net sales after all revenue recognition criteria are met.
When determining revenue recognition for contracts, we make judgments based on our understanding of the obligations in each contract. We determine whether or not customer acceptance criteria are perfunctory or inconsequential. The determination of whether or not customer acceptance terms are perfunctory or inconsequential impacts the timing of revenue recognition.
Multiple Performance Obligations. Certain agreements with customers include the sale of capital equipment involving multiple elements that may include civil works to prepare a site for the installation of equipment, manufacture and delivery of equipment, installation and integration of equipment, training of customer personnel to operate the equipment and after-market service of the equipment. We generally separate multiple elements in a contract into separate performance obligations if those elements are distinct, both individually and in the context of the contract. If multiple promises comprise a series of distinct services which are substantially the same and have the same pattern of transfer, they are combined and accounted for as a single performance obligation.
In cases where obligations in a contract are distinct and thus require separation into multiple performance obligations, revenue recognition guidance requires that contract consideration be allocated to each distinct performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price. The value allocated to each performance obligation is then recognized as revenue when the revenue recognition criteria for each distinct performance obligation has been met.
The standalone selling price for each performance obligation is an amount that depicts the amount of consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for transferring the good or service. When there is only one performance obligation associated with a contract, the entire sale value is attributed to that obligation. When a contract contains multiple performance obligations the standalone selling price is first estimated using the observable price, which is generally a list price net of applicable discount, or the price used to sell the good or service in similar circumstances. In circumstances when a selling price is not directly observable, we will estimate the standalone selling price using information available to us including our market assessment and expected cost plus margin.
The timetable for fulfilment of each of the distinct performance obligations can range from completion in a short amount of time and entirely within a single reporting period to completion over several reporting periods. The timing of revenue recognition for each performance obligation may be dependent upon several milestones, including physical delivery of equipment, completion of factory acceptance test, completion of site acceptance test, installation and connectivity of equipment, certification of training of personnel and, in the case of after-market service deliverables, the passage of time (typically evenly over the post-warranty period).
We often provide a guarantee to support our performance under multiple performance obligation contracts. In the event that customers are permitted to terminate such arrangements, the underlying contract typically requires payment for deliverables and reimbursement of costs incurred through the date of termination.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts. The allowance for doubtful accounts involves estimates based on management’s judgment, review of individual receivables and analysis of historical bad debts. We monitor collections and payments from our customers, and we maintain allowances for doubtful accounts for estimated losses resulting from the inability of our customers to make required payments. We also assess current economic trends that might impact the level of credit losses in the future. If the financial condition of our customers were to deteriorate, resulting in an impairment of their ability to make payments, additional allowances could be required.
Inventory. Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. We write down inventory for slow-moving and obsolete inventory based on historical usage, orders on hand, assessments of future demands, and market conditions, among other items. If these factors are less favorable than those projected, additional inventory write-downs may be required.
Property and Equipment. Property and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization are charged while assets are used in service and are computed using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets taking into consideration any estimated salvage value. Amortization of leasehold improvements is calculated on the straight-line method over the shorter of the useful life of the asset or the lease term. Leased capital assets are included in property and equipment. Amortization of property and equipment under capital leases is included with depreciation expense. In the event that property and equipment are idle, as a result of excess capacity or the early termination, non-renewal or reduction in scope of a turnkey screening operation, such assets are assessed for impairment on a periodic basis and when an indication that impairment may exist.
Income Taxes. Our annual tax rate is based on our income, statutory tax rates and tax planning opportunities available to us in the various jurisdictions in which we operate. Tax laws are complex and subject to different interpretations by the taxpayer and respective governmental taxing authorities. Significant judgment is required in determining our tax expense and in evaluating our tax positions including evaluating uncertainties. We review our tax positions quarterly and adjust the balances as new information becomes available.
Deferred income tax assets represent amounts available to reduce income taxes payable on taxable income in future years. Such assets arise because of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, as well as from net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. We evaluate the recoverability of these future tax deductions by assessing the adequacy of future expected taxable income from all sources, including reversal of taxable temporary differences, forecasted operating earnings and available tax planning strategies. These sources of income inherently rely on estimates. To provide insight, we use our historical experience and our short and long-range business forecasts. We believe it is more likely than not that a portion of the deferred income tax assets may expire unused and therefore have established a valuation allowance against them. Although realization is not assured for the remaining deferred income tax assets, we believe it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will be fully recoverable within the applicable statutory expiration periods. However, deferred tax assets could be reduced in the near term if our estimates of taxable income are significantly reduced or available tax planning strategies are no longer viable.
Business Combinations. In connection with the acquisition of a business, we record the fair value of purchase consideration for the tangible and intangible assets acquired, and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. Such valuations require management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Significant estimates in valuing certain intangible assets include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows from acquired customers, acquired technology, trade names, useful lives and discount rates. Our estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. During the measurement period, which is up to one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to earnings.
Impairment of Goodwill, Other Intangible Assets and Long-Lived Assets. Goodwill represents the excess purchase consideration over the estimated fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination. Goodwill is allocated to our segments based on the nature of the product line of the acquired business. The carrying value of goodwill is not amortized but is annually tested for impairment as of the end of the second quarter and more frequently if there is an indicator of impairment. We assess qualitative factors of each of our three reporting units to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, including goodwill. The assessments conducted as of December 31, 2020 indicated that it is not more likely than not that the fair values of our three reporting units are less than their carrying amounts, including goodwill. Despite the COVID-19 pandemic, there were no qualitative factors which would trigger impairment testing between measurement dates. Thus, we have determined that there is no goodwill impairment for any of our three reporting units.
We evaluate long-lived assets with finite lives for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable. Impairment is considered to exist if the total estimated future cash flows on an undiscounted basis are less than the carrying amount of the assets. If impairment does exist, we measure the impairment loss and record it based on the discounted estimate of future cash flows. In estimating future cash flows, we group assets at the lowest level for which there are identifiable cash flows that are largely independent of the cash flows from other asset groups. Our estimate of future cash flows is based upon, among other things, certain assumptions about expected future operating performance, growth rates and other factors.
Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made in the past have been reasonable and appropriate, different assumptions and estimates could materially impact our reported financial results. More conservative estimates of the anticipated future benefits from these businesses could result in impairment charges, which would decrease net income and result in lower asset values on our balance sheet.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense. We account for stock-based compensation using fair value recognition provisions. Thus, we record stock-based compensation as a charge to earnings net of the estimated impact of forfeited awards. As such, we recognize stock-based compensation cost only for those stock-based awards that are estimated to ultimately vest over their requisite vesting period, based on the vesting provisions of the individual grants.
The process of estimating the fair value of stock-based compensation awards and recognizing stock-based compensation cost over their requisite vesting period involves significant assumptions and judgments. We estimate the fair value of stock option awards on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-valuation model which requires that we make certain assumptions regarding: (i) the expected volatility in the market price of our Common Stock; (ii) dividend yield; (iii) risk-free interest rates; and (iv) the period of time employees are expected to hold the award prior to exercise. We estimate the fair value of restricted stock unit awards on the date of the grant using the market price of our Common Stock on that date. In addition, we estimate the expected impact of forfeited awards and recognize stock-based compensation cost only for those awards expected to vest. If actual forfeiture rates differ materially from our estimates, stock-based compensation expense could differ significantly from the amounts we have recorded in the current period. We periodically review actual forfeiture experience and revise our estimates, as necessary. We recognize the cumulative effect of changes in the estimated forfeiture rate as compensation cost in earnings in the period of the revision. As a result, if we revise our assumptions and estimates, our stock-based compensation expense could change materially in the future. Certain restricted stock units vest based upon the achievement of pre-established performance criteria. We estimate the fair value of performance-based awards at the date of grant based upon the probability that the specified performance criteria will be met, adjusted for estimated forfeitures. Each quarter we update our assessment of the probability that the specified performance criteria will be achieved and adjust our estimate of the fair value of the performance-based awards if necessary. We amortize the fair values of performance-based awards over the requisite service period adjusted for estimated forfeitures for each separately vesting tranche of the award. See Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements for a further discussion of stock-based compensation.
Legal and Other Contingencies. We are subject to various claims and legal proceedings. We review the status of each significant legal dispute to which we are a party and assess our potential financial exposure, if any. If the potential financial exposure from any claim or legal proceeding is considered probable and the amount can be reasonably estimated, we record a liability and an expense for the estimated loss. Significant judgment is required in both the determination of probability and the determination as to whether an exposure is reasonably estimable. Because of uncertainties related to these matters, accruals are based only on the best information available at the time. As additional information becomes available, we reassess the potential liability related to our pending claims and litigation and revise our estimates accordingly. Such revisions in the estimates of the potential liabilities could have a material impact on our results of operations and financial position.
Net Revenues
The table below and the discussion that follows are based upon the way we analyze our business. See Note 14 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information about business segments.
Fiscal 2021 Compared with Fiscal 2020. Revenues for the Security division during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 continued to be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic most notably in our aviation and cargo businesses, as we experienced delays in the timing of delivery and installation of equipment and related services, as well as the timing of receipt of new orders. Our product revenues decreased by approximately $66 million. We also experienced a decrease in revenues of $60 million associated with the expiration of a contract in Mexico in June 2020. Excluding revenues attributable to the Mexico contract, our service revenues increased approximately $18 million.
Revenues for the Healthcare division during the year ended June 30, 2021 increased year-over-year due to an increase in sales of $26 million attributable to patient monitoring systems, cardiology equipment, supplies and accessories and related service revenue. Some of this increase was due to increased demand for our patient monitoring products as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Revenues for the Optoelectronics and Manufacturing division during the year ended June 30, 2021 increased year-over year as a result of an increase in revenue in our contract manufacturing business of approximately $51 million and an increase in sales of approximately $11 million in our optoelectronics business, which includes a $7 million increase in revenues from a small business acquired in February 2020.
Gross Profit
Fiscal 2021 Compared with Fiscal 2020. Gross profit is impacted by sales volume, productivity, and changes in overall manufacturing-related costs, such as raw materials and component costs, warranty expense, provision for inventory, freight, and logistics. Our cost of goods sold decreased year-over-year primarily as a result of the change in revenues. While certain raw material and component costs increased, these increases were mitigated by operational efficiencies. Gross profit as a percentage of net revenues during the year ended June 30, 2021 increased on a year-over-year basis due to (i) an improved gross margin in our Healthcare division (which has the highest gross margin among our divisions) as a result of the benefit of economies of scale associated with increased sales, combined with operating efficiencies, (ii) increase in Healthcare revenue as a percentage of total net revenues, and (iii) an increase in gross margin in our Security division. Our gross margin decreased within the Optoelectronics and Manufacturing division due to a less favorable sales mix.
Operating Expenses
Selling, General and Administrative
Our significant selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses include employee compensation, sales commissions, travel, professional services, marketing expenses, and depreciation and amortization expense.
Fiscal 2021 Compared with Fiscal 2020. SG&A expense for the year ended June 30, 2021 decreased as compared to the same prior-year period due to reduced travel and entertainment and marketing expenses of $6 million and $3 million, respectively, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and decreased third-party sales commissions of $8 million. These decreases were offset by an increase in the provision for losses on accounts receivable of $5 million.
Research and Development
Our Security and Healthcare divisions have historically invested substantial amounts in research and development (“R&D”). We intend to continue this trend in future years, although specific programs may or may not continue to be funded and funding levels may fluctuate. R&D expenses included research related to new product development and product enhancement expenditures.
Fiscal 2021 Compared with Fiscal 2020. The decrease in R&D expense during the year ended June 30, 2021 from the same prior-year period reflected a decrease in materials and supplies consumed in research activities of $2 million and reduced travel expenses of $1 million due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Impairment, Restructuring and Other Charges
Impairment, restructuring and other charges generally consist of charges relating to reductions in our workforce, facilities consolidation, impairment of assets, costs related to acquisition activity, legal charges and other non-recurring charges. We have undertaken certain restructuring activities in an effort to align our global capacity and infrastructure with demand by our customers and fully integrate acquisitions, thereby improving our operational efficiency. Our efforts have helped enhance our ability to improve operating margins, retain and expand existing relationships with customers and attract new business. We may utilize similar measures in the future to realign our operations to further increase our operating efficiencies. The effect of these efforts may materially affect our future operating results.
Fiscal 2021 Compared with Fiscal 2020. During the year ended June 30, 2021, we incurred $7.2 million for exit activities associated with an expired turnkey contract in Mexico. Such exit costs include $2.8 million for employee terminations, $1.1 million for facility closure and other exit costs, direct transaction costs of $2.7 million, and $0.6 million for right-of-use asset impairment for a leased facility. We also incurred costs of $2.1 million for other employee terminations and facility closure costs for operational efficiency activities, $0.3 million for acquisition-related activities, and $0.5 million for certain legal charges, net of insurance reimbursements. Impairment, restructuring and other charges in fiscal 2020 included (i) $5.5 million for impairment of assets associated with the write-off of intangible and fixed assets due to abandonment of a non-core product line in our Healthcare division and a strategic shift in the intended use of an intangible asset in the Security division, (ii) $4.2 million for employee termination and facility closure costs and (iii) $0.4 million in acquisition-related costs. These charges in fiscal 2020 were partially offset by a net $3.6 million recovery of certain legal costs as a result of insurance reimbursements.
Interest and Other Expense, Net
Fiscal 2021 Compared with Fiscal 2020. For the year ended June 30, 2021, interest and other expense, net was $16.7 million as compared to $18.8 million in the comparable prior-year period. This decrease was driven by lower average levels of borrowing under our revolving credit facility as well as lower average interest rates during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the same period in the prior year. Interest expense included $9.0 million and $8.8 million of non-cash interest expense during the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, mainly related to the Notes (see Note 8 to the condensed consolidated financial statements for further discussion).
Provision for Income Taxes
The effective tax rate for a particular period varies depending on a number of factors including (i) the mix of income earned in various tax jurisdictions, each of which applies a unique range of income tax rates and income tax credits, (ii) changes in previously established valuation allowances for deferred tax assets (changes are based upon our current analysis of the likelihood that these deferred tax assets will be realized), (iii) the level of non-deductible expenses, (iv) certain tax elections, (v) tax holidays granted to certain of our international subsidiaries, (vi) return to provision adjustments and (vii) changes in tax legislation.
Fiscal 2021 Compared with Fiscal 2020. For the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, we recognized a provision for income taxes of $24.6 million and $10.9 million, respectively. The effective tax rate for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 was 24.9% and 12.6%, respectively. During the year ended June 30, 2021, we recognized a net discrete tax benefit of $1.2 million for equity-based compensation under ASU 2016-09. During the year ended June 30, 2020, we recognized a discrete tax benefit of $12.6 million, comprised of $6.8 million for equity-based compensation under ASU 2016-09 and $5.8 million for a return to provision true-up adjustment.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of liquidity are our cash and cash equivalents, cash generated from operations and our credit facility. Cash and cash equivalents totaled $80.6 million at June 30, 2021, an increase of $4.5 million, or 5.9%, from $76.1 million at June 30, 2020. During fiscal 2021, we generated $139.1 million of cash flow from operations. These proceeds were used for the following: $15.8 million invested in capital expenditures, $3.0 million for the acquisition of a business, $59.3 million for net repayment of bank borrowings and long-term debt and $49.0 million for share repurchases and taxes paid related to the net share settlement of equity awards. If we continue to net settle equity awards, we will use additional cash to pay our tax withholding obligations in connection with such settlements. We currently anticipate that our available funds, credit facilities and cash flow from operations will be sufficient to meet our operational cash needs for the next 12 months and foreseeable future. In addition, without repatriating earnings from non-U.S. subsidiaries, we anticipate that cash generated from operations will be able to satisfy our obligations in the United States.
We have a five-year revolving credit facility that allows us to borrow up to $535 million. As of June 30, 2021, there were no outstanding borrowings under our revolving credit facility and letters-of-credit outstanding totaled $63.2 million. See Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion.
Cash Provided by Operating Activities. Cash flows from operating activities can fluctuate significantly from period to period, as net income, adjusted for non-cash items, and working capital fluctuations impact cash flows. During fiscal 2021, we generated cash from operations of $139.1 million compared to $129.2 million in the prior fiscal year. This increase was driven by change in net working capital.
Cash Used in Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities was $34.7 million during fiscal 2021 as compared to $42.7 million used during the prior year. During fiscal 2021, we used cash of $3.0 million for the acquisition of businesses as compared to $8.9 million in the prior fiscal year. Net capital expenditures in fiscal 2021 were $15.8 million compared to $20.4 million in the prior year.
Cash Used in Financing Activities. Net cash used in financing activities was $103.9 million during fiscal 2021, compared to $104.7 million during the prior year. The changes in cash flows from financing activities primarily relate to (i) net repayments of borrowings on bank lines of credit and debt totaling $59.3 million in fiscal 2021 compared to $29.2 million in fiscal 2020; and (ii) $49.1 million used for share repurchases and taxes paid related to the net share settlement of equity awards in fiscal 2021 compared to $76.3 million in the prior year.
Borrowings
Outstanding lines of credit and current and long-term debt totaled $277.3 million at June 30, 2021, a decrease of $49.7 million from $327.0 million at June 30, 2020. As of June 30, 2021, we were in compliance with all financial covenants under our various borrowing agreements. See Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion.
We anticipate that cash generated from our operations, in addition to existing cash borrowing arrangements and future access to capital markets should be sufficient to meet our cash requirements for at least the next 12 months. However, our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including future business acquisitions, capital expenditures, litigation, stock repurchases and levels of research and development spending, among other factors. The adequacy of available funds will depend on many factors, including the success of our businesses in generating cash, continued compliance with financial covenants contained in our credit facility and the health of capital markets in general, among other factors.
Cash Held by Foreign Subsidiaries
Our cash and cash equivalents totaled $80.6 million at June 30, 2021. Of this amount, approximately 71% was held by our foreign subsidiaries and subject to repatriation tax considerations. These foreign funds were held primarily by our subsidiaries in the United Kingdom, India, Malaysia, Singapore, Canada, and Australia, and to a lesser extent in Albania and Germany among others. We intend to permanently reinvest certain earnings from foreign operations, and we currently do not anticipate that we will need this cash in foreign countries to fund our U.S. operations. In the event we repatriate cash from certain foreign operations and if taxes have not previously been withheld on the related earnings, we would provide for withholding taxes at the time we change our intention with regard to the reinvestment of those earnings.
Stock Repurchase Program
In April 2020, the Board of Directors authorized a new share repurchase program of up to 1,000,000 shares, and in August 2020, the Board of Directors increased the maximum number of shares to 3,000,000 shares authorized under the stock repurchase program. This program does not expire unless our Board of Directors acts to terminate the program. During fiscal 2021, we repurchased 452,005 shares. As of June 30, 2021, 2,547,995 shares remained available for repurchase.
The timing and actual numbers of shares purchased depends on a variety of factors, including stock price, general business and market conditions and other investment opportunities. Repurchases may be made from time to time under the program through open-market purchases or privately-negotiated transactions at our discretion. Upon repurchase, the shares are restored to the status of authorized but unissued shares, and we record them as a reduction in the number of shares of Common Stock issued and outstanding in our consolidated financial statements.
Dividends
We have not paid any cash dividends since the consummation of our initial public offering in 1997.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of June 30, 2021, we had no significant off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303 of Regulation S-K, other than those previously disclosed.
New Accounting Pronouncements
For information with respect to new accounting pronouncements and the impact of these pronouncements on our consolidated financial statements, see Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements.