ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and operating results together with our financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements based upon current beliefs, plans and expectations that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” or in other parts of this Annual Report.
Overview
OSS designs, manufactures and sells specialized high-performance edge computing (HPC) systems to customers world-wide. We differentiate ourselves from other suppliers of HPC solutions by utilizing our high-performance expertise in custom systems design and PCIe expansion to build systems with a greater quantity of PCIe add-in slots, GPU-based compute cards and/or flash cards. These applications require ultra-fast processing power and the ability to quickly access and store ever-growing data sets. Systems are built using the latest GPU (graphical processing unit) and solid-state flash (memory) technologies.
Our systems offer industry leading capabilities that occupy less physical space and power consumption. We are a niche provider of HPC custom servers, compute accelerators, and flash storage arrays. We deliver this technology to customers through sale of equipment and software to customers. Concept Development Inc., (“CDI”) which was acquired on August 31, 2018, specializes in the design and manufacture of specialized high-performance in-flight entertainment systems for commercial aircraft. CDI’s capabilities include electrical, mechanical and software design as well as extensive experience in test and certifications required for airborne systems. Bressner Technology GmbH, (Bressner) which was acquired on October 31, 2018, provides standard and customized servers, panel PCs, and PCIe expansion systems. Bressner provides manufacturing, test, sales and marketing services for customers throughout Europe.
Recent Developments
CDI has been fully integrated into the core operations of OSS as of June 1, 2020.
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of Coronavirus, or COVID-19, a global pandemic and the United States federal government declared it a national emergency. COVID-19 continues to impact worldwide economic activity. A public health pandemic, including COVID-19, poses the risk that we or our employees, contractors, customers, suppliers, and other partners may be prevented from conducting business activities for an indefinite period of time, including due to shutdowns that may be requested or mandated by governmental authorities.
More generally, COVID-19 raises the possibility of an extended global economic downturn, which could affect demand for our products and services and impact our results and financial condition even after the pandemic is contained and remediation/restriction measures are lifted. For example, we may be unable to collect receivables from customers that are significantly impacted by COVID-19. Also, a decrease in orders in a given period could negatively affect our revenues in future periods. COVID-19 may also have the effect of heightening many of the other risks described in the “Risk Factors” section of our Annual Report on Form 10-K, including risks associated with our customers and supply chain. We will continue to evaluate the nature and extent of the impact of COVID-19 to our business.
At present, it is clear the global economy has been negatively impacted by COVID-19, and demand for some of our products and services have been reduced due to uncertainty and the economic impact of COVID-19. For example, customers in certain of the industries most impacted by COVID-19, have requested, and we expect will continue to request, relief to existing contracts or payment obligations, and the impact of those is uncertain. Furthermore, some customers are delaying payments owed to the Company while they address immediate financial crises in their operations due to COVID-19. In particular, in the media and entertainment industry, demand for the use of outdoor media equipment has been impacted due to restrictions on public gatherings. Until such restrictions improve, we expect that demand for certain of our clients’ products and services will be limited, and may not return to prior levels, and thus, may impact our financial results and operations.
Specifically, our business has also begun to be negatively affected by a range of external factors related to COVID-19 that are not within our control. For example, numerous measures have been implemented by governmental authorities across the globe to contain the virus, including travel bans and restrictions, quarantines, shelter-in-place orders, restrictions and limitations of public gatherings, and business limitations and shutdowns. Many of our customers’ businesses have been severely impacted by these measures and some have been required to reduce employee headcount as a result. If a significant
number of our customers are unable to continue as a going concern, this would have an adverse impact on our business and financial condition. In addition, many of our customers are working remotely, which may delay the timing of new business and implementations of our services. If COVID-19 continues to have a substantial impact on our partners, customers, or suppliers, our results of operations and overall financial performance will be harmed.
Though management has been proactively managing through the current known impacts, if the situation further deteriorates or the outbreak results in further restriction on both supply and demand factors, our cash flows, financial position and operating results for 2021 and beyond will be negatively impacted. Neither the length of time nor the magnitude of the negative impacts can be presently determined.
The longer the COVID-19 pandemic persists, the greater the potential for significant adverse impact to our business operations. Quarantines, travel restrictions, prohibitions on non-essential gatherings, shelter-in-place orders and other similar directives and policies intended to reduce the spread of the disease, may reduce our productivity and that of the third parties on which we rely and may disrupt and delay many aspects of our business.
The Company is complying with state mandated requirements for safety in the workplace to ensure the health, safety and welling-being of our employees. These measures included personal protective equipment, social distancing, cleanliness of the facilities and daily monitoring of the health of employees in our facilities. We have not developed a specific and comprehensive contingency plan designed to address the challenges and risks presented by the COVID-19 pandemic and, even if and when we do develop such a plan, there can be no assurance that such plan will be effective in mitigating the potential adverse effects on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
On February 15, 2020, Steve Cooper was terminated as President and CEO of One Stop Systems, Inc., and was replaced by David Raun who is now the president and CEO of the Company.
On April 7, 2020, the Company implemented a cost reduction plan which included the termination of certain employees and elimination of certain costs. Savings from this effort are estimated to be approximately $2.5 million on an annual basis.
On April 24, 2020, the Company completed a $6.0 million debt financing on a non-interest bearing convertible note with a 10% original issue discount. The first tranche of $3.0 million was received on April 27, 2020, with an additional $3.0 million available seven months from the date of closing at the option of the Company conditioned upon meeting certain requirements which have been satisfied. The note is repayable in twenty-two installments beginning three months after closing in cash or shares of the Company’s common stock.
On March 1, 2021, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with an accredited investor, pursuant to which the Company agreed to issue and sell, in a registered direct offering, 1,497,006 shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, to the purchaser at an offering price of $6.68 per share. The registered offering was conducted pursuant to the Company’s effective shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (Registration No. 333-231513), which was initially filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on May 15, 2019, and was declared effective on June 19, 2019. As compensation for their services, the Company paid to the placement agents a fee equal to 7% of the gross proceeds received by the Company as a result of the registered offering, and reimbursed the placement agents for certain expenses incurred in connection with such offering. The Company estimates that the net proceeds from the registered offering will be approximately $9.25 million after deducting certain fees due to the placement agents’ and the Company’s estimated transaction expenses. The net proceeds received by the Company will be used for general corporate and working capital purposes.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
The Company recognizes revenue under accounting standard ASC 606. Revenue is primarily generated from the sale of computer hardware and engineering services and to some extent the sale of software, and sales of software maintenance and support contracts. The Company’s performance obligations are satisfied over time as work is performed or at a point in time. The majority of the Company’s revenue is recognized at a point in time when products ship and control is transferred to the customer. The Company determines revenue recognition through the following steps: (1) identification of the contract with a customer; (2) identification of the performance obligations in the contract; (3) determination of the transaction price; (4) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (5) recognition of revenue when, or as, a performance obligation is satisfied.
Cost of revenue
Cost of revenue primarily consists of costs of materials, costs paid to third-party contract manufacturers (which may include the costs of components), and personnel costs associated with manufacturing and support operations. Personnel costs consist of wages, bonuses, benefits, stock-based compensation expenses. Cost of revenue also includes freight, allocated overhead costs and inventory write-offs and changes to our inventory and warranty reserves. Allocated overhead costs consist of certain facilities and utility costs. We expect cost of revenue to increase in absolute dollars with an improvement in margin, as product revenue increases.
Operating expenses
Our operating expenses consist of general and administrative, sales and marketing and research and development expenses. Salaries and personnel-related costs, benefits, and stock-based compensation expense, are the most significant components of each category of operating expenses. Operating expenses also include allocated overhead costs for facilities and utility costs.
General and Administrative - General and administrative expense consists primarily of employee compensation and related expenses for administrative functions including finance, legal, human resources and fees for third-party professional services, as well as allocated overhead. We expect our general and administrative expense to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to invest in growing the business.
Marketing and Sales - Marketing and Sales expense consists primarily of employee compensation and related expenses, sales commissions, marketing programs, travel and entertainment expenses as well as allocated overhead. Marketing programs consist of advertising, tradeshows, events, corporate communications and brand-building activities. We expect marketing and sales expenses to increase in absolute dollars as we expand our sales force, increase marketing resources, and further develop sales channels.
Research and Development - Research and development expense consists primarily of employee compensation and related expenses, prototype expenses, depreciation associated with assets acquired for research and development, third-party engineering and contractor support costs, as well as allocated overhead. We expect our research and development expenses to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to invest in new and existing products.
Other Income (Expense), net
Other income consists of miscellaneous income and income received for activities outside of our core business. Other expense includes expenses for activities outside of our core business.
Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes consists of estimated income taxes due to the United States and German governments as well as state tax authorities in jurisdictions in which we conduct business, along with the change in our deferred income tax assets and liabilities.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 respectively, presented in dollars and as a percentage of net revenue.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2020, total revenue decreased $6,412,631 or 11.0%, as compared to the same period in 2019. OSS saw a decrease in revenue of $6,405,389 or 16.0 percentage points as compared to the prior year. The majority of this decrease is attributable to a reduction in shipments of $10,978,121 to our two largest customers of which $8,057,289 is attributable to our media and entertainment customer which saw a significant reduction in business resulting from COVID -19 restrictions. Reductions in revenue were offset by new business of which $6,621,676 was from four customers for which the incremental revenue was more than one million dollars from each customer. There was also a small decrease of $7,242 or a decrease of 0.04 percentage points attributable to Bressner.
Cost of revenue and gross profit
Cost of revenue decreased by $3,444,982 or 8.9%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year 2019. The decrease in cost of revenue was mainly attributable to our reduced sales and changes in product mix. OSS saw a decrease in cost of revenue of $3,681,025 or 9.5 percentage points as compared to the prior year. Bressner’s cost of revenue increased $236,043 or 0.6 percentage points.
The overall gross margin percentage decreased from 33.3% for the year ended December 31, 2019 to 31.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of 1.6 percentage points. OSS’ gross margin percentage for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 37.3%, a decrease of 0.9 percentage points as compared to the prior year of 38.2% attributable to changes in product mix. Bressner contributed gross margin at a rate of 21.2% as compared to the prior year 2019 of 22.5%, a decrease of 1.3 percentage points which was attributable to a change in product mix.
Operating expenses
General and administrative expense
General and administrative expense decreased $83,214 or 1.0%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year 2019. OSS experienced an increase of $10,434 which was offset by a decrease at Bressner of $93,648. The decrease in general and administrative expense was primarily attributable to cost containment efforts implemented in April 2020. Much of the current year benefit derived from this cost containment effort was offset by increased costs associated with the termination benefits for employees released in April 2020 and the termination of our previous president and CEO. Overall, total general and administrative expense increased as a percentage of revenue to 16.2% during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 14.6% during the same period in 2019, which is attributable to the lower revenue in 2020.
Impairment of goodwill
During the prior year 2019, the Company recognized a write-down of $1,697,394 attributable to impairment of goodwill of CDI due to a short-fall in the actual overall financial performance of CDI as compared to plan, a recurring need for working capital, and a decrease in the overall Company’s stock price. There was no such impairment charge in 2020.
Marketing and selling expense
Marketing and selling expense decreased $1,017,984 or 19.8% during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year 2019. OSS had a decrease of $1,025,309 or 100.7% of the total decrease attributable to reductions in travel, advertising and tradeshows associated with constraints imposed by COVID-19 restrictions. Bressner saw a modest increase of $7,325 or 0.7%. Overall, total marketing and selling expense decreased as a percentage of revenue to 7.9% during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 8.8% during the same period in 2019.
Research and development expense
Research and development expense decreased $523,795 or 10.8% during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year. OSS saw a decrease of $534,461 or 102% of the decrease. The decrease was largely driven by cost reduction efforts implemented in quarter two of the current year. This reduction was offset by an increase of $10,666 or 0.2% at Bressner. Overall, there was no change to the total research and development expense as a percentage of revenue as compared to the prior year with both years at 8.3% of revenue.
Interest income
Interest income increased $267,266 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year 2019. The increase is attributable to increased finance charges on outstanding accounts receivable balances from our largest customer in the media and entertainment industry.
Interest expense
Interest expense increased $385,214 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to same period in 2019. On April 24, 2020, the Company borrowed $3,000,000 through a senior secured convertible debt offering issued with a 10% original issue discount and incurred legal costs associated with this debt offering. The interest and the professional fees incurred on securing the debt are being amortized on an effective interest rate basis to interest expense.
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense), for the year ended December 31, 2020 resulted in net expenses of $53,612 as compared to net other income of $130,381 in the prior year 2019, for a net change of $183,993. The majority of the decrease is a reduction in foreign currency transactions gains and losses.
(Benefit) provision for income taxes
We have recorded an income tax (benefit) provision of $(603,744) and $237,252, respectively, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The effective tax rate for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 differs from the statutory rate mainly due to permanent non-deductible goodwill amortization for Bressner Technology GmbH, income from the Global Intangible Low-Taxed Income inclusion for 2019 only, deductions related to expenses of OSS stock options, as
well as projecting federal, foreign and state tax liabilities for the year. The effective tax rate for 2020 is 98.9% as compared to 35.7% in the prior year.
Liquidity and capital resources
Given our recent operating losses, the Company’s primary sources of liquidity have been provided by (i) the Company’s February 2018 initial public offering (net proceeds were approximately $16,100,000); (ii) March 2019 notes payable from members of the Board of Directors and others of $1,500,000; (iii) the July 2019 sale of 1,554,546 shares of the Company’s common stock for net cash proceeds of $2,488,148; (iv) the April 24, 2020 sale of $3,000,000 of Senior Secured Convertible Promissory Notes issued at a 10% original issue discount; (v) receipt of approximately $1,500,000 on April 28, 2020 of government loan proceeds under the Paycheck Protection Program; and (vi) a receipt of approximately $9,250,000 on March 3, 2021 in a registered direct offering.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company’s cash and cash equivalents were $6,316,921 and working capital was $16,266,293. Cash and cash equivalents held by Bressner totaled $1,062,818 (USD) at December 31, 2020, and Bressner’s debt covenants do not permit the use of those funds by its parent company. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company experienced an operating loss of $424,281, with cash used in operating activities of $250,173. During the year, our largest customer, engaged in the media and entertainment industry, was having significant financial hardships attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic and as a result had been slow in paying their outstanding account receivables. The Company formulated a plan whereby extended payment terms were made available, and our customer is now current, having paid down their past-due outstanding account receivables and are presently honoring their credit terms.
Our sources of liquidity and cash flows are used to fund ongoing operations, research and development projects for new products and technologies, and provide ongoing support services for our customers. Over the next two fiscal years, we anticipate that we will use our liquidity and cash flows from our operations to fund our growth. In addition, as part of our business strategy, we occasionally evaluate potential acquisitions of businesses and products and technologies. Accordingly, a portion of our available cash may be used at any time for the acquisition of complementary products or businesses. Such potential transactions may require substantial capital resources, which may require us to seek additional debt or equity financing. We cannot assure you that we will be able to successfully identify suitable acquisition candidates, complete acquisitions, integrate acquired businesses into our current operations, or expand into new markets. Furthermore, we cannot provide assurances that additional financing will be available to us in any required time frame and on commercially reasonable terms, if at all.
The Company’s revenue growth during the year has slowed due to the effects of COVID-19. However, resulting from a reduction in force and strict cost containment, the Company has been able to mitigate the effects, to some degree, of the reduced revenue. For a further description and risk factors associated with COVID-19, please see Part 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Management’s plans are to continue its efforts towards responding to the changing economic landscape attributable to COVID-19, to restructure the Company with the primary objectives of reducing costs, conserving cash, strengthening margins, and improving company-wide execution. Specific actions already implemented by management include a reduction in force, a limited freeze on hiring, reduced work week, minimizing overtime, travel and entertainment, and contractor costs. On April 7, 2020, the Company implemented a cost reduction plan which included the termination of certain employees and elimination of certain costs.
While management expects these actions to result in prospective cost reductions, management is also committed to securing debt and/or equity financing to ensure that liquidity will be sufficient to meet the Company’s cash requirements through at least a period of the next twelve months. Management believes potential sources of liquidity include at least the following:
▪
In May 2019, the Company filed a Form S-3 prospectus with the Securities and Exchange Commission which became effective on June 19, 2019, and allows the Company to offer up to $100,000,000 aggregate dollar amount of shares of its common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants to purchase its common stock, preferred stock or debt securities, subscription rights to purchase its common stock, preferred stock or debt securities and\or units consisting of some or all of these securities, in any combination, together or separately, in one or more offerings, in amounts, at prices and on the terms that the Company will determine at the time of the offering and which will be set forth in a prospectus supplement and any related free writing prospectus.
▪
On April 24, 2020, the Company completed a $6.0 million debt financing on a non-interest bearing convertible note with a 10% original issue discount. The first tranche of $3.0 million was received on April 27, 2020, with an additional $3.0 million available seven months from the date of closing at the option of the Company conditioned upon meeting certain requirements which have been satisfied. The note is repayable in twenty-two installments beginning three months after closing in cash or shares of the Company’s common stock.
▪
On March 1, 2021, the Company entered into a definitive agreement with an institutional investor for the purchase and sale of 1,497,006 shares of common stock at a purchase price of $6.68 in a registered direct offering priced At-The-Market under Nasdaq rules. Total estimated proceeds are $9,250,000 after commissions and offering costs.
As a result of management’s cost reduction plans, the Company’s potential sources of liquidity and management’s most recent cash flow forecasts, management believes that the Company has sufficient liquidity to satisfy its anticipated working capital requirements for its ongoing operations and obligations for at least the next twelve months. However, there can be no assurance that management’s cost reduction efforts will be effective or the forecasted cash flows will be achieved. Furthermore, the Company shall continue to evaluate its capital expenditure needs based upon factors including but not limited to the Company’s sales from operations, growth rate, the timing and extent of spending to support development efforts, the expansion of the Company’s sales and marketing, the timing of new product introductions, and the continuing market acceptance of the Company’s products and services. If cash generated from operations is insufficient to satisfy the Company’s capital requirements, the Company may open a revolving line of credit with a bank, or it may have to sell additional equity or debt securities or obtain expanded credit facilities to fund its operating expenses, pay its obligations, diversify its geographical reach, and grow the Company. In the event such financing is needed in the future, there can be no assurance that such financing will be available to the Company, or, if available, that it will be in amounts and on terms acceptable to the Company. If the Company cannot raise additional funds when it needs or wants them, the Company’s operations and prospects could be negatively affected. However, if cash flows from operations become insufficient to continue operations at the current level, and if no additional financing were obtained, then management would restructure the Company in a way to preserve its business while maintaining expenses within operating cash flows.
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we used $250,173 in cash from operating activities, a decrease of $2,625,041 when compared to the cash generated in operating activities of $2,374,868 during the year 2019. This use of operating cash and the change from the prior year is mostly attributable to a decrease in revenue attributable to a COVID-19 economic environment. The economic effect from COVID-19 directly affected our revenue with our largest customer and caused an increase in the use of working capital in the financing of inventory due to longer lead-times.
The decrease in cash generated by operating activities was primarily a result of an increase in working capital requirements of $1,936,267, an improvement in net loss of $893,793, offset by a decrease in non-cash adjustments of $1,582,567. Non-cash adjustments include increases of $1,033,653 loss on disposal of property and equipment, the provision for bad debt, depreciation, inventory reserves, amortization of debt discount and stock-based compensation expense. These increases were offset by $2,616,218 in decreases in non-cash adjustments attributable to deferred taxes, impairment of goodwill, warranty reserves, amortization of deferred gain, and amortization.
Working capital requirements increase overall by $1,936,267. The source of working capital of $5,451,890 was attributable to reductions in accounts receivable for the comparable period. This source was offset by uses of working capital of $7,388,157 due to increased inventory levels, and prepaid expense and other current assets and reductions in accounts payable and accrued expenses and other liabilities.
Our ability to generate cash from operations in future periods will depend in large part on our profitability, the rate and timing of collections of our accounts receivable, our inventory turns and our ability to manage other areas of working capital including accounts payable.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company used cash of $818,794 in investing activities as compared to $2,385,177 used during the prior year 2019, a decrease of $1,566,383. The main projects for the year 2020, were the continued enhancement of our ERP system, the purchase of test equipment for the engineering department, and demo equipment for the sales and marketing department. The expenditures in the prior year 2019 are primarily due to tenant improvements to our headquarter facility and software costs and external consulting costs associated with the implementation of our ERP system for which phase one of the project was substantially completed in 2020. We currently do not anticipate any other significant purchases of equipment or expansion of our ERP system beyond completion of phase II of the project, which is the integration of certain sales functions.
Financing Activities
Given the economic and financial hardships operating in a COVID-19 environment, the Company believed it to be imperative to secure additional financial resources to ensure financial stability during trying economic times. Therefore, during the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company obtained liquidity through two new debt instruments. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated $2,109,235 from financing activities as compared to the cash generated of $2,922,101 during the year 2019. During 2020, the Company entered into a $3.0 million, two-year senior secured convertible debt offering with a 10% original issue discount and received net proceeds of $2,383,726 after payment of professional fees. The Company also received proceeds from a federal Paycheck Protection Program of $1,499,360, and proceeds of $181,892 from the exercise of warrants and stock options.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company raised $1,500,000 from individuals and related parties through the issuance of notes payable that bear interest at an annual rate of 9.5% and are repaid through 24 months monthly installments. Additionally, during the third quarter of the year, the Company sold 1,554,832 shares of common stock for total gross proceeds of $2,700,714, which after commissions to brokers and other expenses resulted in net proceeds to the Company of $2,488,148. The Company also received proceeds of $47,334 from the exercise of warrants and stock options.
Contractual obligations and commitments
The following table sets forth our non-cancellable contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020.
We have made certain indemnities, under which the Company may be required to make payments to an indemnified party, in relation to certain transactions. We indemnify our directors, officers, employees and agents to the maximum extent permitted under the laws of the State of Delaware. In connection with our facilities leases, we indemnify our lessors for certain claims arising from the use of our facilities. The duration of the indemnities varies, and in many cases is indefinite. These indemnities do not provide for any limitation of the maximum potential future payments we could be obligated to make. Historically, we have not been obligated to make any payments for these obligations and no liabilities have been recorded for these indemnities.
Known trends or uncertainties
Although we have not seen any significant reduction in revenues to date due to consolidations, we have seen some consolidation in our industry during economic downturns. These consolidations have not had a negative effect on our total sales; however, should consolidations and downsizing in the industry continue to occur, those events could adversely impact our revenues and earnings going forward.
As discussed in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the world has been affected due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Until the pandemic has passed, there remains uncertainty as to the effect of COVID-19 on our business in both the short and long-term.
We believe that the need for improved productivity in the research and development activities directed toward developing new products and/or software will continue to result in increasing adoption of high-performance computers and interconnect technologies such as those we produce. New product and/or software developments in the specialized compute business segment could result in increased revenues and earnings if they are accepted by our markets; however, there can be no assurances that new products and/or software will result in significant improvements to revenues or earnings. For competitive reasons, we do not disclose all of our new product development activities.
Also, the potential for growth in new markets is uncertain. We will continue to explore these opportunities until such time as we either generate sales or determine that resources would be more efficiently used elsewhere.
Inflation
We have not been affected materially by inflation during the periods presented, but we may experience some effect in the near future due to trade tariffs imposed on certain products from China and increased product pricing due to semiconductor product shortages.
Off balance sheet arrangements
Other than lease commitments incurred in the normal course of business and certain indemnification provisions, we do not have any off-balance sheet financing arrangements or liabilities, guarantee contracts, retained or contingent interests in transferred assets, or any obligation arising out of a material variable interest in an unconsolidated entity.
We do not have any majority-owned subsidiaries that are not consolidated in the financial statements. Additionally, we do not have an interest in, or relationships with, any special purpose entities.
Stockholder transactions
In 2016, we entered into a management services agreement with a company owned by the former Chief Executive Officer of Magma. Payments for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $0 and $21,875, respectively. Such management services agreement has been now fully completed.
In April 2019, certain members of the Company’s Board of Directors executed definitive agreements to commit funds of up to $4,000,000 as a credit facility. The Company initially borrowed $1,150,000 from members of the Board of Directors and $350,000 from other shareholders for a two year period at an interest rate of 9.5% which requires the Company to make monthly principal and interest payment of $69,000 per month. In connection with these loans, the Company issued to the note holders warrants to purchase shares of the Company’s common stock equal to 10% of the original principal as a price per share equal to $2.15 per share. Accordingly, the Company issued to the note holders warrants to purchase 69,766 shares of the Company’s common stock. The relative fair value of the warrants issued was $60,158.
Critical accounting policies and estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses, and related disclosures. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our estimates are based on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ from these estimates. The critical accounting estimates, assumptions and judgments that we believe have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements are described below.
Revenue Recognition
On January 1, 2019, the Company adopted the new accounting standard update ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, which superseded nearly all existing revenue recognition guidance under GAAP, to all contracts using the modified retrospective method. The comparative information has not been restated and continues to be reported under the accounting standards in effect for those periods.
The Company’s performance obligations are satisfied over time as work is performed or at a point in time. The majority of the Company’s revenue is recognized at a point in time when products ship and control is transferred to the customer. The Company determines revenue recognition through the following steps: (i) identification of the contract with a customer; (ii) identification of the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determination of the transaction price; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognition of revenue when, or as, a performance obligation is satisfied.
The Company’s contracts are executed through a combination of written agreements along with purchase orders with all customers including certain general terms and conditions. Generally, purchase orders entail products, quantities and prices, which define the performance obligations of each party and are approved and accepted by the Company. The Company’s contracts with customers do not include extended payment terms. Payment terms vary by contract type and type of customer and generally range from 30 to 60 days from invoice. Additionally, taxes assessed by a governmental authority that are both imposed on and concurrent with a specific revenue-producing transaction, that are collected by the Company from a customer and deposited with the relevant government authority, are excluded from revenue.
The transaction price is determined based on the consideration to which the Company will be entitled in exchange for transferring goods or services to the customer adjusted for estimated variable consideration, if any. Variable consideration may include discounts, rights of return, refunds, and other similar obligations. The Company allocates the transaction price to each distinct product and service based on its relative standalone selling price. The standalone selling price for products primarily involves the cost to produce the deliverable plus the anticipated margin and for services is estimated based on the Company’s approved list price.
In the normal course of business, the Company does not accept product returns unless the items are defective as manufactured. The Company establishes provisions for estimated returns and warranties. In addition, the Company does not typically provide customers with the right to a refund and does not transact for noncash consideration.
Customer agreements include one vendor managed inventory program. The Company recognizes revenue under this arrangement when all of the following criteria are met: (i) the goods have been identified separately as belonging to the customer; (ii) the goods are ready for physical shipment to the customer; (iii) the Company does not have the ability to direct the goods to another customer; and (iv) the arrangement was requested by the customer and that the customer has sufficiently explained a substantial business purpose for the arrangement. Management also considers whether the customer's custodial risks are insured and whether modifications to the Company's normal billing and credit terms were required.
Revenues on certain fixed-price contracts where we provide engineering services, prototypes and completed products are recognized based upon percentage of completion or based upon milestones delivered that are provided during the period and compared to milestone goals to be provided over the entire contract. These services require that we perform significant, extensive and complex design, development, modification or implementation of our customers’ systems. Performance will often extend over long periods of time, and our right to receive future payment depends on our future performance in accordance with the agreement.
The percentage-of-completion methodology involves recognizing probable and reasonably estimable revenue using the percentage of services completed, on a current cumulative cost to estimated total cost basis, using a reasonably consistent profit margin over the performance period. Due to the long-term nature of these projects, developing the estimates of costs often requires significant judgment. Factors that must be considered in estimating the progress of work completed and ultimate cost of the projects include, but are not limited to, the availability of labor and labor productivity, the nature and complexity of the work to be performed and the impact of delayed performance. If changes occur in delivery, productivity or other factors used in developing the estimates of costs or revenues, we revise our cost and revenue estimates, which may result in increases or decreases in revenues and costs, and such revisions are reflected in earnings in the period in which the revision becomes known.
The Company recognizes contract assets or unbilled receivables related to revenue recognized for services completed but not yet invoiced to the clients. Unbilled receivables are recorded as accounts receivable when the Company has an unconditional right to contract consideration. A contract liability is recognized as deferred revenue when the Company invoices clients in advance of performing the related services under the terms of a contract. Deferred revenue is recognized as revenue when the Company has satisfied the related performance obligation.
On certain contracts with several of the Company’s significant customers, the Company receives payments in advance of manufacturing. Advanced payments are recorded as deferred revenue until the revenue recognition criteria described above has been met. Related billings that are in excess of revenue earned are deferred and recorded as a liability on the consolidated balance sheet until the related services are provided.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure and recognize compensation expense for all stock-based awards granted to our employees and other service providers, including stock options granted under the 2017 Plan and 2015 Stock Option Plan that was approved in December 2015 (the “2015 Plan”), based on the estimated fair value of the award. We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to estimate the fair value of stock option awards granted under the 2017 Plan and 2015 Plan. We recognize the fair value of stock options granted under the 2017 Plan and 2015 Plan as stock-based compensation on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. We record expense net of anticipated forfeitures and adjust the annual expense based upon actual experience.
Compensation cost for stock awards, which include restricted stock units (“RSUs”) is measured at the fair value on the grant date and recognized as expense, net of estimated forfeitures, over the related service period. The fair value of stock awards is based on the quoted price of our common stock on the grant date less the present value of expected dividends not received during the vesting period.
Our use of the Black-Scholes option pricing model requires the input of highly subjective assumptions, including the fair value of the underlying common stock, expected term of the option, expected volatility of the price of our common stock, risk-free interest rates and the expected dividend yield of our common stock. The assumptions used in our option pricing model represent management’s best estimates. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. If factors change and different assumptions are used, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
These assumptions and estimates are as follows:
•
Fair Value of Common Stock. Since the completion of our IPO, we use the closing quoted price of our common stock on the date of grant.
•
Expected Term. The expected term represents the period that our stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding. The expected term assumptions were determined based on the vesting terms and contractual lives of the options, using the simplified method.
•
Expected Volatility. Since we do not have sufficient trading history of our common stock, the expected volatility was determined based on the historical stock volatilities of comparable companies. Comparable companies consist of public companies in our industry that is similar in size, stage of life cycle and financial leverage. We intend to continue to apply this process using the same or similar public companies until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of our own share price becomes available, or unless circumstances change such that the identified companies are no longer similar to us, in which case, more suitable companies whose share prices are publicly available would be used in the calculation.
•
Risk-Free Interest Rate. The risk-free interest rate is based on the implied yield available on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with remaining terms similar to the expected term on the options.
•
Dividend Rate. We have never declared or paid any cash dividends and do not plan to pay cash dividends in the foreseeable future, and, therefore, use an expected dividend yield of zero.
We will continue to use judgment in evaluating the assumptions related to our stock-based compensation on a prospective basis. As we continue to accumulate additional data related to our common stock, we may refine our estimation process, which could materially impact our future stock-based compensation expense.
Inventory Valuation
We value our inventory at the lower of cost or its estimated net realizable value. We use the average cost method for purposes of determining cost, which approximates the first-in, first-out method. We write down inventory for excess and obsolescence based upon a review of historical usage and assumptions about future demand, product mix and possible alternative uses. Actual demand, product mix and alternative usage may be lower than those that we project, and this difference could have a material adverse effect on our gross margin if inventory write-downs beyond those initially recorded become necessary. Alternatively, if actual demand, product mix and alternative usage are more favorable than those we estimated at the time of such a write-down, our gross margin could be favorably impacted in future periods.
Goodwill, Intangible Assets and Long-lived Assets
We evaluate our goodwill, intangible and long-lived assets for impairment when events or circumstances arise that indicate our goodwill, intangible and long-lived assets may be impaired. Indicators of impairment include, but are not limited to, a significant deterioration in overall economic conditions, a decline in our market capitalization, the loss of significant business, significant decreases in funding for our contracts, or other significant adverse changes in industry or market conditions. Regardless, goodwill is tested for potential impairment at least annually.
Income Taxes
The determination of income tax expense requires us to make certain estimates and judgments concerning the calculation of deferred tax assets and liabilities, as well as the deductions and credits that are available to reduce taxable income. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in our consolidated financial statements. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the difference between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse.
In evaluating our ability to recover deferred tax assets, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including our past operating results, our forecast of future earnings, future taxable income, and tax planning strategies. The assumptions utilized in determining future taxable income require significant judgment. We record a valuation allowance against deferred tax assets if, based upon the available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. If it becomes more likely than not that a tax asset will be used for which a reserve has been provided, we reverse the related valuation allowance. If our actual future taxable income by tax jurisdiction differs from estimates, additional allowances or reversals of reserves may be necessary.
We use a two-step approach to recognize and measure uncertain tax positions. First, the tax position must be evaluated to determine the likelihood that it will be sustained upon external examination. If the tax position is deemed more-likely-than-not to be sustained, the tax position is then assessed to determine the amount of benefit to recognize in the financial statements. The amount of the benefit that may be recognized is the largest amount that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. We reevaluate our uncertain tax positions on a quarterly basis and any changes to these positions as a result of tax audits, tax laws or other facts and circumstances could result in additional charges to operations.
Business Combinations
We utilize the acquisition method of accounting for business combinations and allocate the purchase price of an acquisition to the various tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values. We primarily establish fair value using the income approach based upon a discounted cash flow model. The income approach requires the use of many assumptions and estimates including future revenues and expenses, as well as discount factors and income tax rates. Other estimates include:
•
estimated step-ups or write-downs for fixed assets and inventory;
•
estimated fair values of intangible assets; and
•
estimated income tax assets and liabilities assumed from the target.
While we use our best estimates and assumptions as part of the purchase price allocation process to accurately value assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the business acquisition date, our estimates and assumptions are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. As a result, during the purchase price allocation period, which is generally no longer than one year from the business acquisition date, we record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill.
For changes in the valuation of intangible assets between preliminary and final purchase price allocation, the related amortization is adjusted in the period it occurs. Subsequent to the purchase price allocation period any adjustment to assets acquired or liabilities assumed is included in operating results in the period in which the adjustment is determined. Should we issue shares of our common stock in an acquisition, we will be required to estimate the fair value of the shares issued.
Recently implemented accounting pronouncements
Per the Company’s consolidated financial statements Note 2 - Significant Accounting Policies, we have implemented a number of changes, as required by FASB. See Note 2 for further details.
Recent accounting pronouncements
Per the Company’s consolidated financial statements Note 2 - Significant Accounting Policies, we may be implementing a number of changes, as required by FASB. See Note 2 for further details.
Interest rate risk
Our exposure to interest rate risk is primarily associated with borrowing on revolving lines of credit denominated in both U.S. dollars and Euros. We are exposed to the impact of interest rate changes primarily through our borrowing activities for our variable rate borrowings.
Concentration of credit risk
Financial instruments that potentially expose us to concentrations of credit risk consist principally of cash, cash equivalents and accounts receivable. We place our cash and cash equivalents with financial institutions with high credit quality. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had $6,316,921 and $5,185,321, respectively, of cash and cash equivalents on deposit or invested with our financial and lending institutions. In Germany, the deposit insurance is €100,000 per bank, per customer. Bressner has funds on deposit in both Euro and U.S. dollar denominations of €669,160 (US$818,256) with banks in excess of the insurance limits.
We provide credit to our customers in the normal course of business. We perform ongoing credit evaluations of our customers’ financial condition and limit the amount of credit extended when deemed necessary.
Foreign currency risk
We operate primarily in the United States. Foreign sales of products and services are primarily denominated in U.S. dollars. We also conduct business outside the United States through our foreign subsidiary in Germany, where business is largely transacted in non-U.S. dollar currencies particularly the Euro, which is subject to fluctuations due to changes in foreign currency exchange rates. Accordingly, we are subject to exposure from changes in the exchange rates of local currencies. Foreign currency transaction gains and losses are recorded in other income (expense), net in the consolidated statements of operations.
OSS GmbH operates as an extension of OSS’ domestic operations which acquired Bressner Technology GmbH in October 2018. The functional currency of OSS GmbH is the Euro. Transactions denominated in currencies other than the functional currency are remeasured to the functional currency at the average exchange rate in effect during the period. At the end of each reporting period, monetary assets and liabilities are translated using exchange rates in effect at the balance sheet date. Non-monetary assets and liabilities are remeasured at historical exchange rates. Consequently, changes in the exchange rates of the currencies may impact the translation of the foreign subsidiaries’ statements of operations into U.S. dollars, which may in turn affect our consolidated statement of operations. The resulting foreign currency translation adjustments are recorded as a separate component of accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income (loss).
Derivative financial instruments
We employ derivatives to manage certain currency market risks through the use of foreign exchange forward contracts. We do not use derivatives for trading or speculative purposes. Our derivatives are designated as a hedge of a forecasted transaction or of the variability of cash flows to be received or paid related to a recognized asset or liability (cash flow hedge). We hedge a portion of the exchange risk involved in anticipation of highly probable foreign currency-denominated transactions. In anticipation of these transactions, we enter into foreign exchange contracts to provide currency at a fixed rate.
Non-GAAP financial measures
Adjusted EBITDA
We believe that the use of adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or adjusted EBITDA, is helpful for an investor to assess the performance of the Company. The Company defines adjusted EBITDA as income (loss) attributable to common stockholders before interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization, acquisition expense, impairment of long-lived assets, financing costs, fair value adjustments from purchase accounting, stock-based compensation expense and expenses related to discontinued operations.
Adjusted EBITDA is not a measurement of financial performance under generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or GAAP. Because of varying available valuation methodologies, subjective assumptions and the variety of equity instruments that can impact a company’s non-cash operating expenses, we believe that providing a non-GAAP financial measure that excludes non-cash and non-recurring expenses allows for meaningful comparisons between our core business operating results and those of other companies, as well as providing us with an important tool for financial and operational decision making and for evaluating our own core business operating results over different periods of time.
Our adjusted EBITDA measure may not provide information that is directly comparable to that provided by other companies in our industry, as other companies in our industry may calculate non-GAAP financial results differently, particularly related to non-recurring and unusual items. Our adjusted EBITDA is not a measurement of financial performance under GAAP, and should not be considered as an alternative to operating income or as an indication of operating performance or any other measure of performance derived in accordance with GAAP. We do not consider adjusted EBITDA to be a substitute for, or superior to, the information provided by GAAP financial results.
(1)
Expenses incurred in the acquisition of Bressner.
Adjusted EPS
Adjusted EPS excludes the impact of certain items and, therefore, has not been calculated in accordance with GAAP. We believe that exclusion of certain selected items assists in providing a more complete understanding of our underlying results and trends and allows for comparability with our peer company index and industry. We use this measure along with the corresponding GAAP financial measures to manage our business and to evaluate our performance compared to prior periods and the marketplace. The Company defines non-GAAP (loss) income attributable to common stockholders as (loss) or income before amortization, stock-based compensation, expenses related to discontinued operations, and acquisition costs. Adjusted EPS expresses adjusted (loss) income on a per share basis using weighted average diluted shares outstanding.
Adjusted EPS is a non-GAAP financial measure and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for financial information provided in accordance with GAAP. These non-GAAP financial measures may not be computed in the same manner as similarly titled measures used by other companies. We expect to continue to incur expenses similar to the adjusted income from continuing operations and adjusted EPS financial adjustments described above, and investors should not infer from our presentation of these non-GAAP financial measures that these costs are unusual, infrequent or non-recurring.
The following table reconciles net loss attributable to common stockholders and diluted earnings per share:
Free cash flow, a non-GAAP measure for reporting cash flow, is defined as cash provided by operating activities less capital expenditures for property and equipment, which includes capitalized software development costs. We believe free cash flow provides investors with an important perspective on cash available for investments and acquisitions after making capital investments required to support ongoing business operations and long-term value creation. We believe that trends in our free cash flow can be valuable indicators of our operating performance and liquidity.
Free cash flow is a non-GAAP financial measure and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for financial information provided in accordance with GAAP. This non-GAAP financial measure may not be computed in the same manner as similarly titled measures used by other companies.
We expect to continue to incur expenditures similar to the free cash flow adjustments described above, and investors should not infer from our presentation of this non-GAAP financial measure that these expenditures reflect all of our obligations which require cash. The following table reconciles cash provided by operating activities, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, to free cash flow: