ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements relating to future events or our future financial or operating performance that involve risks and uncertainties, as set forth above under "Special Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements." Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors described in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including those set forth above under "Special Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements" or in Item 1A under the heading "Risk Factors" or elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition, our future results may be significantly different from our historical results.
The following discussion and analysis also should be read in conjunction with the disclosures in Item 1. "Business" under "Our Retail Business" and "Our Medici Business," as well as the risk factors described in Item 1A. "Risk Factors." Our ability to pursue some or all of the strategies described below, and the extent to which we would be able to pursue some or all of them, will depend on the resources we have available, and may require significantly more capital than we currently have. These costs have been and are expected to continue to be material. See "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Liquidity and Capital Resources" below.
Our Retail Business
Our online Retail business seeks to provide goods to furnish and accessorize "Dream Homes for All" of our target customers-consumers who seek smart value on quality, stylish merchandise at competitive prices. In our Retail business, customer demand increased significantly beginning in the second half of March 2020 and continuing through December 2020 as consumers migrated to online shopping as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. We regularly update our home furnishings product assortment to meet the evolving preferences of our customers and current trends. Our products include, among others, furniture, home décor including rugs, bedding and bath, home improvement, and kitchen and dining items. Our supply chain allows us to ship directly to our customers from our suppliers or from our warehouses. See Item 1 - "Business-Our Retail Business" for further information on our Retail business.
Strategies for our Retail Business
Our Retail business initiatives enable our long-term focus on our three brand pillars, "Product Findability," "Smart Value," and "Easy Delivery and Support." Initiatives for the Retail business include:
•Improve Mobile Experience - As more website visitors move to mobile, we are focusing on ensuring our mobile experience is fast, frictionless, and meets the unique needs of the mobile shopping journey. We believe an improved mobile experience improves product findability, conversion, search engine rankings, and organic traffic.
•Overhaul Discounting and Pricing Experience - "Smart Value" is the central brand pillar of our value proposition. We believe clarifying our pricing and discounting experience allows customers to more confidently purchase at Overstock. Savvy shoppers expect a "smart deal," including saving through coupons, site sales, Club O rewards and financing. We have historically offered free shipping on orders over $45. We initially introduced free shipping on everything to the continental U.S in late March 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic stay-at-home orders, with the goal of easing consumers’ financial burdens. As this shopping benefit continued to resonate with new and existing customers, we made the limited-time offer permanent for shoppers across the continental U.S. We believe our net promoter score (NPS), repeat purchase rates and conversion will improve as we better optimize the mix of offers and clarify the pricing and discounting experience.
•Real Time Performance and SKU Profitability - We are improving our ability to address site, assortment and pricing issues more quickly by enhancing our real-time visibility into site, category, and marketing channel performance. We believe this initiative allows us to improve margin by more quickly resolving site issues for an improved customer experience.
•Expand Partner Sponsored Marketing - We are expanding the "Overstock Sponsored Product" program, a platform for our drop ship partners to promote their products to shoppers through a cost-per-click auction platform. In addition, we have implemented a marketing allowance program required across our partner network. This marketing allowance program allows us to optimize the marketing promotion type, mix of acquisition spend and on-sale assortment to better meet the needs of our target customer segments and adapt to seasonal relevance.
Our Medici Ventures Business
Our Medici business initiatives include our wholly-owned subsidiary, Medici Ventures, which conducts the majority of its business through its majority-owned subsidiary tZERO. Medici Ventures also owns strategic minority equity interests in several blockchain-related companies, all of which are startup businesses, businesses in the development stage, or businesses with a short operating history. As a result of the transaction described in Item 1 - "Business-Our Medici Business-Pelion Transaction Agreement" and Item 8 of Part II, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data"-Note 27-Subsequent Events, Medici Ventures has discontinued providing the services of its software engineers, developers, or other technologists to other blockchain companies. Active seats on the boards these companies previously held by Medici Ventures will be filled by nominees of Pelion following the close of the Pelion Transaction Agreement.
Our tZERO Business
tZERO is a leader in blockchain innovation and liquidity for digital assets. tZERO and its affiliates are working with regulators and other stakeholders to expand the role of blockchain in the lifecycle of digital securities and to facilitate the infrastructure, issuance, recording, trading, clearing, settlement, and regulatory compliance of "digital asset securities" described in the July 8, 2019 Joint Staff Statement on Broker-Dealer Custody of Digital Asset Securities and the Custody of Digital Asset Securities by Special Purpose Broker-Dealers, Exchange Act Release No. 90788 (Dec. 23, 2021) in a manner consistent with existing market and legal infrastructure. In addition, tZERO also maintains certain businesses not focused on digital securities, including the broker-dealer activities of certain of its subsidiaries. See Item 1 - "Business-Our Medici Business-tZERO" for further information on our tZERO business.
The transaction described in Item 1 - "Business-Our Medici Business-Pelion Transaction Agreement" and Item 8 of Part II, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data"-Note 27-Subsequent Events is not expected to have a significant impact on tZERO's business strategies.
Strategies for our tZERO Business
tZERO's primary initiatives currently consist of the following:
•Promote trading - tZERO ATS, LLC is focused on onboarding and trading high-quality digital securities. tZERO ATS, LLC is working with prospective issuers spanning various industries, including real estate, technology, health care and sports, as they seek to issue new digital securities using the tZERO Technology Stack and provide liquidity to existing investors. Additionally, tZERO is enhancing the tZERO Technology Stack to support third party issuance protocols in order to support securities which have been digitally enabled by other technology companies and has established relationships with market participants to help prospective issuers raise capital, prior to tokenizing and trading on the tZERO ATS.
•Enhance liquidity - tZERO ATS, LLC is focused on enhancing liquidity. To achieve this, tZERO ATS, LLC is in continual discussions with additional broker-dealers interested in subscribing to the tZERO ATS, which would enable their customers to trade digital securities traded on the tZERO ATS. tZERO also continues to develop new avenues for investors to access digital securities including tZERO Markets, an SEC-registered broker-dealer able to accept retail customers and BSTX, which may seek regulatory approval for a U.S. national exchange facility and thereby provide a new trading venue for digital securities.
•Create a world class trading experience - tZERO continues to seek opportunities to enhance the tZERO Technology Stack and improve investors' trading experience for all types of financial products. tZERO is working to allow digital securities to be traded via a mobile application to complement their accessibility via tZERO Markets' web platform. It is also developing further enhancements of tZERO Crypto's separate wallet and exchange services, such as providing additional features for its mobile application and ensuring it is accessible on a web platform. tZERO has and will partner with third-parties in order to provide this functionality in the most efficient and effective manner. tZERO believes a world-class combined trading experience will be key to investors' adoption of digital securities and tZERO's other products and services, including cryptocurrencies.
•Advocacy - tZERO operates businesses which are subject to complex and often uncertain legal environments and believes active engagement with regulatory authorities is necessary to realize the full potential of its business. tZERO continues, in partnership with other industry participants, to advocate regulatory reform with legislators and regulators in order to spur market innovation through the adoption of distributed ledger technology and digital asset securities.
tZERO also continues to identify, evaluate and pursue various opportunities for strategic transactions to enhance the services and expertise it offers its customers as well as to refine its strategic operational focus. Subject to board approval, tZERO's management exercises substantial discretion in identifying appropriate strategic transactions and negotiating the terms of such transactions. Management's determinations are based on numerous financial, strategic and operational assumptions, and there can be no assurance that such assumptions will prove to be true. Moreover, such strategic transactions may fail to produce the benefits expected at the time tZERO enters into such transactions.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP") requires estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. The SEC has defined a company's critical accounting policies as the ones that are most important to the portrayal of the company's financial condition and results of operations, and which require the company to make its most difficult and subjective judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates of matters that are inherently uncertain. Based on this definition, we have identified the critical accounting policies, estimates and judgments addressed below. We also have other key accounting policies, which involve the use of estimates, judgments, and assumptions that are significant to understanding our results. For additional information, see Item 8 of Part II, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data"-Note 2-Accounting Policies and Supplemental Disclosures. Although we believe that our estimates, assumptions, and judgments are reasonable, they are based upon information presently available. Actual results may differ significantly from these estimates. Our critical accounting policies are as follows:
•revenue recognition; and
•accounting for the tZERO digital security offering.
Revenue recognition
We derive our revenue primarily from our Retail business through our Website from merchandise sold at a point in time and shipped to customers. When we are the principal in a transaction and control the specific good or service before it is transferred to the customer, revenue is recorded gross; otherwise, revenue is recorded on a net basis.
Revenue is recognized when control of the product passes to the customer, typically at the date of delivery of the merchandise to the customer or the date a service is provided and is recognized in an amount that reflects the expected consideration to be received in exchange for such goods or services. As such, customer orders are recorded as unearned revenue prior to delivery of products or services ordered.
As we ship high volumes of packages through multiple carriers, we use estimates to determine which shipments are delivered and, therefore, recognized as revenue at the end of the period. Our delivery date estimates are based on average shipping transit times based on historical data. However, actual shipping times may differ from our estimates.
The following table shows the effect that hypothetical changes in the estimate of average shipping transit times would have had on the reported amount of revenue and income before taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
Shipping and handling is considered a fulfillment activity, as it takes place prior to the customer obtaining control of the merchandise, and fees charged to customers are included in net revenue upon completion of our performance obligation. We present revenue net of sales tax, discounts, and expected refunds.
Our merchandise sales contracts include terms that could cause variability in the transaction price for items such as discounts, credits, or sales returns.
We recognize gift cards and Club O rewards in the period they are redeemed. Unredeemed gift cards and Club O rewards not subject to requirements to remit balances to governmental agencies are recognized as net revenue based on historical redemption patterns.
Our Other revenue occurs primarily through our broker-dealer subsidiaries in our tZERO segment. We recognize revenue for our broker-dealer subsidiaries based on the gross amount of consideration that we expect to receive on securities transactions (commission revenue) on a trade date basis.
Accounting for the tZERO Digital Security offering
On December 18, 2017, tZERO launched an offering (the "TZROP offering") of the right to acquire tZERO's Preferred Equity Tokens, Series A ("TZROP") through a Simple Agreement for Future Equity ("SAFE"). The TZROP offering closed on August 6, 2018, and on October 12, 2018 tZERO issued the TZROP in settlement of the SAFEs. The SAFEs were accounted for as a prepaid contract to obtain equity interest in tZERO and were classified as a component of noncontrolling interest in our consolidated financial statements. The TZROP issued under the TZROP offering to settle the SAFEs represent a form of preferred stock and are classified as a component of noncontrolling interest within our consolidated financial statements. For additional information, see Item 8 of Part II, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data"-Note 16-Stockholders' Equity.
For information about recent accounting pronouncements, see Item 8 of Part II, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data"-Note 2-Accounting Policies and Supplemental Disclosures.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Executive Commentary
This executive commentary is intended to provide investors with a view of our business through the eyes of our management. As an executive commentary, it necessarily focuses on selected aspects of our business. This executive commentary is intended as a supplement to, but not a substitute for, the more detailed discussion of our business included elsewhere herein. Investors are cautioned to read our entire "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations," as well as our interim and audited financial statements, and the discussion of our business and risk factors and other information included elsewhere or incorporated in this report. This executive commentary includes forward-looking statements, and investors are cautioned to read "Special Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements."
Revenue increased 75% in 2020 compared to 2019. This increase was primarily due to increased Retail product sales resulting from a 71% increase in customer orders, 111% new customer growth, and strong repeat customer behavior, due in part to a consumer migration toward online shopping in response to COVID-19 stay at home mandates.
Gross profit increased 98% in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to an increase in Retail product sales and an increase in gross margin. Gross margin increased to 22.7% in 2020, compared to 20.1% in 2019, primarily due to our new partner marketing allowance program that was fully rolled out in the second quarter of 2020, which requires all of our partners to participate and allows us to advertise more strategically to our customers. Gross margin also benefited from reduced promotional discounting as we balanced spend to support new customer acquisition efforts, gained leverage in our fixed warehouse infrastructure, increased fees charged to partners due to unmet contractual service levels, and lower customer service costs as sales outpaced staffing expense during the early part of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Sales and marketing expenses as a percentage of revenue increased to 10.3% in 2020 compared to 9.8% in 2019 primarily due to increased spending to support our customer acquisition strategy, resulting in a 111% increase in new customers compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2019.
Technology expenses increased $1.7 million in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to staff-related costs, including accrued bonuses.
General and administrative expenses decreased $10.9 million in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to an $8.6 million reversal of a legal settlement accrual, a $2.5 million Visa settlement, a $4.3 million decrease in consulting expenses, and a reduction in discretionary spending due to adjustments related to the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by an $8.8 million increase in staff-related costs, including accrued bonus.
Liquidity
Our consolidated cash and cash equivalents balance increased from $112.3 million as of December 31, 2019 to $516.5 million as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $404.2 million, primarily as the result of cash inflows from operating activities of $196.5 million and from the sale of common stock of $195.5 million, net of offering costs (including commissions) for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $47.5 million of proceeds from cash generated by new debt agreements, which was partially offset by expenditures for fixed assets of $19.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Additional commentary related to Medici Ventures
The majority of Medici Ventures' business is its 80% interest in tZERO, which is described below. As described in Item 1 - "Business-Our Medici Business-Pelion Transaction Agreement" and Item 8 of Part II, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data"-Note 27-Subsequent Events, we entered into a transaction agreement with Pelion that, when consummated, will alter our ownership of Medici Ventures. The remaining business activities of Medici Ventures are focused on developing and advancing blockchain technology. As a result of its business model of providing technical assistance to companies in which Medici Ventures owns an interest, as well as the early stage of development of the companies in which it owns interests, Medici Ventures has not yet generated material revenues. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our pre-tax loss in our Medici Ventures business, excluding our loss in our tZERO business, was $10.0 million, and we expect to continue to incur significant losses in our Medici Ventures business during 2021.
Additional commentary related to tZERO
To date, tZERO has focused primarily on developing its businesses and exploring opportunities for novel financial applications of blockchain technology. tZERO does not yet have a stable customer base or backlog orders and has not yet generated any meaningful revenue from any commercially available applications of its blockchain initiatives. The businesses, products, and services that tZERO is pursuing or contemplating will require substantial additional funding, initially for technology development and regulatory compliance, as well as for working capital, marketing and sales, and other substantial costs of developing new products and businesses in emerging areas of technology. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our pre-tax loss in our tZERO business, excluding our loss in the non-tZERO portion of our Medici business, was $45.7 million, and we expect to continue to incur significant losses in our tZERO business during 2021. As described in Item 1 - "Business-Our Medici Business-Pelion Transaction Agreement" and Item 8 of Part II, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data"-Note 27-Subsequent Events, we entered into a transaction agreement with Pelion that, when consummated, will alter our ownership of tZERO.
Additional commentary related to COVID-19
Overstock has continued to respond to the challenges and opportunities created by the COVID-19 pandemic. In our Retail business, customer demand increased significantly beginning in the second half of March 2020 and continuing through December 2020, particularly in our key home furnishings categories. We have seen a substantial year over year increase in our website traffic and number of new customers. Our online-only platform and partner network with thousands of fulfillment centers have enabled us to meet this increase in demand. Our three warehouses have remained operational based on our sustained implementation of sound safety measures, including staggered shifts and social distancing. We have hired in key areas throughout the company to support our current and expected growth. There are continued challenges created by the increased volume throughout the supply chain in factory production capacity, inbound freight delays, as well as carrier delivery constraints and fulfillment performance from some suppliers. Most of our Medici Ventures blockchain companies have seen relatively little disruption, and several are working on solutions to problems exacerbated by the global pandemic. We have evaluated and implemented a phased re-entry plan for our offices; most of our corporate employees continue to work from home without incident. We cannot predict how the COVID-19 pandemic or the ongoing development and rollout of vaccinations will unfold in the coming months. Nevertheless, the challenges arising from the pandemic have not adversely affected our liquidity, revenues, or capacity to service our debt, nor have these conditions required us to reduce our capital expenditures.
Results of Operations
Our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed March 13, 2020, includes a discussion and analysis of our year-over-year changes, financial condition, and results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 in Item 7 of Part II, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations."
Retail revenue, costs of goods sold, gross profit and gross margin
The following table reflects our Retail net revenue, costs of goods sold, gross profit and gross margin for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
The 74% increase in Retail net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019, was primarily due to increased Retail product sales resulting from a 71% increase in customer orders, 111% new customer growth, and strong repeat customer behavior, largely due to a consumer migration toward online shopping in response to COVID-19.
International sales were less than 2% of total net revenues for 2020 and 2019.
Our overall gross margins fluctuate based on changes in supplier cost and/or sales price, including competitive pricing; inventory management decisions; sales coupons and promotions; product mix of sales; and operational and fulfillment costs. Fulfillment costs include all warehousing costs, including fixed overhead and variable handling costs (excluding packaging costs), as well as merchant processing fees associated with customer payments made by credit cards and other payment methods and other variable fees, and customer service costs, all of which we include as costs in calculating gross margin. We believe that some companies in our industry, including some of our competitors, account for fulfillment costs within operating expenses, and therefore exclude fulfillment costs from gross margin. As a result, our gross margin may not be directly comparable to others in our industry.
Fulfillment costs as a percentage of sales may vary due to several factors, such as our ability to manage costs at our warehouses, significant changes in the number of units received and fulfilled, and our ability to effectively manage customer service costs and merchant fees. Fulfillment and related costs remained relatively flat during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019.
Gross margins for the past eight quarterly periods and years ending December 31, 2020 and 2019 were:
Retail gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased 98% compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to an increase in Retail product sales and an increase in gross margin. Retail gross margin increased to 22.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 20.1% for the same period in 2019, primarily due to our new partner marketing allowance program that was fully rolled out in the second quarter of 2020, which requires all of our partners to participate and allows us to advertise more strategically to our customers. Gross margin also benefited from reduced promotional discounting as we balanced spend to support new customer acquisition efforts, gained leverage in our fixed warehouse infrastructure, an increase in fees charged to partners due to unmet contractual service levels, and lower customer service costs due to slower growth in our staffing relative to sales.
Other revenue, costs of goods sold, gross profit and gross margin
The following table reflects our net revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
The 129% increase in Other net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019, was primarily due to an increase in SpeedRoute trading volume on increased market volatility during the year.
Other gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased 59.0% compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to an increase in SpeedRoute trading volume on increased market volatility during the year.
Other gross margin decreased to 14.6% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 21.0% for the same period in 2019, primarily due to a shift in trade execution volume to transactions with lower commission rates.
Operating expenses
Sales and marketing expenses
We use a variety of methods to target our consumer audience, including online campaigns, such as advertising through keywords, product listing ads, display ads, search engines, affiliate marketing programs, social coupon websites, portals, banners, e-mail, direct mail and viral and social media campaigns. We also do brand advertising through television, radio, print ads, and event sponsorships.
The following table reflects our sales and marketing expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
The 50 basis point increase in sales and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019, was primarily due to increased spending to support our customer acquisition strategy, resulting in a 111% increase in new customers compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2019.
We are also experiencing an increasingly competitive digital marketing landscape. We have competitors who are spending significant amounts on advertising, bidding up the cost of certain marketing channels, such as paid keywords, and expect this trend to continue. While we may not choose to match their levels of spending, this has increased our marketing costs in recent years.
We do not include costs associated with our discounted shipping and other promotions, such as coupons in sales and marketing expense. Rather, we account for them as a reduction of revenue and therefore affect sales and gross margin. We consider discounted shipping and other promotions, such as our historical policy of free shipping on orders over $45 and our recent policy of free shipping on all orders, as an effective marketing tool, and intend to continue to offer them as we deem appropriate as part of our overall marketing plan.
Technology expenses
We seek to invest efficiently in technology, including web services, customer support solutions, website search, expansion of new and existing product categories, and in investments in technology to enhance the customer experience, improve our process efficiency and support and expand our logistics infrastructure. We expect to continue to increase our technology expenses to support these initiatives and these increases may be material.
The frequency and variety of cyberattacks on our Website, our corporate systems, and on third parties we use to support our technology continues to increase. The impact of such attacks, their costs, and the costs we incur to protect ourselves against future attacks have not been material. However, we consider the risk introduced by cyberattacks to be serious and will continue to incur costs related to efforts to protect ourselves against them.
The following table reflects our technology expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Technology expenses increased $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to staff-related costs, including accrued bonuses.
General and administrative expenses
The following table reflects our general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
The $10.9 million decrease in general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019, was primarily due to an $8.6 million reversal of a legal settlement accrual, a $2.5 million Visa settlement, a $4.3 million decrease in consulting expenses, and a reduction in discretionary spending due to adjustments related to the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by an $8.8 million increase in staff-related costs, including accrued bonus.
Other expense, net
The $7.7 million decrease in other expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019, was primarily due to a $10.7 million gain recognized on the deconsolidation of the Medici Land Governance business, partially offset by an increase in losses associated with our equity securities.
Income taxes
Our effective tax rate for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was 2.1% and (0.1%), respectively. Our effective tax rate is affected by recurring items such as research tax credits and non-recurring items such as changes in valuation allowances. We record valuation allowances against deferred tax assets when there is uncertainty about our ability to generate future income in relevant jurisdictions, and the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business make estimates of future income more challenging due to the unpredictable nature of the ultimate scope and duration of the pandemic. It is also affected to a lesser extent by tax rates in foreign jurisdictions and the relative amount of income we earn in those jurisdictions, which we expect to be fairly consistent in the near term. Our low effective tax rate is primarily attributable to the valuation allowance we are maintaining on our net deferred tax assets.
We have indefinitely reinvested foreign earnings of $3.8 million at December 31, 2020. We would need to accrue and pay various taxes on this amount if repatriated. We do not intend to repatriate these earnings.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
We believe that our cash and cash equivalents currently on hand and expected cash flows from future operations will be sufficient to continue operations for at least the next twelve months. We continue to monitor, evaluate, and manage our operating plans, forecasts, and liquidity in light of the most recent developments driven by the COVID-19 pandemic. We proactively seek opportunities to improve the efficiency of our operations and have in the past and may in the future take steps to realize internal cost savings, including aligning our staffing needs based on our current and expected future levels of operations and process streamlining.
Current sources of liquidity
Our principal sources of liquidity are existing cash and cash equivalents and accounts receivable, net. At December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $516.5 million and accounts receivables, net of $30.1 million. Our ability to access the liquidity of our subsidiaries may be limited by tax and legal considerations and other factors.
Cash flow information is as follows (in thousands):
At December 31, 2020, we had $150.0 million available under our "at the market" sales program which permits us to conduct "at the market" public offerings of our common stock under a sales agreement, dated June 26, 2020, with JonesTrading Institutional Services LLC ("JonesTrading") and D.A. Davidson & Co. ("D.A. Davidson"). We did not sell any shares under our at the market sales program during the year ended December 31, 2020.
We completed a public offering of our common stock on August 14, 2020 and issued 2,415,000 shares of our common stock pursuant to an underwriting agreement, dated August 11, 2020, for proceeds totaling $192.7 million, net of $11.4 million in offering costs.
Cash flows from operating activities
Cash received from customers generally corresponds to our net revenues as our customers primarily use credit cards to buy from us causing our receivables from these sales transactions to settle quickly. We have payment terms with our partners that generally extend beyond the amount of time necessary to collect proceeds from our customers. As a result of increased online shopping migration from the COVID-19 pandemic, we saw our Retail product sales accelerate beginning in the second half of March 2020 and continuing through December 2020, as customers turned to online shopping, which caused our cash, cash equivalents and accounts receivable balances to increase compared to prior year-end and also resulted in an increase in our accounts payable and unearned revenue balance as of December 31, 2020. Due to uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic, we are unable to predict the duration such favorable conditions and its sustained impact on cash flows. We continue to monitor, evaluate, and manage our operating plans, forecasts, and liquidity in light of the most recent developments driven by the COVID-19 pandemic.
The $196.5 million of net cash provided by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to consolidated net income, adjusted for non-cash items, of $100.6 million and cash provided by changes in operating assets and liabilities of $95.9 million.
The $81.6 million of net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to consolidated net loss, adjusted for non-cash items, of $64.9 million and cash used by changes in operating assets and liabilities of $16.7 million.
Cash flows from investing activities
The $23.6 million of net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily from expenditures for property and equipment of $19.1 million and purchases of equity securities of $5.4 million, partially offset by $6.3 million in proceeds from the sale of equity securities.
The $26.9 million of net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily from expenditures for property and equipment of $21.8 million and purchases of equity securities of $12.6 million, partially offset by $7.3 million in proceeds from the sale of equity securities.
Cash flows from financing activities
The $231.4 million provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 resulted primarily from $195.5 million of net proceeds from sales of our common stock, net of offering costs (including commissions), and $47.5 million of proceeds from our long-term debt secured by our building and land.
The $80.5 million provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 resulted primarily from $83.0 million of net proceeds from sales of our common stock under the at the market offering.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 and the effect such obligations and commitments are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flow in future periods (in thousands):
___________________________________________
(1) - Represents the future minimum lease payments under non-cancellable operating leases. For information regarding our operating lease obligations, see Item 8 of Part II, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data"-Note 13-Leases contained in the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(2) - Represents future interest and principal payments on our financing agreements. For information regarding our financing agreements, see Item 8 of Part II, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data"-Note 12-Borrowings contained in the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Potential Commitment relating to Pelion Transaction Agreement
As described in Item 1 - "Business-Our Medici Business-Pelion Transaction Agreement" and Item 8 of Part II, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data"-Note 27-Subsequent Events, we entered into a transaction agreement with Pelion and Pelion, Inc., as guarantor, pursuant to which Medici Ventures would convert into a Delaware limited partnership and Pelion would become the sole general partner of the Limited Partnership, and we (along with any other stockholders of Medici Ventures at the time of the Medici Closing), would become the limited partners of the Partnership, pursuant to a limited partnership agreement to be entered into at the time of such transaction. Pursuant to the terms of the limited partnership agreement to be entered into in connection therewith, we and any other limited partners agree to make a capital commitment of $44.6 million to the Partnership in proportion to our equity interest in the Partnership. The capital commitments may be called in one or more cash installments as specified by the general partner upon 10 business days' prior written notice.
Tax contingencies
We are involved in various tax matters, the outcomes of which are uncertain. As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, tax contingencies were $900,000 and $1.5 million, respectively, which are included in our reconciliation of unrecognized tax benefits (see Item 8 of Part II, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data"-Note 21-Income Taxes contained in the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K). The decrease in tax contingencies in 2020 was primarily a result of negotiated settlements. Changes in state, federal, and foreign tax laws may increase our tax contingencies. The timing of the resolution of income tax contingencies is highly uncertain, and the amounts ultimately paid, if any, upon resolution of issues raised by the taxing authorities may differ from the amounts accrued. It is reasonably possible that within the next 12 months we will receive additional assessments by various tax authorities. These assessments may or may not result in changes to our contingencies related to positions on prior years' tax filings.
Borrowings
2020 loan agreements
In March 2020, we entered into two loan agreements. The loan agreements provide a $34.5 million Senior Note, carrying interest at an annual rate of 4.242%, and a $13.0 million Mezzanine Note, carrying interest at an annual rate of 5.002%. The loans carry a blended annual interest rate of 4.45%. The Senior Note is for a 10-year term (stated maturity date is March 6, 2030) and requires interest only payments, with the principal amount and any then unpaid interest due and payable at the end of the 10-year term. The Mezzanine Note has a stated 10-year term, though the agreement requires principal and interest payments monthly over approximately a 46-month term payment period. Both loans are secured by our corporate headquarters and the related land. We incurred insignificant debt issuance costs with the new loan agreements.
Other Factors that May Affect Future Results
We periodically evaluate opportunities to repurchase our equity securities, obtain credit facilities, or issue additional debt or equity securities. In addition, we may, from time to time, consider the investment in, or acquisition of, complementary businesses, products, services, or technologies, any of which might affect our liquidity requirements or cause us to issue additional debt or equity securities. There can be no assurance that financing arrangements will be available in amounts or on terms acceptable to us, if at all. Our future results may be significantly different from our historical results for several other reasons as well. Other reasons that our future results may be significantly different from our historical results include the potential effects on us of the accounting and tax changes discussed in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and other reasons described in Item 1. "Business" under "Our Retail Business" and "Our Medici Business," as well as the risk factors described in Item 1A. "Risk Factors."
Any investment in our securities involves a high degree of risk. Investors should consider carefully the risks and uncertainties described in this Form 10-K, including the risks described in Item 1A of Part I, "Risk Factors", and all other information in this Form 10-K and in our other filings with the SEC including those we file after we file this Form 10-K, before deciding whether to purchase or hold our securities. Additional risks and uncertainties not currently known to us or that we currently deem immaterial may also become important factors that may harm our business. The occurrence of any of the risks described under "Risk Factors" in this report could harm our business. The trading price of our securities could decline due to any of these risks and uncertainties, and investors may lose part or all of their investment.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources that would be material to investors.