ITEM 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Statements below regarding future events or performance are “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Our actual results could be quite different from those expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. Factors that could affect results are discussed more fully under the Item 1A, entitled “Risk Factors,” and elsewhere in this Annual Report. Although forward-looking statements help to provide complete information about us, readers should keep in mind that forward-looking statements may not be reliable. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on the forward-looking statements. We undertake no duty to update any forward-looking statements made herein after the date of this Annual Report.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements contained herein and the notes thereto, along with the Section entitled “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates,” set forth below. This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussion of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Overview and Business Segments
The overall goal of our Company is to empower the global community to improve health and wellness by providing access to accurate essential information. Our business consists of two segments: our “Diagnostics” segment, which was previously named “OSUR” and our “Molecular Collection Systems” segment, which was previously named “DNAG.” Our Diagnostics business primarily consists of the development, manufacture, marketing and sale of oral fluid diagnostic products and specimen collection devices using our proprietary technologies, as well as other diagnostic products including immunoassays and other in vitro diagnostic tests that are used on other specimen types. Our Molecular Solutions business consists of the manufacture and sale of kits that are used to collect, stabilize, transport and store biological samples of genetic material for molecular testing in the consumer genetic, clinical genetic, academic research, infectious disease diagnostics, pharmacogenomics, personalized medicine, microbiome and animal genetics markets. Our collection kits are also used for the collection of first-void urine for liquid biopsy in the prostate and bladder cancer markets and in the sexually transmitted infection screening market. In addition, our Molecular Solutions business provides microbiome laboratory and bioinformatics services.
The Diagnostics business includes tests for diseases including HIV and Hepatitis C that are performed on a rapid basis at the point of care and tests that are processed in a laboratory. These products are sold in the United States and internationally to various clinical laboratories, hospitals, clinics, community-based organizations, and other public health organizations, distributors, government agencies, physicians’ offices, and commercial and industrial entities. Our HIV product is also sold in a consumer-friendly format in the over-the-counter (“OTC”) market in the U.S. and as a self-test to individuals in a number of other countries. Our Diagnostics business includes the operations of UrSure, Inc. (“UrSure”), which was acquired and merged into OraSure in 2020. This part of the business develops and commercializes products that measure adherence to HIV medications including pre-exposure prophylaxis or PrEP, the daily medication to prevent HIV, and anti-retroviral medications to suppress HIV. These products include laboratory-based tests that can measure levels of the medication in a patient’s urine or blood, as well as point of care products currently in development. We also previously manufactured and sold medical devices used for the removal of benign skin lesions by cryosurgery or freezing. We sold the assets associated with our cryosurgical systems business to a third party in August 2019.
Our Molecular Solutions business is operated by our subsidiaries, DNA Genotek Inc. (“DNAG”), Diversigen, Inc. (“Diversigen”) and Novosanis NV (“Novosanis”). In this business, we manufacture and sell kits that are used to collect, stabilize, transport and store biological sample of genetic material for molecular testing. Our products are used for academic research and commercial applications, including ancestry, disease risk management, lifestyle and animal testing. Included in the disease risk management area are pharmacogenomics testing, hereditary disease screening, prenatal or cancer screening, population health initiatives and other molecular testing using DNA or RNA for diagnosis of acute disease. We also sell research use only collection products into the microbiome market. We offer our customers a suite of genomics and microbiome services that range from package customization and study design optimization to extraction, analysis and reporting services. The microbiome laboratory and bioinformatics services are provided by Diversigen, which includes the operations of CoreBiome, Inc. (“CoreBiome”), a subsidiary we acquired in early 2019. CoreBiome and Diversigen were merged together in 2020. Novosanis manufactures and sells the Colli-Pee® collection device for the volumetric collection of first-void urine for use in research, screening and diagnostics in the liquid biopsy and sexually transmitted infection markets. Our Molecular Solutions business serves customers in many countries worldwide, including many leading research universities and hospitals.
Recent Developments
Impact of COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”) a global pandemic. This contagious disease outbreak, which has continued to spread, has adversely affected workforces, economies, and financial markets globally, leading to an economic downturn. It is not possible for us to predict the duration or magnitude of the outbreak’s effects on our business or results of operations at this time. During 2020, traditional HIV and HCV testing programs and drug testing in the workplace market were reduced or terminated as a result of the various “stay-at-home” orders and social distancing guidelines issued by federal, state and local governments to contain the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States. On the international front, we experienced some reductions and stoppages of professional HIV and HCV testing in Europe and Asia due to the pandemic and delays with international shipments due to a reduction of customs and transportation personnel, a reduced number of air flights and shipping congestion. In our molecular segment, clinical and research work during the year, particularly in the academic market, has reduced demand for our products. These trends had a material impact on our results of operations during 2020 and we believe they will continue to have a material and adverse impact on the revenues of certain parts of our business for an indeterminate time period, depending on the duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic.
We also believe there are potentially significant opportunities for increased revenues as a result of the pandemic. During 2020, we began selling our saliva collection devices for use in molecular COVID-19 testing. In addition, we are developing and will be seeking EUA of a rapid COVID-19 antigen test and a laboratory-based oral fluid SARS-CoV-2 antibody test. A description of these products can be found in the “Business” section of Part I one of this Annual Report.
In 2020, we generated additional revenues of approximately $49.8 million from sales of our molecular collection devices related to COVID-19 testing during the year. In the U.S., public health customers are purchasing increased quantities of our OraQuick® In-Home HIV Test in order to permit continued HIV testing while allowing clients and patients to adhere to “stay-at-home” and social distancing requirements. In addition, we are seeing increased demand for our molecular collection products from customers who conduct both saliva and blood-based testing. As it becomes increasingly difficult to collect blood in clinics or healthcare settings, these customers are increasingly relying on the saliva collection alternative. However, the degree to which these and other opportunities will offset the negative trends caused by the COVID-19 pandemic in future periods cannot be predicted with certainty.
Public Offering
In June 2020, the Company completed the issuance and sale of 9,200,000 shares of its Common Stock. The price to the public in the offering was $11.00 per share, with net proceeds from the offering equaling approximately $95.0 million after deducting underwriting discounts and offering expenses paid by the Company.
UrSure Acquisition
On July 22, 2020, the Company acquired all of the outstanding stock of UrSure, pursuant to the terms of a merger agreement. Subsequently in December 2020, UrSure was merged into OraSure. The activities of this line of business are described in the “Business” section of Part I of this Annual Report. The acquisition of UrSure supports our strategy of expanding our product offerings to include additional diagnostic products particularly point-of-care tests, that complement our current infectious disease portfolio and pipeline. We used cash of $3.0 million to pay for this acquisition and have incurred a total of $393,000 of acquisition related costs, including accounting, legal, and other professional fees, all of which were expensed and reported as a component of general and administrative expense in the consolidated statement of income for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Current Consolidated Financial Results
During the year ended December 31, 2020, our consolidated net revenues increased 11% to $171.7 million, compared to $154.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net product and services revenues during the year ended December 31, 2020 increased 12% when compared to the same period of 2019, due to the inclusion of product revenues associated with COVID-19 testing, higher international sales of our OraQuick® HIV Self-Test, and higher laboratory services revenues. Partially offsetting these increases were lower sales of our genomics, HCV, risk assessment, domestic HIV and microbiome products and the absence of cryosurgical sales as a result of the divestiture of our cryosurgical systems business in August 2019. Other revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $5.3 million compared to $6.5 million in the same period of 2019. This decline was largely due to lower royalty income partially offset by increased revenues from funded research and development associated with the development of our adherence tests and COVID-19 products.
Our consolidated net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $14.9 million, or $(0.22) per share on a fully diluted basis, compared to consolidated net income of $16.7 million, or $0.27 per share on a fully diluted basis, for the year ended December 31, 2019. Results for the year ended December 31, 2020 included a $1.1 million non-cash pre-tax gain associated with the change in the fair value of acquisition-related contingent consideration and $393,000 of acquisition related transaction costs associated with the UrSure acquisition, which together accounted for approximately $0.01 per share. Results for the year ended December 31, 2019 included a pre-tax gain on the sale of our cryosurgical systems business of $10.2 million, $664,000 of non-cash pre-tax income associated with the change in the fair value of acquisition-related contingent consideration and $1.8 million of acquisition-related transaction costs. The combined net impact of these items increased earnings per share by approximately $0.14 in 2019. Results for the full-year 2020 also reflect the significant increase in spending associated with the development of our COVID-19 products.
Cash provided by operating activities during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $5.8 million and $9.8 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had $257.1 million in cash, cash equivalents, and available-for-sale securities, compared to $189.8 million at December 31, 2019.
Results of Operations
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020 COMPARED TO DECEMBER 31, 2019
CONSOLIDATED NET REVENUES
The table below shows a breakdown of total net revenues (dollars in thousands) generated by each of our business segments.
Consolidated net product and services revenues increased 12% to $166.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $148.1 million for 2019 due to the inclusion of product revenues associated with COVID-19 testing from our Molecular Solutions segment coupled with increased international sales of our OraQuick® HIV Self-Test and higher laboratory services revenues. These increases were partially offset by lower sales of our genomics, HCV, risk assessment, domestic HIV, and microbiome products and the absence of cryosurgical sales as a result of the divestiture of our cryosurgical systems business in August 2019. Other revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $5.3 million compared to $6.5 million in 2019. This decline was largely due to lower royalty income partially offset by increased revenues from funded research and development associated with the development of our adherence tests and COVID-19 products.
Consolidated net revenues derived from products sold to customers outside of the United States were $40.9 million and $47.3 million, or 24% and 31% of total net revenues, during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Because the majority of our international sales are denominated in U.S. dollars, the impact of fluctuating foreign currency exchange rates was not material to our total consolidated net revenues.
Net Revenues by Segment
Diagnostics Segment
The table below shows the amount of total net revenues (dollars in thousands) generated by our Diagnostics segment.
Infectious Disease Testing Market
Sales to the infectious disease testing market decreased 7% to $54.2 million in 2020 from $58.0 million in 2019. This decrease resulted from lower world-wide sales of our OraQuick® HCV products and lower domestic sales of our OraQuick® HIV products partially offset by higher international sales of our OraQuick® HIV products.
The table below shows a breakdown of our total net OraQuick® HIV and HCV product revenues (dollars in thousands) during 2020 and 2019.
Domestic OraQuick® HIV sales decreased 16% to $15.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $18.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily the result of the decline in domestic HIV testing in public health clinics, hospitals and doctors’ offices resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic partially offset by increased sales for our at-home test as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
International sales of our OraQuick® HIV products during 2020 increased 16% to $29.0 million from $25.1 million in 2019. This increase was largely due to higher sales of our OraQuick® HIV Self-Test in Africa.
Domestic OraQuick® HCV sales decreased 41% to $4.8 million in 2020 from $8.1 million in 2019. International OraQuick® HCV sales decreased 25% to $3.7 million in 2020 from $4.9 million in 2019. The declines in HCV sales in both the domestic and international markets were due to the closure of testing programs due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Risk Assessment Market
Sales to the risk assessment market decreased 23% to $9.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $12.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 due to unemployment and reductions in workplace and insurance testing programs resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cryosurgical Systems Market
In August 2019, we sold our cryosurgical systems line of business and as such have stopped recording revenues associated with that business since the third quarter of 2019.
Other revenues
Other revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased 70% to $1.6 million from $966,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Revenue associated with funding of our research and development efforts increased to $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $705,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019 as new grants for COVID-19 funded projects and adherence test research and development funding were partially offset by the wind-down of efforts to develop our rapid Ebola test. Other revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 also included $68,000 in reimbursement of certain costs under our charitable support agreement with the Gates Foundation compared to $261,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Molecular Solutions Segment
The table below shows a breakdown of total net revenues (dollars in thousands) generated by our Molecular Solutions segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Sales of our genomics products decreased 34% to $37.1 million in 2020 compared to $56.2 million in 2019, largely due to the timing of orders placed by one of our largest genomics customer and the reduction in genomics testing due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Microbiome revenues decreased 14% to $6.2 million in 2020 compared to $7.2 million in 2019 largely due to reduced product demand caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
During 2020, we sold $49.8 million of sample collection devices for use in the collection and transport of samples for COVID-19 molecular testing. There were no similar sales in 2019.
Laboratory services revenues increased 41% to $9.6 million in 2020 compared to $6.8 million in 2019, due to the inclusion of revenues generated by Diversigen which was acquired in the fourth quarter of 2019, partially offset by a decline in laboratory testing due to the inability of our customers to collect samples as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Other revenues in 2020 decreased 34% to $3.7 million from $5.6 million in 2019 largely as a result of lower royalty income under a litigation settlement agreement.
CONSOLIDATED OPERATING RESULTS
Consolidated gross profit percentage was 59% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 61% for 2019. The decrease in gross profit percentage was primarily due to lower labor utilization as we increased our manufacturing headcount with full-time and temporary employees to prepare for expected product production increases, increased scrap and spoilage expense and the decline in other revenues which contribute 100% to our gross profit percentage. These declines in gross profit percentage were partially offset by a more favorable product mix.
Consolidated operating loss in 2020 was $5.2 million, a $23.8 million decline from the $18.6 million of operating income reported in 2019. Results in 2020 were negatively impacted by increased operating expenses related to COVID-19 product development, higher staffing costs and the inclusion of expenses attributable to Diversigen and UrSure. The operating loss in 2020 included $1.1 million of non-cash income related to the fair value change of acquisition-related contingent consideration compared to $664,000 of non-cash income in the comparable period of the prior year. Results in 2019 also included the pre-tax gain of $10.2 million from the sale of our cryosurgical systems business.
OPERATING INCOME BY SEGMENT
Diagnostic Segment
The gross profit percentage of the Diagnostics business was 42% in 2020 compared to 55% in 2019. This decrease is largely due to a less favorable product mix, lower labor utilization as we increased our manufacturing headcount with full-time and temporary employees to prepare for expected product production increases and increased scrap and spoilage expense.
Research and development expenses increased 75% to $21.3 million in 2020 from $12.2 million in 2019, largely due to spending associated with COVID-19 product development, higher staffing costs, and the inclusion of UrSure expenses not present in 2019.
Sales and marketing expenses increased 24% to $22.4 million in 2020 from $18.1 million in 2019, due to higher staffing costs as a result of increased headcount, increased commissions and the additional costs associated with the retirement of a senior executive who previously led our Diagnostics Business Unit and the on-boarding costs of his successor. Also contributing to the higher sales and marketing expense was an increase in our reserve for uncollectible accounts associated primarily with one of our distributors located in Africa, higher marketing costs and the inclusion of UrSure expenses not present in 2019. These increases were partially offset by lower travel and trade show costs due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
General and administrative expenses increased 25% to $28.1 million in 2020 from $22.5 million in 2019 largely due to higher staffing costs associated with increased employee bonuses as a result of our strong financial performance in 2020 and an increase in headcount, and the inclusion of $393,000 in transaction costs associated with the UrSure acquisition. These increases were partially offset by a decline in professional fees related to business development activities and lower travel expenses due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Operating income in 2019 also included a $10.2 million pre-tax gain on the sale of our cryosurgical systems business. In August 2019, we sold all assets necessary to operate this line of business to a third party for $12.0 million. The $10.2 million gain includes the $12.0 million proceeds received net of the fair value of the assets sold, which consisted of inventory and fully-depreciated fixed assets, the legal fees associated with the transaction, and a value attributed to the transition services.
All of the above contributed to an operating loss of $43.2 million for 2020, which included non-cash charges of $3.3 million for depreciation and amortization and $6.0 million for stock-based compensation. The Diagnostics segment operating loss also included a non-cash pre-tax gain of $989,000 associated with the change in the fair value of acquisition-related contingent consideration.
Molecular Solutions Segment
The gross profit percentage of the Molecular Solutions segment was 70% in 2020 compared to 68% in 2019. This increase was attributable to a more favorable product mix as a result of higher sales of higher gross profit products and services partially offset by the decline in other revenues which contribute 100% to the gross profit percentage.
Research and development expenses increased 31% to $9.8 million in 2020 from $7.5 million in 2019 due higher staffing costs and the inclusion of research and development expenses incurred by Diversigen for the full year in 2020 compared to two months in 2019.
Sales and marketing expenses decreased 12% to $12.0 million in 2020 compared to $13.7 million in 2019 largely due to a prior period increase in our reserve for uncollectible accounts associated primarily with a receivable from a large Chinese genomics customer and
a decline in travel expenses due to the COVID-19 pandemic. These decreases were partially offset by increased staffing costs and a full year of expenses incurred by Diversigen compared to two months in 2019.
General and administrative expenses increased 14% to $14.6 million in 2020 compared to $12.8 million in 2019, due to the inclusion of expenses incurred by Diversigen for in the full year 2020 compared to two months in 2019.
All of the above contributed to operating income of $38.0 million for 2020, which included non-cash charges of $6.0 million for depreciation and amortization and $1.1 million for stock-based compensation. The Molecular Solutions segment operating income also included a non-cash pre-tax gain of $110,000 associated with the change in the fair value of acquisition-related contingent consideration.
CONSOLIDATED INCOME TAXES
We continue to believe the full valuation allowance established in 2008 against our total U.S. deferred tax asset is appropriate as the facts and circumstances necessitating the allowance have not changed. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a federal tax benefit of $637,000 and a state income tax benefit of $156,000 compared to a federal tax benefit of $832,000 and state income tax expense of $892,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Foreign income tax expense of $12.2 million and $4.6 million was recorded in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in income tax expense was largely a result of the increase in income before taxes generated by our Canadian subsidiary.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our cash and cash equivalents and available-for-sale securities increased to $257.1 million at December 31, 2020 from $189.8 million at December 31, 2019. Our working capital increased to $242.4 million at December 31, 2020 from $191.8 million at December 31, 2019.
During 2020, net cash provided by operating activities was $5.8 million. Our net loss of $14.9 million included non-cash charges for depreciation and amortization expense of $9.4 million, stock-based compensation expense of $7.1 million, a provision for doubtful accounts of $941,000, and other net non-cash charges of $165,000. Operating activities also included a $1.1 million non-cash gain associated with the change in the estimated fair value of contingent consideration and a $496,000 contingent consideration payment representing the excess of the total contingent consideration payment made during the first quarter of 2020 over the fair value of the liability estimated at the time of acquisition. Sources of cash generated from our working capital accounts included a $7.4 million increase in accounts payable due to the timing of invoice payments, a $7.3 million increase in accrued expenses associated with the accruals for current year management incentive bonuses and higher sales tax payable, and a $1.1 million increase in deferred revenue associated with customer prepayments. Offsetting these sources of cash were an increase in inventory of $8.6 million to meet anticipated demand to support COVID-19 testing programs and to fulfill international HIV sales. An additional use of cash was a $2.3 million increase in accounts receivable largely resulting from an increase in product orders placed during the fourth quarter of 2020.
Net cash used in investing activities was $14.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which reflects $90.1 million used to purchase investments, $26.7 million used to acquire property and equipment largely associated with increasing capacity in anticipation of increased product demand in 2021, $3.0 million to acquire UrSure, and $2.3 million used to purchase certain patent and product rights from a third party, partially offset by $107.7 million in proceeds from the maturities and redemptions of investments.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $92.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which largely resulted from the $95.0 million in net proceeds from the issuance of common stock in connection with a public offering and proceeds of stock option exercises of $3.2 million, partially offset by $3.0 million used for payment of an acquisition-related contingent consideration obligation and $2.1 million used for the repurchase of common stock to satisfy withholding taxes related to the vesting of restricted shares awarded to our employees.
We expect current balances of cash and cash equivalents and available-for-sale securities to be sufficient to fund our current and foreseeable operating and capital needs. Our cash requirements, however, may vary materially from those now planned due to many
factors, including, but not limited to, the scope and timing of future strategic acquisitions, the progress of our research and development programs, the scope and results of clinical testing, the cost of any future litigation, the magnitude of capital expenditures, including continued investment to expand our capacity to manufacture products for COVID-19 testing, changes in existing and potential relationships with business partners, the timing and cost of obtaining regulatory approvals, the timing and cost of future stock purchases, the costs involved in obtaining and enforcing patents, proprietary rights and any necessary licenses, the cost and timing of expansion of sales and marketing activities, market acceptance of new products, competing technological and market developments, the impact of the current economic environment and other factors. In addition, $99.4 million or 39% of our $257.1 million in cash, cash equivalents and available-for-sale securities at December 31, 2020 as held by to our Canadian subsidiary, DNAG. Repatriation of such cash into the United States exceeding certain levels could have adverse tax consequences.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations discusses our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these financial statements requires that we make judgements and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We base our judgments and estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 of the Notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 15 of this Annual Report. We consider the following accounting policies, which have been discussed with our Audit Committee, to be most critical in understanding the more complex judgments that are involved in preparing our financial statements and the uncertainties that could impact our results of operations, financial condition and cash flows.
Revenue Recognition.
Product sales. Revenue from product sales is recognized upon transfer of control of a product to a customer based on an amount that reflects the consideration we are entitled to, net of allowances for any discounts or rebates.
We generally do not grant product return rights to our customers, except for (i) warranty returns, (ii) return rights on sales of our OraQuick® In-Home HIV test to the retail trade, and (iii) under the terms of a long-term contract with a genomics customer, which was amended in 2020 to remove the return rights provision.
Historically, returns arising from warranty issues have been infrequent and immaterial. Accordingly, we expense warranty returns as incurred.
We record shipping and handling charges billed to our customers as product revenue and the related expense as cost of products sold.
Service Revenues. Service revenues represent microbiome laboratory testing and analytical services. We recognize revenues when we satisfy our performance obligation for services rendered.
Arrangements with multiple-performance obligations. In arrangements involving more than one performance obligation, which largely applies to our service revenue stream, each required performance obligation is evaluated to determine whether it qualifies as a distinct performance obligation based on whether (i) the customer can benefit from the good or service either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available and (ii) the good or service is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract. The consideration under the arrangement is then allocated to each separate distinct performance obligation based on each respective relative stand-alone selling price. The estimated selling price of each deliverable is determined using an observable cost plus margin approach. The consideration allocated to each distinct performance obligation is recognized as revenue when control is transferred for the related goods or services or when the performance obligation has been satisfied.
Other revenues. Other revenues consist primarily of royalty income, funding of research and development efforts and cost reimbursements under a charitable support agreement. Royalties from licensees are based on third-party sales of licensed products and are recorded when the related third-party product sale occurs. Funding and charitable support reimbursements are recorded as the activities are being performed in accordance with the respective agreements.
Deferred Revenue. We record deferred revenue when funds are received prior to the recognition of the associated revenue. Deferred revenue as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 included customer prepayments of $3.2 million and $1.9 million, respectively. Deferred revenue as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 also included $1.6 million and $1.8 million, respectively, associated with a long-term contract that has variable pricing based on volume. The average price over the life of contract was determined based on the expected revenues and revenue is recognized at that rate when the product is delivered to the customer.
Financing and Payment. Our payment terms vary by the type and location of our customer and products or services offered. Payment terms differ by jurisdiction and customer but payment is generally required in a term ranging from 30 to 120 days from date of shipment or satisfaction of the performance obligation. For certain products or services and customer types, we may require payment before the products are delivered or services are rendered to the customer.
Practical expedients and exemptions. Taxes assessed by governmental authorities, such as sales or value-added taxes, are excluded from product revenues.
Sales commissions are expensed when incurred if the amortization period is one year or less. These costs are recorded in sales and marketing expense in the consolidated statements of operations. If the amortization period exceeds one year, we defer the cost of the commission and expense over the life of the related sales contract.
Inventories.
Our inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value, with cost determined on a first-in, first-out basis, and include the cost of raw materials, labor and overhead. The majority of our inventories are subject to expiration dating, which can be extended in certain circumstances. We continually evaluate quantities on hand and the carrying value of our inventories to determine the need for reserves for excess and obsolete inventories, based on prior experience as well as estimated forecasts of product sales. We reserve for unidentified scrap or spoilage based on historical write-off rates. We also consider items identified through specific identification procedures in assessing the adequacy of our reserve. When factors indicate that impairment has occurred, either a reserve is established against the inventories’ carrying value or the inventories are completely written off, as in the case of lapsing expiration dates.
During 2020, 2019, and 2018, we wrote-off inventory which had a cost of $2.6 million, $1.3 million and $1.3 million, respectively. These write-offs were a result of quality, scrap and product expiration issues. Although we make every effort to ensure the accuracy of our forecasts of future product demand, any significant unanticipated changes in demand could have a significant impact on the carrying value of our inventories and reported operating results.
Deferred Tax Assets and Liabilities.
At December 31, 2020, we had federal Net Operating Loss (“NOL”) carryforwards of $136.3 million. The net deferred tax assets, before the valuation allowance, associated with these NOLs and other temporary differences were $35.4 million at December 31, 2020. Net operating losses will begin to expire in 2021. In assessing the realizability of deferred tax assets, we consider whether it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during the period in which those temporary differences become deductible or the NOLs and credit carryforwards can be utilized. We consider the scheduled reversal of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income and tax planning strategies in making this assessment.
We currently have a full valuation allowance recorded against our total U.S. deferred tax asset as we had determined in 2008 that it was more likely than not that we would not realize the benefits associated with our deferred tax assets. Each year, we continue to reevaluate our valuation allowance position and believe that it is more likely than not that our U.S. deferred income tax asset will not be realized. As such, we maintain a full valuation allowance as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 against our deferred tax assets associated with the operations subject to income tax in the U.S.
The Tax Reform Act of 1986 contains provisions under Internal Revenue Code (“IRC”) Section 382 that limit the annual amount of federal and state NOLs available to be used in any given year in the event of a significant change in ownership. Our ability to use our federal and state NOL carryforwards to offset future federal income tax obligations could be limited by changes in the ownership of our stock. The Company does not believe, however, that there is a Section 382 limitation that will impair our future ability to utilize NOLs to offset our future taxable income and the Company continues to review ownership changes on an annual basis.
Business Combinations and Contingent Consideration.
Acquired businesses are accounted for using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires that the purchase price be allocated to the net assets acquired at their respective fair values. Any excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair values of the net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill. Amounts allocated to contingent consideration are recorded to the balance sheet at the date of acquisition based on their relative fair values. The purchase price allocation requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially at the acquisition date, with respect to intangible assets. Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made are reasonable, they are based in part on historical experience and information obtained from the management of the acquired companies and are inherently uncertain.
We account for contingent consideration in accordance with applicable guidance provided within the business combination accounting guidance. As part of our consideration for our recent acquisitions, we are contractually obligated to pay certain consideration resulting from the outcome of future events. Therefore, we are required to update our underlying assumptions each reporting period, based on new developments, and record such contingent consideration liabilities at fair value until the contingency is resolved. Changes in the fair value of the contingent consideration liabilities are recognized each reporting period and included in our consolidated statements of operations. Our estimates of fair value are based on assumptions we believe to be reasonable, but the assumptions are uncertain and involve significant judgment by management. Updates to these assumptions could have a significant impact on our results of operations in any given period and any updates to the fair value of the contingent consideration could differ materially from the previous estimates.
Examples of critical estimates used in valuing certain intangible assets and contingent consideration include:
•
future expected cash flows from sales and acquired developed technologies;
•
the acquired company's trade name and customer relationships as well as assumptions about the period of time the acquired trade name and customer relationships will continue to be used in the combined company's portfolio;
•
the probability of meeting the future events; and
•
discount rates used to determine the present value of estimated future cash flows.
These estimates are inherently uncertain and unpredictable, and if different estimates were used the purchase price for the acquisition could be allocated to the acquired assets and liabilities differently from the allocation that we have made. In addition, unanticipated events and circumstances may occur, which may affect the accuracy or validity of such estimates, and if such events occur we may be required to record a charge against the value ascribed to an acquired asset or an increase in the amounts recorded for assumed liabilities.