ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K (the “Annual Report” or “Report”) includes a number of forward-looking statements that reflect management’s current views with respect to future events and financial performance. Forward-looking statements are projections in respect of future events or our future financial performance. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “expects,” “plans,” “anticipates,” “believes,” “estimates,” “predicts,” “potential” or “continue” or the negative of these terms or other comparable terminology. Those statements include statements regarding the intent, belief or current expectations of us and members of our management team, as well as the assumptions on which such statements are based.
Although we believe that the expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, we cannot guarantee future results, levels of activity, or performance. These statements are only predictions and involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors. Some of these risks are included in the section entitled “Risk Factors” set forth in this Annual Report and in other reports that we file with the SEC. The occurrence of any of these risks, or others of which we are currently unaware, may cause our company’s actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements. These risks include, by way of example and without limitation:
● our ability to successfully commercialize our products and services on a large enough scale to generate profitable operations;
● our ability to maintain and develop relationships with customers and suppliers;
● our ability to successfully integrate acquired businesses or new products, or to realize anticipated synergies in connection with acquisitions of businesses or products;
● expectations concerning our ability to raise additional funding and to continue as a going concern;
● our ability to successfully implement our business plan;
● our ability to avoid, or to adequately address any intellectual property claims brought by third parties; and
● the anticipated impact of any changes in industry regulation.
Readers are urged to carefully review and consider the various disclosures made by us in this report and in our other reports filed with the SEC, including our Form 8-K/A filed with the SEC on July 8, 2019, which includes the audited financial statements for our subsidiary, Oncotelic, as of and for the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017. We undertake no obligation to update or revise forward-looking statements to reflect changed assumptions, the occurrence of unanticipated events or changes in the future operating results over time except as required by law. We believe that our assumptions are based upon reasonable data derived from and known about our business and operations. No assurances are made that actual results of operations or the results of our future activities will not differ materially from our assumptions.
Corporate History
Oncotelic Therapeutics, Inc. (also d/b/a Mateon Therapeutics, Inc.) (“Oncotelic”), was formed in the State of New York in 1988 as OXiGENE, Inc., was reincorporated in the State of Delaware in 1992, and changed its name to Mateon Therapeutics, Inc. in 2016, and Oncotelic Therapeutics, Inc. in November 2020. Oncotelic conducts business activities through Oncotelic and its wholly-owned subsidiaries, Oncotelic, Inc., a Delaware corporation, PointR Data, Inc. (“PointR”), a Delaware corporation, and EdgePoint AI, Inc. (“Edgepoint”), a Delaware Corporation for which there are non-controlling interests, (Oncotelic, Oncotelic Inc., PointR and Edgepoint are collectively called the “Company”). The Company is evaluating the further development of its product candidates OXi4503 as a treatment for acute myeloid leukemia and myelodysplastic syndromes and CA4P in combination with a checkpoint inhibitor for the treatment of advanced metastatic melanoma.
Amendments to Certificate of Incorporation
In November 2020 the Company filed an amendment to its Certificate of Incorporation with the Secretary of State for the State of Delaware changing its name from “Mateon Therapeutics, Inc.” to “Oncotelic Therapeutics, Inc.” A notice of corporate action had been filed with the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (“FINRA”), requesting confirmation to change its name and approval for a new ticker symbol. On March 29, 2021, the Company received approval from FINRA on its notice of corporate action, and effective March 30, 2021, the Company’s ticker symbol has changed from “MATN” to “OTLC”.
In January 2021, the Company filed an additional amendment to its Certificate of Incorporation, as amended (the “Charter Amendment”), with the Secretary of State for the State of Delaware, which Charter Amendment went effective immediately upon acceptance by the Secretary of State for the State of Delaware. As approved by the Company’s stockholders by written consent on August 10, 2020, the Charter Amendment increased the number of authorized shares of Common Stock from 150,000,000 shares to 750,000,000 shares.
Merger Agreement with Oncotelic, Inc.
In April 2019, Oncotelic entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger with Oncotelic Inc. (the “Merger Agreement”), a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on the treatment of cancer using TGF-b RNA, and Oncotelic Acquisition Corporation (the “Merger Sub”, a newly formed wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company). Oncotelic and Oncotelic Inc. entered into the Merger Agreement in order to create a publicly traded company with a pipeline of immunotherapies that target several cancer markets which currently lack adequate treatment options. Following the satisfaction of closing conditions contained in the Merger Agreement (the “Merger”), the Merger Sub was merged with and into Oncotelic, with Oncotelic Inc. surviving the Merger as a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company.
Merger Agreement with PointR Data, Inc.
In August 2019, the Company entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “PointR Merger Agreement”) with PointR (the “PointR Merger”), a privately-held developer of high-performance cluster computer and AI applications. The PointR Merger Agreement provided, that subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions, PointR would be merged with and into a newly formed subsidiary of the Company, with PointR surviving the PointR Merger as a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company.
In November 2019, the Company entered into Amendment No. 1 to the PointR Merger Agreement (the “Amendment”) with PointR and consummated the PointR Merger. The PointR Merger is intended to create a publicly traded AI driven immuno-oncology company with a robust pipeline of first in class TGF-β immunotherapies for late stage cancers such as gliomas, pancreatic cancer and melanoma.
For additional information on both mergers, refer to our Annual Report on form 10-K filed with the SEC on May 14, 2020.
Company Overview
We are a clinical stage biopharmaceutical company developing drugs for the treatment of cancer. Our goal is to advance our drug candidates into late stage pivotal clinical trials and either sell marketing rights to a larger pharmaceutical company or seek FDA approval ourselves.
The Company’s lead product candidate, OT-101, is being developed as a broad-spectrum anti-cancer drug that can also be used in combination with other standard cancer therapies to establish an effective multi-modality treatment strategy for difficult-to-treat cancers. Together, we plan to initiate phase 3 clinical trials for OT-101 in both high-grade glioma and pancreatic cancer. During phase 2 clinical trials in pancreatic cancer, melanoma, and colorectal cancers (Study P001) and in high-grade gliomas (Study G004), meaningful clinical benefits were observed and OT-101 exhibited a favorable safety profile. These clinical benefits included long-term survival and meaningful tumor reduction. Both partial and complete responses have been observed in the G004 Phase 2 clinical trial of OT-101 as a single agent in patients with aggressive brain tumors.
The Company’s self-immunization protocol (“SIP™”) is based on novel and proprietary sequential treatment of cancers with OT-101 (an antisense against TGF-ß2) and chemotherapies. This sequential treatment strategy is aimed at achieving effective self-immunization against a patients’ own cancer, resulting in robust therapeutic immune response and consequently better control of the cancer and improved survival. Prolonged states of being cancer-free have been observed in some patients with the most aggressive forms of cancer, raising a renewed hope for a potential cure. The use of OT-101 lifts the suppression of the patient’s immune cells around the cancer tissue, providing the foundation for an effective initial priming, which is critical for a successful immune response. The subsequent chemotherapy results in the release of neoantigens that result in a robust boost of the immune response. We believe that a rational combination of the Company’s SIP™ platform with immune-modulatory drugs like interleukin 2 (IL-2) and/or immune checkpoint inhibitors has the potential to help achieve sustained and robust immune responses in patients with the most difficult-to-treat forms of cancer.
The Company is also working on developing OT-101 as a possible drug candidate that can be deployed in various epidemic and pandemic diseases, such as Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (“SARS”) and specifically for the current COVID-19. As of the date of this report, the Company has filed an IND with the FDA to permit the Company to conduct clinical trials to prove the efficacy of OT-101 against COVID-19. The Company has initiated clinical trials in Latin America to evaluate the efficacy of OT-101 against COVID-19 and expects preliminary results in Q2, 2021. The Company plans to initiate the Company’s Phase 2 clinical trial of OT-101, a TGF-β antisense, for the treatment of patients with mild to severe COVID-19 infection. Argentina now has the fifth highest tally of confirmed coronavirus cases worldwide, with the latest additions taking it past Colombia in a global ranking compiled by John Hopkins University. This multi-center, double blind, randomized, placebo-control study will evaluate the safety and efficacy of OT-101 in combination with standard of care on two (2) patient cohorts - 1) mild or moderate disease, and 2) severe disease requiring mechanical ventilation or intubation. The study will enroll approximately 24 patients in Argentina with an aggregate total of 72 patients study wide.
In addition, the Company is developing artemisinin. Artemisinin, purified from a plant Artemisia annua, is able to inhibit TGF-β activity and is able to neutralize COVID-19. The Company’s test results during an in vitro study at Utah State University showed Artemisinin having an EC50 of 0.45 ug/ml, and a Safety Index of 140. Artemisinin can target multiple viral threats including COVID-19 by suppressing both viral replication and clinical symptoms that arise from viral infection. Viral replication cannot occur without TGF-β. Artemisinin also has been reported to have antiviral activities against hepatitis B and C viruses, human herpes viruses, HIV-1, influenza virus A, and bovine viral diarrhea virus in the low micromolar range. TGF-β surge and cytokine storm cannot occur without TGF-β. In a clinical study undertaken in India, clinical consequences related to the TGF-β surge, including ARDS and cytokine storm, were suppressed by targeting TGF-β with Artemisinin. The clinical study (“ARTI-19”) showing these results was a global study with India to contribute at least 120 patients to the total aggregate of 3000 patients using ArtiShieldTM (“ArtiShieldTM”). The ARTI-19 trials were conducted in India by Windlas Biotech Private Limited (“Windlas”), the Company’s business partner in India, as part of the Company’s global effort at deploying ArtiShieldTM across India, Africa, and Latin America. The Windlas study evaluates the safety and efficacy of Artemisia absinthium Powder 500mg capsule of ArtiShieldTM in the treatment of adults with COVID-19. Data from ARTI-19 is expected by end of 4Q20. The ARTI-19 trial was registered under the Clinical Trials Registry India (CTRI) with three active sites and additional sites to be added as the trial progresses and expands. ARTI-19 in India is being conducted by Windlas, as part of the Company’s global effort at deploying ArtiShieldTM across India, Africa, and Latin America. For more information on developments after December 31, 2020, see below under Entry into MOU and Agreement with Windlas.
In January 2021 and subsequently in February 2021, the Company announced preliminary results for ARTIVeda™, or PulmoHeal™, which is the Company’s lead Ayurvedic drug against COVID-19 in India and being developed by the Company in partnership with Windlas. These interim results are based on 120 randomized patients across 3 sites in India. The ARTI-19 India trial completed enrollment of 120 randomized individuals and we expect final data available 6-8 weeks thereafter. Upon completion of the trial results, it is the Company’s objective to file for Emergency Use Authorization (“EUA”) with regulatory authorities around the world, including India, the United States, and the United Kingdom; discussions regarding EUA with several of these authorities have commenced.
No adverse events were reported that required discontinuation of treatment. When ARTIVeda™ / PulmoHeal™ was added to the standard of care (“SOC”), more patients recovered faster than SOC alone.31 of 39 (79.5%) of patients taking became asymptomatic after 5-day of therapy. In comparison, only 12 of 21 control patients (57.1%) treated with SOC alone became asymptomatic on day 5 (P=0.028, Fisher’s exact test). For the sicklier patients (WHO scale 4), the median time to becoming asymptomatic was only 5 days for the ARTIVeda™ / PulmoHeal™ + SOC group (N=18), as compared to 14 days for the SOC alone group (N=10) (P=0.004, Log-rank test).These data sets provide clinical support that targeting the TGF-β pathway with ARTIVeda™ / PulmoHeal™ may contribute to a faster recovery of patients with mild to moderate COVID-19. The trend was more pronounced with higher initial disease status. Log rank statistics: WHO-scale 2,3,4: p= 0.0369 /RR = 1.476 (0.8957-2.433), WHO-scale 3,4: p= 0.026/ RR = 1.581 (0.9094-2.747), WHO-scale 4: p= 0.0043/ RR = 2.038 (0.9961-4.168). RR = rate ratio for recovery. The Company has published the results of the trial in certain renowned publications.
In addition to ARTIVeda™ / PulmoHeal™, the Company has also developed and launched a mobile application called ArtiHealth and a post marketing survey that have been included with ArtiVeda, which along with ArtiHealth is called PulmoHeal™. PulmoHeal™ is a full evaluation package of drug and assessment platforms for COVID-19, and other respiratory disease patients. Windlas has launched PulmoHeal™ on Amazon.in and a couple other websites. The platform has been powered by the Company’s AI supercomputing and AI platform in conjunction with IBM. Initially, the cough assessment will be powered by Salcit Pvt. Ltd.’s (“Salcit”) AI module. Per Salcit, their AI module has overall accuracy in predicting the pattern of the disease at 91.97%, sensitivity at 87.2%, and specificity at 93.69%.
Our artificial intelligence subsidiary, PointR, develops and deploys high performance cluster computers and AI technologies as a supercomputing grid that can be layered in and interconnected to create an all-point mesh to harvest operational data within manufacturing plant, hospitals, clinics, phase I units. These grids provide real-time, localized decision-making harvesting complex data from structured and unstructured sources. The deployment of this supercomputing grid enables data capture and insight extraction in real time in blocks which are chained into blockchain ledger records serving as immutable transactions for stakeholders such as regulatory agencies, caretakers, insurers, payers, and manufacturers. The PointR grid can integrate and fuse data from any type of sensors or collection devices. For example, the Vision platform is a network of activity detection cameras functionalized with AI algorithms to monitor, evaluate, and archive real time visual data as a series of metadata entries in a Blockchain ledger. In the pharmaceutical industry PointR’s AI combined with Blockchain will be used in the entire life cycle of a drug: discovery, clinical trials and manufacturing. Leveraging its deep partnership with IBM, the PointR team will combine its own AI Vision technology with industry standard Blockchain to transform drug manufacturing and real-world evidence monitoring for clinical trials. The combined system has the potential to automatically record individual key steps in cGMP manufacturing operations including the flow of people, raw materials and operations in trusted perpetual blockchain ledgers that are indisputable. This has the potential to create much more efficient GMP manufacturing operations while simultaneously improving reliability and data security. The Company is also developing AI driven telehealth and other applications, that would be used in health monitoring and supporting the Company’s various clinical programs. The PointR technology is planned to be transferred into Edgepoint. Edgepoint also plans to redeploy TrustPoint, a tested technology for GMP drug manufacturing relieving human errors in supply chain and increasing compliance with warehouse operating procedures. For example, the warehouse module of TrustPoint will automatically create a shopping list from standard templates and alert supply chain personnel to collect and deliver a list of raw materials to manufacturing. To support the anti-viral drug program, Edgepoint is developing an AI app to remotely monitor patients’ respiratory status just using a mobile phone. Protected by patents and partnership with IBM Watson Health Research the app allows patients to cough and speak into a mobile phone app that can be operated either by a nurse or by the end-user patient at home. The app is part of the company’s Telehealth platform to remotely monitor patient’s progression of disease. The Company’s clinical trials of the anti-viral agent ARTI-Shield will deploy the AI app to COVID patients in the study to collect and score data by medical professionals. The data will be used by the AI to predict and diagnose patients as a de-novo software as a medical device. After regulatory approvals, the app will be bundled with ARTI-Shield™ to be prescribed by physicians. Patients will be able to self-monitor progression of their respiratory condition with the AI app much as they check their temperature with a thermometer. The app virtualizes and expands the use of spirometers in the form of a software app.
Since April 2019, we have been operating under significant capital constraints, which has curtailed our ability to achieve meaningful progress in either of the Company’s two clinical programs - one of which is developing OXi4503 as a treatment for acute myeloid leukemia and myelodysplastic syndromes and the other of which is developing CA4P in combination with a checkpoint inhibitor for the treatment of advanced metastatic melanoma. We believe that the merger of Oncotelic and Oncotelic Inc. creates a combined company that has potential to generate shareholder value through a promising pipeline of next generation immunotherapies targeting several significant cancer markets where there is a lack of therapeutic options and lack of an effective immunotherapy protocol.
Research Service Agreement between Golden Mountain Partners LLC (GMP) and the Company.
When COVID-19 emerged in China, the Company and GMP contemplated a collaboration to develop drug candidates for COVID-19. Oncotelic Inc. and GMP entered into a research and services agreement (the “GMP Research Agreement”) on February 3, 2020 memorializing their collaborative efforts to develop and test COVID-19 antisense therapeutics (the “GMP Agreement Product”). On March 18, 2020, the Company reported the anti-viral activity of OT-101 - its lead drug candidate currently in phase 3 testing in pancreatic cancer and glioblastoma. In an in vitro antiviral testing performed by an independent laboratory, OT-101 has an 50% effective concentration (EC50) of 7.6 µg/mL and is not toxic at the highest dose of 1000 µg/mL giving a safety index (SI) value of >130, which is considered highly active. On March 23, 2020, the Company and GMP entered into a supplement to the GMP Research Agreement (the “GMP Research Supplement”) to confirm the inclusion of OT-101 within the scope of the GMP Research Agreement as a GMP Agreement Product, pending positive confirmatory testing against COVID-19. In consideration for the financial support provided by GMP for the research, pursuant to the terms of the GMP Research Agreement (as amended by the GMP Research Supplement) GMP is entitled to obtain certain exclusive rights to the use of the GMP Agreement Product in the COVID Field on a global basis, and an economic interest in the use of the GMP Agreement Product in the COVID Field including 50/50 profit sharing. As described in the GMP Research Supplement, the Company intends to license or assign intellectual property rights, including the 2020 Patent Application and any other intellectual property rights owned or controlled by the Company relating to the GMP Agreement Product, OXi4503 and CA4P, to a joint venture company (the “Joint Venture Transaction”) to be established jointly between Oncotelic Inc. and GMP (or its designee), as well as providing management services and other expertise to the joint venture company. GMP intends that it (or its designee, as the case may be) shall provide funding to the joint venture company to support its development and commercial activities in the joint venture company’s territories, and in each case, on terms to be agreed by the parties. GMP shall be entitled to use its governmental relations and local expertise in Greater China to assist with coordinating the research, development and commercialization of (i) the GMP Agreement Products in the COVID Field, (ii) the GMP Agreement Products in the OT101 Oncology Field, (iii) OXi4503; and (iv) CA4P, in each case in Greater China.
The joint venture company is intended to be owned 50% by Oncotelic Inc. and 50% by GMP (or its designee), and its principal activities shall be to research, develop, bring to market and commercialize: (i) the GMP Agreement Products in the COVID Field on a global basis, (ii) the GMP Agreement Products in the OT101 Oncology Field in the territory set forth above, (iii) OXi4503 in the territory set forth above; and (iv) CA4P in the territory set forth above. On April 6, 2020, the Company announced that it had delivered the requisite testing results to GMP confirming the applicability and potential use of OT-101 for the treatment of COVID-19. OT-101 exhibited potent activity against both COVID-19 and SARS with a robust safety index of >500. Also, the Company has submitted a Pre-Investigational New Drug application package to the Food and Drug Administration. GMP paid the Company fees of $300,000 during the three months ended March 31, 2020 and $900,000 during the three months ended June 30, 2020 for the services rendered under the agreement. The Company also recorded approximately $40,000 for reimbursement of actual costs incurred. The Company has received the total fees from GMP as of the date of this report.
In June 2020, the Company secured $2 million in debt financing, evidenced by a one year convertible note (the “GMP Note”) from GMP or it’s affiliate, to conduct a clinical trial evaluating OT-101 against COVID-19 bearing 2% annual interest, and is personally guaranteed by Dr. Vuong Trieu, the Chief Executive Officer of the Company. The GMP Note is convertible into the Company’s Common Stock upon the GMP Note’s maturity one year from the date of the GMP Note, at the Company’s Common Stock price on the date of conversion with no discount. GMP does not have the option to convert prior to the GMP Note’s maturity at the end of one year. Such financing will be utilized solely to fund the clinical trial.
The Company’s liability under GMP Note commenced to accrue when GMP first began to pay for services related to the clinical trial to our third-party clinical research organization, up to a maximum of $2 million. As of December 31, 2020, the clinical research organization has invoiced GMP ‘s affiliate for the entire $2 million, and the Company has accrued as a convertible debt under the terms of the GMP Note.
Entry into MOU and Agreement with Windlas
In August 2020 the Company executed a memorandum of understanding (the “MOU”) with Windlas for the development and commercialization of Artemisinin as a therapeutic pharmaceutical, nutraceutical and herbal supplement against COVID-19. The development of Artemisinin against COVID-19 is dependent on the successful completion of ARTI-19 clinical trial “Artemisinin Intervention trial against COVID-19”, which is being initiated globally in Africa, India, and South America. Windlas will be our manufacturing partner for the clinical trial batches as well as commercial batches. In September 2020 the Company executed the final MOU with Windlas regarding the development and commercialization of Artemisinin as therapeutic pharmaceutical, nutraceutical and herbal supplement against COVID-19.
The ARTI-19 trial was cleared by India regulatory authorities and the trial was registered under CTRI and three sites had been selected, their IRB approval obtained, their staffs have been trained into the protocol/EDC. Additional sites will be added as the trial progressed. Enrollment of 120 patients was completed during the year ended December 31, 2020. In January 2021 and subsequently in February 2021, the Company announced preliminary results for ARTIVeda, or PulmoHeal, which is the Company’s lead Ayurvedic drug against COVID-19 in India and being developed by the Company in partnership with Windlas, and we expect final data available 6-8 weeks thereafter. Upon completion of the trial results, it is the Company’s objective to file for Emergency Use Authorization (“EUA”) with regulatory authorities around the world, including India, the United States, and the United Kingdom; discussions regarding EUA with several of these authorities have commenced. For more information, please see above under Company Overview.
Agreement with Autotelic BIO
Oncotelic Inc. had entered into a license agreement in February 2018 (the “ATB Agreement”) with Autotelic BIO (“ATB”), a non-affiliated Korean Company. The ATB Agreement licensed the use of OT-101, in combination with Interleukin-2 (the “Combined Product”), and granted to ATB an exclusive license under the Oncotelic Inc. technology to develop, make, have made, use, sell, offer for sale, import and export the Combined Product, and the Combined Product only, in the field, throughout the entire world (excluding the United States of America and Canada) as the territory, on the terms and subject to the conditions of the ATB Agreement. The ATB Agreement requires ATB to be responsible for the development of the Combined Product. Oncotelic Inc. was responsible to provide to ATB the technical know-how and other pertinent information on the development of the Combined Product. ATB paid Oncotelic Inc. a non-refundable milestone payment in consideration for the rights and licenses granted to ATB under the ATB Agreement, and ATB was to pay Oncotelic Inc. $500,000 within sixty days from the successful completion of the in vivo efficacy studies. This payment was made in June 2020 after the successful completion of the in-vivo study and the Company recorded the revenue during the three months ended June 30, 2020. In addition, ATB is to pay Oncotelic Inc.: (i) $500,000 upon Oncotelic Inc.’s completion of the technology know how and Oncotelic’s technical assistance and regulatory consultation to ATB, as determined by the preparation of a Current Good Regulation Practices audit or certification by the Food and Drug Administration, with a mutual goal to obtain marketing approval of the Combined Product in the aforementioned territory; (ii) $1,000,000 upon receiving marketing approval of the Combined Product in Japan, China, Brazil, Mexico, Russia, or Korea; and (iii) $2,000,000 from receiving marketing approval of the Combined Product in Germany, France, Spain, Italy, or the United Kingdom. ATB paid the Company fees of $0.5 million during the three months ended June 30, 2020 for the successful completion of the in-vivo efficacy studies.
Private Placement through JH Darbie & Co., Inc.
Beginning July 2020, the Company offered and sold certain units (“Units”) in a private placement through JH Darbie & Co., Inc. (“JH Darbie”), with each unit consisting of: (i) 25,000 shares of Edgepoint common stock, par value $0.01 per share (“Edgepoint Common Stock”), for a price of $1.00 per share of Edgepoint Common Stock; (ii) one convertible promissory note issued by the Company (the “Unit Note”), convertible into up to 25,000 shares of EdgePoint Common Stock at a conversion price of $1.00 per share, or up to 138,889 shares of the Company’s Common Stock, at a conversion price of $0.18 per share; and (iii) 100,000 warrants (the “Warrants”), consisting of (a) 50,000 warrants to purchase an equivalent number of shares of EdgePoint Common Stock at $1.00 per share (“Edgepoint Warrant”), and (b) 50,000 warrants to purchase an equivalent number of shares of Company Common Stock at $0.20 per share (the “JH Darbie Financing”). In total, as of December 31, 2020, the Company had issued and sold a total of 63 Units. In addition, 6.3 Units were issued to JH Darbie as fees. Subsequent to December 31, 2020 and through the date of this report, the Company sold the rest of the 37 Units and JH Darbie has earned additional 3.7 Units as fees.
Through December 31, 2020, the JH Darbie Financing resulted in gross proceeds of $3.15 million to the Company. Placement agent fees of $0.4 million were paid to JH Darbie pursuant to that certain Placement Agent Agreement, dated February 25, 2020 between the Company and JH Darbie (the “Darbie Placement Agreement”). In addition, the Company paid approximately $39,000 as legal costs for the transaction. Under the Darbie Placement Agreement, JH Darbie has the right to sell a minimum of 40 Units and a maximum of 100 Units on a best-efforts basis. The Company has had five tranches under the JH Darbie Financing between July and December 2020. Subsequent to December 31, 2020, the Company received gross funds of $1.85 million through 4 tranches under the JH Darbie Financing. Placement fees of $0.2 million were paid to JH Darbie in connection with such financing.
Paycheck Protection Program
In April 2020, the Company received loan proceeds in the amount of $250,000 under the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) which was established under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act and is administered by the Small Business Administration (“SBA”). The PPP provides loans to qualifying businesses in amounts up to 2.5 times the average monthly payroll expenses and was designed to provide direct financial incentive to qualifying businesses to keep their workforce employed during the Coronavirus crisis. PPP Loans are uncollateralized and guaranteed by the SBA and are forgivable after a “covered period” (8 weeks or 24 weeks) as long as the borrower maintains its payroll levels and uses the loan proceeds for eligible expenses, including payroll, benefits, mortgage interest, rent and utilities. The forgiveness amount will be reduced if the borrower terminates employees or reduces salaries and wages more than 25% during the covered period. Any unforgiven portion is payable over 2 years if issued before, or 5 years if issued after, June 5, 2020 at an interest rate of 1% with payments deferred until the SBA remits the borrowers loan forgiveness amount to the lender, or if the borrower does not apply for forgiveness, 10 months after the covered period. PPP loans provide for customary events of default, including payment defaults, breach of representations and warranties, and insolvency events and may be accelerated upon occurrence of one or more of these events of default. Additionally, the PPP Loans do not include prepayment penalties.
The Company believes it met the PPP’s loan forgiveness requirements but has not yet applied for forgiveness. When legal release is received from the SBA or lender, the Company will record the amount forgiven as forgiveness income within the other income section of its statement of operations. If any portion of the PPP loan is not forgiven, the Company will be required to repay that portion, plus interest, through the maturity date.
The SBA reserves the right to audit any PPP loan, regardless of size. These audits may occur after the forgiveness has been granted. In accordance with the CARES Act, all borrowers are required to maintain their PPP loan documentation for six years after the loan was forgiven or repaid in full and to provide that documentation to the SBA upon request.
Consent Solicitation
On June 25, 2020, the Company commenced a solicitation of shareholder consents (the “Consent Solicitation”), pursuant to a consent solicitation statement (the “Consent Solicitation Statement”), to the holders (the “Stockholders”) of its Common Stock and Series A Convertible Preferred Stock. The deadline for Stockholders to respond to the Consent Solicitation Statement was August 10, 2020. Pursuant to the Consent Solicitation Statement, the following actions were approved by the written consent of the requisite number of Stockholders:
(1) changing the name of the Company to “Oncotelic Therapeutics, Inc.” and to changing the Company’s ticker symbol (the “Name Change”);
(2) amending the Company’s Amended and Restated 2015 Equity Incentive Plan to increase the number of shares of Common Stock available for issuance from 7.25 million shares to 27.25 million shares, and increasing the maximum number of stock awards that may be issued in any fiscal year from 500,000 to 1,000,000 shares (the “Plan Amendment”);
(3) increasing the authorized number of shares of Common Stock from 150,000,000 to 750,000,000 (the “Capital Increase”); and
(4) amending and restating the certificate of incorporation for the Company to give effect to the Name Change, Capital Increase and forum selection provision.
The Company filed the Current Report on Form 8-K with the SEC to declare the voting results on August 14, 2020. In November 2020 the Company filed an amendment to its Certificate of Incorporation with the Secretary of State for the State of Delaware changing its name from “Mateon Therapeutics, Inc.” to “Oncotelic Therapeutics, Inc.” A notice of corporate action had been filed with the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (“FINRA”), requesting confirmation to change its name and approval for a new ticker symbol. On March 29, 2021, the Company received approval from FINRA on its notice of corporate action, and effective March 30, 2021, the Company’s ticker symbol will be changed from “MATN” to “OTLC”.
In January 2021, the Company filed an additional amendment to its Certificate of Incorporation, as amended (the “Charter Amendment”), with the Secretary of State for the State of Delaware, which Charter Amendment went effective immediately upon acceptance by the Secretary of State for the State of Delaware. As approved by the Company’s stockholders by written consent on August 10, 2020, the Charter Amendment increased the number of authorized shares of Common Stock from 150,000,000 shares to 750,000,000 shares.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenues and expense during the reporting periods. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances at the time we make such estimates. Actual results and outcomes may differ materially from our estimates, judgments and assumptions. We periodically review our estimates in light of changes in circumstances, facts and experience. The effects of material revisions in estimates are reflected in the financial statements prospectively from the date of the change in estimate. Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
We define our critical accounting policies as those accounting principles that require us to make subjective estimates and judgments about matters that are uncertain and are likely to have a material impact on our financial condition and results of operations, as well as the specific manner in which we apply those principles. We believe the critical accounting policies used in the preparation of our financial statements that require significant estimates and judgments are the following:
Investment in Equity-based Securities
Prior to the Merger, Oncotelic Inc. received Series E Preferred Shares of Adhera Therapeutics, Inc. (“Adhera”) in consideration for the issuance of Oncotelic Inc.’s common stock under various Securities Purchase Agreements. The Company records its investments in equity securities initially at cost in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 321, Investments -Equity Securities (“ASC 321”). The Company subsequently marks the investments to market at each reporting period and, in accordance with ASU 2016-01, Financial Instruments - (Overall), records the unrealized gains or losses in the Statement of Operations. There were no unrealized gains or losses on investments in equity securities for the year ended December 31, 2019. There were no unrealized gains or losses on investments in equity securities for the year ended December 31, 2018. The Company identified certain disclosures by Adhera indicating their financial condition and that they may file for bankruptcy. As such the Company wrote off the long-term investment during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
The Company reviews long-lived assets, including definite-lived intangible assets, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. Recoverability of these assets is determined by comparing the forecasted undiscounted net cash flows of the operation to which the assets relate to the carrying amount. If the operation is determined to be unable to recover the carrying amount of its assets, then these assets are written down first, followed by other long-lived assets of the operation to fair value. Fair value is determined based on discounted cash flows or appraised values, depending on the nature of the assets. For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, there were no impairment losses recognized for long-lived assets.
Intangible Assets
The Company records its intangible assets at cost in accordance with ASC 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other. The Company reviews the intangible assets for impairment on an annual basis or if events or changes in circumstances indicate it is more likely than not that they are impaired. These events could include a significant change in the business climate, legal factors, a decline in operating performance, competition, sale or disposition of a significant portion of the business, or other factors.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price of acquired business over the estimated fair value of the identifiable net assets acquired. Goodwill is not amortized but is tested for impairment at least once annually, at the reporting unit level or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. The goodwill impairment test is applied by performing a qualitative assessment before calculating the fair value of the reporting unit. If, on the basis of qualitative factors, it is considered not more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than the carrying amount, further testing of goodwill for impairment would not be required. Otherwise, goodwill impairment is tested using a two-step approach.
The first step involves comparing the fair value of the reporting unit to its carrying amount. If the fair value of the reporting unit is determined to be greater than its carrying amount, there is no impairment. If the reporting unit’s carrying amount is determined to be greater than the fair value, the second step must be completed to measure the amount of impairment, if any. The second step involves calculating the implied fair value of goodwill by deducting the fair value of all tangible and intangible assets, excluding goodwill, of the reporting unit from the fair value of the reporting unit as determined in step one. The implied fair value of the goodwill in this step is compared to the carrying value of goodwill. If the implied fair value of the goodwill is less than the carrying value of the goodwill, an impairment loss equivalent to the difference is recorded.
Convertible Instruments
The Company evaluates and accounts for conversion options embedded in its convertible instruments in accordance with ASC 815 “Derivatives and Hedging”.
ASC 815 generally provides three criteria that, if met, require companies to bifurcate conversion options from their host instruments and account for them as free standing derivative financial instruments. These three criteria include circumstances in which (a) the economic characteristics and risks of the embedded derivative instrument are not clearly and closely related to the economic characteristics and risks of the host contract, (b) the hybrid instrument that embodies both the embedded derivative instrument and the host contract is not re-measured at fair value under otherwise applicable generally accepted accounting principles with changes in fair value reported in earnings as they occur, and (c) a separate instrument with the same terms as the embedded derivative instrument would be considered a derivative instrument. Professional standards also provide an exception to this rule when the host instrument is deemed to be conventional as defined under professional standards.
The Company accounts for convertible instruments (when it has determined that the embedded conversion options should not be bifurcated from their host instruments) in accordance with ASC 470-20 “Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options.” Accordingly, the Company records, when necessary, discounts to convertible notes for the intrinsic value of conversion options embedded in debt instruments based upon the differences between the fair value of the underlying common stock at the commitment date of the note transaction and the effective conversion price embedded in the note. Original issue discounts under these arrangements are amortized over the term of the related debt to their earliest date of redemption. The Company also records when necessary deemed dividends for the intrinsic value of conversion options embedded in preferred shares based upon the differences between the fair value of the underlying common stock at the commitment date of the note transaction and the effective conversion price embedded in the note.
ASC 815-40 “Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity” provides that, among other things, generally, if an event is not within the entity’s control could or require net cash settlement, then the contract shall be classified as an asset or a liability.
Derivative Financial Instruments Indexed to the Company’s Common Stock
We have generally issued derivative financial instruments, such as warrants, in connection with our equity offerings. We evaluate the terms of these derivative financial instruments in order to determine their accounting treatment in our financial statements. Key considerations include whether the financial instruments are freestanding and whether they contain conditional obligations. If the warrants are freestanding, do not contain conditional obligations and meet other classification criteria, we account for the warrants as an equity instrument. However, if the warrants contain conditional obligations, then we account for the warrants as a liability until the conditional obligations are met or are no longer relevant. Because no established market prices exist for the warrants that we issue in connection with our equity offerings, we must estimate the fair value of the warrants, which is as inherently subjective as it is for stock options, and for similar reasons as noted in the stock-based compensation section above. For financial instruments which are accounted for as a liability, we report any changes in their estimated fair values as gains or losses in our Consolidated Statement of Income.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense consists of costs we incur for the development of our investigational drugs and, to a lesser extent, for preclinical research activities. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Research and development expense includes clinical trial costs, salaries and benefits of employees, including associated stock-based compensation, payments to clinical investigators, drug manufacturing costs, laboratory supplies and facility costs. Clinical trial costs are a significant component of our research and development expense, and these can be difficult to accurately estimate. Included in clinical trial costs are fees paid to other entities that conduct certain research and development activities on our behalf, such as clinical research organizations, or CROs. We estimate clinical trial expense based on the services performed pursuant to contracts with research institutions such as CROs and the actual clinical investigators. These estimates are based on actual time and expenses incurred by the CRO and the clinical investigators. Also included in clinical trial expense are costs based on the level of patient enrollment into the clinical trial and the actual services performed under the related clinical trial agreement. Changes in clinical trial assumptions, such as the length of time estimated to enroll all patients, rate of screening failures, patient drop-out rates, number and nature of adverse event reports and the total number of patients enrolled can impact the average and expected cost per patient and the overall cost of the clinical trial. Based on patient enrollment reports and services provided, we may periodically adjust estimates for the clinical trial costs. If we do not identify costs that we have begun to incur or if we underestimate or overestimate the level of services performed, the length of time for these services or the costs of these services, our actual expenses could differ from our estimates.
Share-Based Compensation
We record the estimated fair value of all share-based payments issued to employees and other service providers. Our share-based payments consist primarily of stock options. The valuation of stock options is an inherently subjective process, since market values are not available for any stock options in our equity securities. Market values are also not available on long-term, non-transferable stock options in other equity securities. With no market values on options to trade in our common stock and no comparable market values on any long-term non-transferable stock options, the process of valuing our stock options is even more uncertain and subjective. Accordingly, we use a Black-Scholes option pricing model to derive an estimated fair value of the stock options which we issue. The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires certain input assumptions, including the expected term of the options and the expected volatility of our common stock. Changes in these assumptions could have a material impact on the estimated fair value that we record for share-based payments that we issue. We determine the term of the options based on the simplified method, which averages the vesting period and the contractual life of the stock option. We determine the expected volatility based on the historical volatility of our common stock over a period commensurate with the option’s expected term. The Black-Scholes option pricing model also requires assumptions for risk-free interest rates and the expected dividend yield of our common stock, but we feel that these values are more objective and note that changes in these values do not have a significant impact on the estimated value of the options when compared to the volatility and term assumptions.
We are also required to estimate the level of award forfeitures expected to occur and record compensation expense only for those awards that are ultimately expected to vest. Accordingly, we perform a historical analysis of option awards that are forfeited prior to vesting, and record total stock option expense that reflects this estimated forfeiture rate.
Results of Operations
The Merger was treated as a “reverse merger” for accounting purposes. In accordance with the reporting requirements, the Company will be reporting historical financial data of Oncotelic Inc. for all periods prior to the date of the Merger, and for the combined company for all periods after the date of the Merger.
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
A comparison of the Company’s operating results for the year ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, is as follows.
Net Loss
We recorded a net loss of approximately $10.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a net loss of approximately $6.6 million for the same period in 2019. The increased loss of approximately $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period of 2019 was primarily due to approximately $5.0 million of higher operational expenses related to the Company, $1.2 million primarily related to interest expense, including amortization of normal and accelerated debt costs related to the debt raised by the company in 2019 and 2020, a loss of $0.3 million of loss on non-cash conversion of debt and recording a higher non-cash loss on conversion of value of derivatives of $0.2 million; partially offset by the recording revenue of approximately $1.7 million and lower write off of long term investment of $1.7 million that we incurred during 2019. The financial information presented includes very nominal expenses for PointR operations for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Revenue
We recorded services revenue of $1.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to no revenues during the same period ended in 2019. The services revenue of $1.2 million was recorded from services provided to GMP in connection with the development of OT-101 for COVID-19 and included reimbursement of costs incurred of approximately $41 thousand. We also recorded $0.5 million of revenues from ATB upon the successful completion of the in-vivo efficacy studies based on the ATB Agreement.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development (“R&D”) expense increased by approximately $2.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. The financial information presented does not include any R&D activity for PointR for the year ended December 31, 2019 and as such the results for the Company are not directly comparative from period to period.
The increase of approximately $3.3 million in the R&D activities is primarily due to increased clinical trial costs of $2.2 million for the trials for OT-101 and Artemisinin, $0.3 million of amortization and depreciation of in process R&D and development equipment, $0.2 million for higher personnel costs and $0.3 million for higher operational costs.
We expect to increase research and development activities, including the initiation of new clinical trials for our oncology indications as well continuing or expanding on the trials and development of AI based tools and applications for OT-101 and Artemisinin for COVID-19 and other epidemics, and therefore believe that research and development expense will increase in the future, subject to our continuing ability to secure sufficient funding to continue planned operations.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative (“G&A”) expense increased by approximately $2.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period of 2019.
The increase in G&A expenses by approximately $2.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to same period of 2019 was primarily due to an increase of approximately $1.8 million of non-cash stock-based compensation expense, higher personnel costs of $0.5 million and $0.1 million due to increase in other operational expenses; partially offset by lower legal and professional services of $0.3 million incurred in 2019 in connection with the PointR Merger and Oncotelic Merger.
We expect to increase G&A activities, in connection with fund raising activities as well as other G&A initiatives in 2021, and therefore believe that G&A expense will increase in the future, subject to our continuing ability to secure sufficient funding to continue planned operations.
Write off of Long-Term Investment
We recorded a loss of $1.8 million in value of our long-term investment in Adhera during the year ended December 31, 2019. Based on an early 2020 filing by Adhera, in which Adhera described their current financial condition as well as the fact that they have ceased all operations and are also considering possible bankruptcy options, we recorded a loss in value of the long term investment in Adhera as it seems severely impaired and therefore, determined to write off the entire investment. No similar charge was recorded in 2020.
Loss on Conversion of Debt
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a loss on conversion of debt by Peak One and TFK of approximately $0.3 million related to the difference in fair value to the price at which the debt was converted. No similar loss was recorded during the same period in 2019.
Change in value of derivatives
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a nominal loss due to the change in value of derivatives of $45 thousand on the 2019 Peak One note, the TFK note and the notes issued to our CEO and the bridge investors (collectively, the “Convertible Notes”). During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded a change in value of derivatives of $0.2 million on the Peak One Tranche #2 note and the notes issued to our CEO and the bridge investors. The Convertible Notes became convertible 180 days after issuance, and as such Peak One, TFK, the CEO and the bridge investor had the ability to convert that debt into equity at the variable conversion price of 65% of the Company’s lowest traded price after the first 180 days or at the lower of the Fixed Price or 55% of the Company’s traded stock price under certain circumstances. This gave rise to a derivative feature within the debt instrument which resulted in the recording of a derivative liability and change in value of the derivative.
Interest Expense
We recorded interest expense, including amortization of debt costs, of $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 in connection with debt raised from convertible notes and a private placement memorandum as compared to $0.8 million for the same period of 2019, in connection with debt raised from convertible notes during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity, Financial Condition and Capital Resources ($s in ‘000’s)
The Company has experienced net losses every year since inception and as of December 31, 2020 had an accumulated deficit of approximately $22.1 million. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had approximately $474,000 in cash and current liabilities of approximately $11.2 million, of which approximately $1.3 million are net assumed liabilities of the Company as part of the Oncotelic Inc. reverse merger, $2 million of debt related to debt for conducting clinical trials for OT-101 from GMP and $2.6 million is contingent liability to issue common shares of the Company to PointR shareholders upon achievement of certain milestones. The Company does not expect to generate any meaningful revenue from product sales in the near future, and expects to incur additional operating losses over the next several years, primarily as a result of the Company’s plans to continue clinical trials for its investigational drugs. The Company’s limited capital resources, history of recurring losses and uncertainties as to whether the Company’s operations will become profitable raise substantial doubt about its ability to continue as a going concern. The financial statements contained in this report do not include any adjustments related to the recoverability of assets or classifications of liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
The principal source of the Company’s working capital deficit to date has been the issuance of convertible notes, a substantial part of which has been provided by officers and certain insiders. The Company will need to raise additional capital in order to fund its operations and continue development of product candidates. The Company is evaluating the options to further the development of the Company’s lead product candidate, OT-101 for both cancer and COVID-19, Artemisinin for COVID-19, developing AI technologies to support the COVID-19 therapies; in addition to evaluating the development pathway of its product candidates; OXi4503 and/or CA4P.
The Company anticipates raising substantial additional capital through the sale of equity securities and/or debt, but no other financing arrangements are in place at this time.
If the Company is unable to access additional funds when needed, it may not be able to continue the development of these investigational drugs and the Company could be required to delay, scale back or eliminate some or all of its development programs and operations. Any additional equity financing, if available, would be dilutive to the current stockholders and may not be available on favorable terms. Additional debt financing, if available, may involve restrictive covenants and could also be dilutive. The Company’s ability to access capital is not assured and, if access is not achieved on a timely basis, would materially harm the Company’s financial condition, the value of its common stock and its business prospects.
Cash Flows ($s in ‘000s)
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was approximately $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This was due to the net loss of approximately $10.0 million, which was partially offset by a $2.0 million of R&D cost paid through debt, non-cash amortization of debt discounts and deferred financing costs of $1.7 million, non-cash stock-based compensation of $2.1 million, amortization and depreciation of intangibles and development equipment of $0.3 million, non-cash loss on conversion of debt and change in fair value of derivatives of $0.3 million and changes in operating assets and liabilities of approximately $0.5 million.
Net cash used in operating activities was approximately $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This was due to the net loss of approximately $6.6 million and a change in the fair value of derivative recorded on the conversion of debt to an equity based instrument of $0.2 million, which was partially offset by non-cash charges of approximately $1.3 million, non-cash issuance of shares in lieu of services of approximately $0.4 million, non-cash charge of $1.8 million for the write off of the long-term investments and changes in operating assets and liabilities of approximately $1.1 million.
Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by investing activities, which was approximately $0.2 million and which was attributable to the cash received in the mergers. No similar cash was recorded for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was approximately $3.2 million. Net cash provided was due to approximately $2.9 million raised from a private placement memorandum, $0.25 million received under the Payroll Protection Plan, $20 thousand received from our CEO, net of repayment of $50 thousand, $75 thousand of short term loans from the CFO and a bridge investor and repayment of $50,000 to one of our Fall 2019 investors.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities was approximately $2.2 million, consisting of approximately $0.9 million from the issuance of the Convertible Debentures in connection with the Bridge Financing, $0.2 million from the issuance of the Convertible Debentures to PointR, $1.0 million from the issuance of notes payable during the fall of 2019 and approximately $0.1 million from the sale of common stock.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Effects of Inflation
We do not believe that inflation has had a material impact on our business, revenues or operating results during the periods presented.
Contractual Obligations
Our current drug development programs are based on a series of compounds called combretastatins, which we have exclusively licensed from Arizona State University, or ASU. If our current drug candidates are approved, we will be required to pay low to mid-single-digit royalties on future net sales of products associated with the ASU patent rights until these patent rights expire.
We also have an exclusive license from Bristol-Myers Squibb, or BMS, for certain patent rights to particular combretastatins, including CA4P. If CA4P is approved, we will be required to pay low-single-digit royalties on future net sales of products associated with the BMS patent rights until these patent rights expire.