Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This Annual Report on Form 10-K, including the following sections, contains forward-looking statements. These statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results and events to differ materially from those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. For a detailed discussion of these risks and uncertainties, see Item 1A “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. See also “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and Industry Data.” We caution the reader not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which reflect management’s analysis only as of the date of this Form 10-K. We undertake no obligation to update forward-looking statements, which reflect events or circumstances occurring after the date of this Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company working to develop and launch the first ophthalmic formulation of bevacizumab approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, for use in retinal indications. Our goal is to launch directly in the United States as the first and only approved bevacizumab for the treatment of wet age-related macular degeneration, or wet AMD, diabetic macular edema, or DME, and branch retinal vein occlusion, or BRVO. Our plans also include potentially securing a strategic partner for the United Kingdom, Europe, Japan and other markets.
ONS-5010 (LYTENAVA (bevacizumab-vikg)), our sole product candidate in active clinical development, is an investigational ophthalmic formulation of bevacizumab, which we are developing to be administered as an intravitreal injection for the treatment of wet AMD and other retinal diseases. Bevacizumab is a full-length, humanized anti-VEGF (Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor) recombinant monoclonal antibody, or mAb, that inhibits VEGF and associated angiogenic activity. The study design for our Phase 3 clinical program to evaluate ONS-5010 as an ophthalmic formulation of bevacizumab was reviewed at an end of Phase 2 meeting with the FDA in April 2018, and we filed our investigational new drug application, or IND, with the FDA in the first quarter of calendar 2019.
Our clinical program for ONS-5010 in wet AMD involves three clinical trials, which we refer to as NORSE ONE, NORSE TWO and NORSE THREE. We reported achieving the anticipated safety and efficacy and positive proof-of-concept topline results from NORSE ONE, a clinical experience study, in August 2020. NORSE TWO is our pivotal Phase 3 clinical trial comparing ONS-5010 to ranibizumab (LUCENTIS). The topline results reported from NORSE TWO in August 2021 showed that ONS-5010 met the primary and key secondary endpoint for efficacy with clinically impactful change observed for treated patients. The NORSE TWO primary endpoint difference in proportion of subjects gaining at least 15 letters BCVA was met and was highly statistically significant and clinically relevant. In the intent-to-treat (ITT) primary dataset, the percentage of patients who gained at least 15 letters who were treated with ranibizumab was 23.1%, and the percentage of patients who gained at least 15 letters who were treated with ONS-5010 was 41.7 % (p = 0.0052). The primary endpoint was also statistically significant and clinically relevant in the secondary per-protocol (PP) dataset (p = 0.04) where the percentages were almost identical, at 24.7% with ranibizumab and 41.0% with ONS-5010. The key secondary endpoint BCVA score change from baseline to month 11 in the primary ITT dataset was also highly statistically significant and clinically relevant (p = 0.0043). A mean change in BCVA was observed with ranibizumab of 5.8 letters and the mean change with bevacizumab-vikg was 11.2 letters. The results were also statistically significant in the secondary PP dataset (p = 0.05) with a mean change in letters with ranibizumab of 7.0 letters and with bevacizumab-vikg 11.1 letters. NORSE THREE is an open-label safety study we conducted to ensure the adequate number of safety exposures to ONS-5010 are available for the initial ONS-5010 Biologics License Application, or BLA, submission with the FDA. In March 2021 we reported that the results from NORSE THREE provided a positive safety profile for ONS-5010. Accordingly, all three of these clinical trials required for our planned BLA submission in the first quarter of calendar 2022 for wet AMD have been completed.
We have also received agreement from the FDA on three Special Protocol Assessments, or SPAs, for three additional registration clinical trials for our ongoing Phase 3 program for ONS-5010. The agreements reached with the FDA on these SPAs cover the protocols for NORSE FOUR, a registration clinical trial evaluating ONS-5010 to treat BRVO, and NORSE FIVE and NORSE SIX, two registration clinical trials evaluating ONS-5010 to treat DME. We intend to initiate these studies in 2023 after we receive FDA approval of our planned BLA for wet AMD.
Additionally, in November 2021, we began enrolling patients in our NORSE SEVEN clinical trial. The study will compare the safety of ophthalmic bevacizumab in vials versus pre-filled syringes in subjects diagnosed with a retinal condition that would benefit from treatment with intravitreal injection of bevacizumab, including exudative age-related macular degeneration, diabetic macular edema, or branch retinal vein occlusion. Subjects will be treated for three months and the enrollment of subjects in the arm of the study receiving ONS-5010 in vials has been completed.
Currently, the cancer drug Avastin (bevacizumab) is used off-label for the treatment of wet AMD and other retinal diseases such as DME and BRVO even though Avastin has not been approved by regulatory authorities for use in these diseases. If the ONS-5010 clinical program is successful, it will support our plans to submit for regulatory approval in multiple markets in 2021 including the United States, United Kingdom, Europe and Japan, as well as other markets. Because there are no approved bevacizumab products for the treatment of retinal diseases in such major markets, we are developing ONS-5010 as a standard Biologics License Application, or BLA, and not using the biosimilar drug development pathway that would be required if Avastin were an approved drug for the targeted diseases. If approved, we believe ONS-5010 has potential to mitigate risks associated with off-label use of unapproved bevacizumab. Off-label use of unapproved bevacizumab is currently estimated to account for at least 50% of all wet AMD prescriptions in the United States.
Going Concern Consideration
Through September 30, 2021, we have funded substantially all of our operations with $338.7 million in proceeds from the sale and issuance of our equity and debt securities. We have also received $29.0 million pursuant to our collaboration and licensing agreements through such date. Our net loss for the year ended September 30, 2021 was $53.2 million. We also had a net loss of $35.2 million for the year ended September 30, 2020. We have not generated any revenue from product sales. We anticipate incurring additional losses until such time, if ever, that we can generate significant sales of ONS-5010 or any other product candidate we may develop.
In October 2021 and November 2021, we sold 1,773,974 shares of common stock under our "at-the-market" equity offering program (the "ATM Offering"). We received $3.6 million in gross proceeds from the ATM Offering and paid fees to the sales agent of $0.1 million.
On November 16, 2021, we received $10.0 million in net proceeds from issuance of an unsecured promissory note with face amount of $10.2 million (the “2021 Note”). The note bears interest at a rate of 9.5% per annum, matures January 1, 2023, and includes an original issue discount of $0.2 million. We may prepay all or a portion of the note at any time by paying 105% of the outstanding balance elected for pre-payment.
On November 16, 2021, we also entered into a note amendment (the “Note Amendment”) to a note dated November 4, 2020 (the “2020 Note”) in the original principal amount of $10,220,000. The Note Amendment amended the 2020 Note to, among other things, (i) extend the maturity date to January 1, 2023, (ii) increase the interest rate from 7.5% per annum to 10% per annum beginning on January 1, 2022 and (iii) provide for the lender’s right to redeem some or all of the outstanding balance of the 2020 Note for shares of our common stock beginning July 1, 2022, subject to certain limitations.
In November 2021, we issued in an underwritten public offering, including full exercise of the underwriters’ overallotment option, an aggregate of 46,000,000 shares of common stock at a purchase price per share of $1.25 for $54.0 million in net proceeds after payment of underwriter discounts and commissions and other underwriter offering costs. GMS Ventures and Investments (“GMS Ventures”), an affiliate of BioLexis Pte. Ltd. (“BioLexis”), our largest stockholder and strategic partner, purchased an aggregate of 16,000,000 shares of common stock in the public offering at the public offering price per share. In connection with the underwritten public offering (including the full exercise of the overallotment option) we issued the underwriter warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 2,100,000 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $1.5625 per share, which warrants have a 5-year term.
We evaluated whether there are conditions or events, considered in the aggregate, that raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Our current cash resources of $14.5 million as of September 30, 2021 together with the $3.5 million in net proceeds from the sale of shares of common stock under our ATM Offering in October 2021 and November 2021, $10.0 million in net proceeds from issuance of the 2021 Note, and net proceeds of $54.0 million received in November 2021 from the public offering are expected to fund our operations through the anticipated approval of the
ONS-5010 BLA expected in the first calendar quarter of 2023, at least one year from the issuance date of this report. We do not anticipate making any material capital expenditures in fiscal 2022 as we believe our facilities and equipment held as of September 30, 2021, are sufficient for at least twelve months subsequent to the date of filing this report.
Impacts of the COVID-19 Pandemic
We continue to monitor the ongoing COVID-19 global pandemic, which has resulted in travel and other restrictions to reduce the spread of the disease. To date, we have experienced only minor disruptions from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, including a brief delay in patient enrollment and recruitment in NORSE TWO due to local clinical trial site protocols designed to protect staff and patients. Given our current infrastructure needs and current strategy, we were able to transition to remote working with limited impact on productivity, as shelter-in-place and other types of local and state orders were imposed. We have confirmed with the Ophthalmic Division of the FDA that it considers both approved and investigational treatments for sight-threatening conditions such as wet AMD not to be elective, and that as such they should continue during the COVID-19 restrictions. All clinical and chemistry, manufacturing and control, or CMC, activities are currently active.
All three of our clinical trials have required to support our planned BLA submission are now complete. To date, we have not experienced any significant COVID-19 disruptions to patient follow-up but the clinical trial protocol accounts for potential delayed or missed visits for any reason, including COVID-19 type interruptions. The FDA has provided guidance in the event of COVID-19 disruptions and we intend to confer with the FDA and follow the appropriate guidance in the event that NORSE TWO experiences an unusually high number of delayed or missed patient visits due to COVID-19.
The safety, health and well-being of all patients, medical staff and our internal and external teams is paramount and is our primary focus. As the pandemic and its resulting restrictions evolve in jurisdictions across the country, we are aware that the potential exists for further disruptions to our projected timelines. We are in close communication with our clinical teams and key vendors and are prepared to take action should the pandemic worsen and impact our business in the future.
The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic is highly uncertain and subject to change. We do not yet know the full extent of any impacts the evolving COVID-19 pandemic may have on our business, operations, financial position and our clinical and regulatory activities. See also the section titled “Risk Factors” herein for additional information on risks and uncertainties related to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
Collaboration and License Agreements
From time to time, we enter into collaboration and license agreements for the research and development, manufacture and/or commercialization of our products and/or product candidates. These agreements generally provide for non-refundable upfront license fees, development and commercial performance milestone payments, cost sharing, royalty payments and/or profit sharing. We have also licensed rights to our legacy biosimilar product candidates (ONS-3010, ONS-1045 and ONS-1050) in other markets.
MTTR, LLC - ONS 5010
In January 2020, we agreed to terminate our February 2018 arrangement with MTTR LLC, or MTTR, for ONS-5010. Following receipt of necessary stockholder approval, in March 2020, we issued an aggregate of 7,244,739 shares of our common stock to the four principals of MTTR (who include two of our named executive officers, Mr. Dagnon and Mr. Evanson) pursuant to individual consulting agreements we entered into with each of them, and paid MTTR a one-time settlement fee of $110,000. The consulting agreements also include terms setting for the respective compensation arrangements of each of the principals, including for Mr. Dagnon and Mr. Evanson, who have been serving as executive officers since November 2018.
See also Item 1 “Business-Collaboration and License Agreements-MTTR-Strategic Partnership Agreement (ONS-5010).”
MTTR and its four principals under the strategic partnership agreement and the subsequent individual consulting agreements earned an aggregate $1,089,408 and $1,294,089 during the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, which includes monthly consulting fees and expense reimbursement, but excludes stock-based compensation related to restricted stock.
Syntone - Private Placement and PRC Joint Venture
In May 2020, we entered into a stock purchase agreement with Syntone, pursuant to which we sold and issued in June 2020, in a private placement, 16,000,000 shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $1.00 per share, for aggregate gross proceeds of $16.0 million. In connection with the entry into the stock purchase agreement, we entered into a joint venture agreement with Syntone’s People’s Republic of China, or PRC, based-affiliate, pursuant to which we agreed to form a PRC joint venture that will be 80% owned by Syntone’s PRC-affiliate and 20% owned by us. Upon formation of the PRC joint venture in April 2021, we entered into a royalty-free license with the PRC joint venture for the development, commercialization and manufacture of ONS-5010 in the greater China market, which includes Hong Kong, Taiwan and Macau.
Selexis SA
In October 2011, we entered into a research license agreement with Selexis whereby we acquired a non-exclusive license to conduct research internally or in collaboration with third parties to develop recombinant proteins from cell lines created in mammalian cells using the Selexis expression technology, or the Selexis Technology. The research license expired on October 9, 2018 and accordingly, we are no longer using the Selexis Technology in our research.
Selexis also granted us a non-transferrable option to obtain a perpetual, non-exclusive, worldwide commercial license under the Selexis Technology to manufacture, or have manufactured, a recombinant protein produced by a cell line developed using the Selexis Technology for clinical testing and commercial sale. We exercised this option in April 2013 and entered into three commercial license agreements with Selexis for our ONS-3010, ONS-1045 (which covers ONS-5010) and ONS-1050 product candidates. We paid an upfront licensing fee to Selexis for each commercial license and also agreed to pay a fixed milestone payment for each licensed product. In addition, we are required to pay a single-digit royalty on a final product-by-final product and country-by-country basis, based on worldwide net sales of such final products by us or any of our affiliates or sub-licensees during the royalty term. At any time during the term, we have the right to terminate our royalty payment obligation by providing written notice to Selexis and paying Selexis a royalty termination fee. The initiation of our Phase 3 clinical program for ONS-5010 triggered a CHF 65,000 (approximately $0.1 million) milestone payment under the commercial license agreement, which we paid in November 2019.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Collaboration Revenue
To date, we have derived revenue only from activities pursuant to our emerging market collaboration and licensing agreements related to our inactive biosimilar development program. We have not generated any revenue from commercial product sales. For the foreseeable future, we expect all of our revenue, if any, will be generated from our collaboration and licensing agreements. If any of our product candidates currently under development are approved for commercial sale, we may generate revenue from product sales, or alternatively, we may receive royalties from any collaborator we select to commercialize our product candidates.
Each of our collaboration and licensing agreements was considered to be a multiple-element arrangement for accounting purposes. We determined that there were two deliverables; specifically, the license to our product candidate and the related research and development services that we were obligated to provide. We concluded that these deliverables should be accounted for as a single unit of accounting and revenue was being recognized on a straight-line basis through the estimated period of completion of our obligations under the agreement. All remaining deferred revenue under our collaboration agreements was fully recognized as of September 30, 2019.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expense consists of expenses incurred in connection with the discovery and development of our product candidates. We expense research and development costs as incurred. These expenses include:
● expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations, or CROs, as well as investigative sites and consultants that conduct our preclinical studies and clinical trials;
● expenses incurred by us directly, as well as under agreements with contract manufacturing organizations, or CMOs, for manufacturing scale-up expenses and the cost of acquiring and manufacturing preclinical and clinical trial materials and commercial materials, including manufacturing validation batches;
● outsourced professional scientific development services;
● employee-related expenses, which include salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation;
● payments made under a third-party assignment agreement, under which we acquired intellectual property;
● expenses relating to regulatory activities, including filing fees paid to regulatory agencies;
● laboratory materials and supplies used to support our research activities; and
● allocated expenses, utilities and other facility-related costs.
The successful development of our product candidates is highly uncertain. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate or know the nature, timing and costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the remainder of the development of, or when, if ever, material net cash inflows may commence from any of our other product candidates. This uncertainty is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the duration and cost of clinical trials, which vary significantly over the life of a project as a result of many factors, including:
● the number of clinical sites included in the trials;
● the length of time required to enroll suitable patients;
● the number of patients that ultimately participate in the trials;
● the number of doses patients receive;
● the duration of patient follow-up;
● the results of our clinical trials;
● the establishment of commercial manufacturing capabilities;
● the receipt of marketing approvals; and
● the commercialization of product candidates.
Our expenditures are subject to additional uncertainties, including the terms and timing of regulatory approvals. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval for any of our biosimilar product candidates. We may obtain unexpected results from our clinical trials. We may elect to discontinue, delay or modify clinical trials of some product candidates or focus on others. A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of a product candidate
could mean a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. For example, if the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, or other regulatory authorities were to require us to conduct clinical trials beyond those that we currently anticipate, or if we experience significant delays in enrollment in any of our clinical trials, we could be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on the completion of clinical development. Product commercialization will take several years and millions of dollars in development costs.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size, complexity and duration of later-stage clinical trials.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist principally of salaries and related costs for personnel in executive, administrative, finance and legal functions, including stock-based compensation, travel expenses and recruiting expenses. Other general and administrative expenses include facility related costs, patent filing and prosecution costs and professional fees for business development, legal, auditing and tax services and insurance costs.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase if and when we believe a regulatory approval of a product candidate appears likely, and we anticipate an increase in payroll and expense as a result of our preparation for commercial operations, particularly as it relates to the sales and marketing of our product.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of cash paid and non-cash interest expense related to our senior secured notes, and unsecured notes with current and former stockholders, equipment loans, lease liabilities and other finance obligations.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
During the year ended September 30, 2020, we recorded a loss on extinguishment of $1.9 million in connection with the exchange of our old senior secured notes for new senior secured notes in December 2019 and the exchange of the remaining outstanding principal and accrued interest on all new senior secured notes for shares of our common stock during the third quarter in fiscal 2020. The new senior secured notes were considered substantially different from the old notes, as such, they qualified for extinguishment accounting.
Change in Fair Value of Redemption Feature
Change in fair value of the redemption feature reflects the change in the fair value of the embedded derivative contained in the new senior secured notes issued in December 2019, as a result of the fact that such notes were convertible into a variable number of shares of our common stock and at a discount that was deemed to be substantial. This embedded derivative was recorded at fair value and was subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until our obligations under the new senior secured notes were satisfied.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liability
We issued warrants to purchase our common stock in conjunction with our old senior secured notes, which are classified as liabilities and recorded at fair value. The warrants are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date and we recognize any change in fair value in our statements of operations as other (income) expense.
Income Taxes
During the year ended September 30, 2020, we sold New Jersey State net operating losses, or NOLs, in the amount of $33.3 million and unused research and development, or R&D, tax credits in the amount of $0.6 million resulting in the recognition of income tax benefits of $3.3 million recorded in our statement of operations. We did not sell any NOLs or unused research and development tax credits during the year ended September 30, 2021.
Since inception, we have not recorded any U.S. federal or state income tax benefits (excluding the sale of New Jersey state NOLs and R&D tax credits) for the net losses we have incurred in each year or on our earned R&D tax credits, due to our uncertainty of realizing a benefit from those items. As of September 30, 2021, we had federal and state NOL carryforwards of $282.4 million and $118.2 million, respectively, that will begin to expire in 2030 and 2039, respectively. As of September 30, 2021, we had federal foreign tax credit carryforwards of $2.4 million available to reduce future tax liabilities, which begin to expire starting in 2023. As of September 30, 2021, we also had federal research and development tax credit carryforwards of $8.1 million and $0.8 million, respectively, which begin to expire in 2032 and 2033, respectively.
In general, under Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, or the Code, a corporation that undergoes an "ownership change" is subject to limitations on its ability to utilize its NOLs to offset future taxable income. We have not completed a study to assess whether an ownership change has occurred in the past. Our existing NOLs may be subject to limitations arising from previous ownership changes, and if we undergo an ownership change, our ability to utilize NOLs could be further limited by Section 382 of the Code. Future changes in our stock ownership, some of which are outside of our control, could result in an ownership change under Section 382 of the Code. Our NOLs are also subject to international regulations, which could restrict our ability to utilize our NOLs. Furthermore, our ability to utilize NOLs of companies that we may acquire in the future may be subject to limitations. There is also a risk that due to regulatory changes, such as suspensions on the use of NOLs, or other unforeseen reasons, our existing NOLs could expire or otherwise be unavailable to offset future income tax liabilities.
Furthermore, our ability to utilize NOLs of companies that we may acquire in the future may be subject to limitations. There is also a risk that due to regulatory changes, such as suspensions on the use of NOLs, or other unforeseen reasons, our existing NOLs could expire or otherwise be unavailable to offset future income tax liabilities.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended September 30, 2021 and 2020
Research and Development Expenses
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses by functional area for the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020:
Research and development expenses for the year ended September 30, 2021 increased by $12.6 million compared to the year ended September 30, 2020. We saw a significant increase in ONS-5010 development costs of $12.8 million as we completed NORSE TWO Phase 3 and NORSE THREE Phase 3 clinical trials in fiscal 2021 and continued with our ongoing necessary process characterization and manufacturing scale up activities with external partners to support our planned BLA submission in 2022.
General and Administrative Expenses
The following table summarizes our general and administrative expenses by type for the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020:
General and administrative expenses for the year ended September 30, 2021 increased by $2.8 million compared to the year ended September 30, 2020. The increase was primarily due to a $2.4 million increase in stock-based compensation from equity grants to employees and directors in fiscal year 2021, a $2.1 million increase in professional fees primarily driven by increased recruitment expenses, licensing efforts, commercial consulting, litigation legal costs, and public company consulting costs, and a $0.4 million increase in salary and benefits from increased headcount. These increases were partially offset by a $2.1 million decrease in facilities related costs primarily due to decrease in rent and utilities of $1.0 million, a gain on lease terminations of $0.6 million in 2021 after the assignment of our Monmouth Junction, New Jersey corporate office lease; and a loss on lease termination recorded in 2020 of $0.7 million recognized upon termination of our lease at our former corporate headquarters in Cranbury, New Jersey.
Impairment of Property and Equipment
During the year ended September 30, 2020, we recorded an impairment charge of $0.5 million primarily due to the write-off of assets held for sale after we determined that the carrying amount of these assets was not recoverable as result of the May 2020 termination of our remaining lease for office, manufacturing and laboratory space at our former corporate headquarters in Cranbury, New Jersey and relocation of our corporate headquarters to our warehouse space in Monmouth Junction, New Jersey.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net decreased by $0.8 million to $0.9 million for the year ended September 30, 2021 as compared to $1.8 million for the year ended September 30, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to due to conversion of both secured and unsecured notes in fiscal 2020.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liability
During the year ended September 30, 2021, we recorded a loss of $0.5 million related to the increase in the fair value of our common stock warrant liability as a result of the increase in the price of our common stock during the period. During the year ended September 30, 2020, we recorded income of $0.2 million related to the decrease in the fair value of our common stock warrant liability as a result of the decrease in the price of our common stock during the period.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have not generated any revenue from product sales. Since inception, we have incurred net losses and negative cash flows from our operations. Through September 30, 2021, we have funded substantially all of our operations with $338.7 million in net proceeds from the sale and issuance of our equity securities, debt securities and borrowings under debt facilities. We have also received an aggregate of $29.0 million pursuant to emerging markets collaboration and licensing agreements for our inactive biosimilar development programs.
We anticipate incurring additional losses until such time, if ever, that we can generate significant sales of ONS-5010 or any other product candidate we may develop. We will need substantial additional financing to fund our operations and to commercially develop ONS-5010 or any other product candidate we may develop. Management is currently evaluating various strategic opportunities to obtain the required funding for future operations. These strategies may include but are not limited to payments from potential strategic research and development, licensing and/or marketing arrangements with pharmaceutical companies, private placements and/or public offerings of equity and/or debt securities. Alternatively, we will be required to, among other things, make further reductions in our workforce, scale back our plans and place certain activities on hold, discontinue our development programs, liquidate all or a portion of our assets, and/or seek protection under the provisions of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code.
On November 5, 2020, we received $10.0 million in net proceeds from issuance of an unsecured promissory note, or 2020 Note, with face amount of $10.2 million. The note bears interest at a rate of 7.5% per annum, matures January 1, 2022, and includes an original issue discount of $0.2 million. We may prepay all or a portion of the note at any time by paying 105% of the outstanding balance elected for pre-payment. In November 2020, we repaid $3.6 million of unsecured stockholder notes that were due on demand as of September 30, 2020. On November 16, 2021, entered into a note amendment (the “Note Amendment”) which, among other things, (i) extended the maturity date to January 1, 2023, (ii) increased the interest rate from 7.5% per annum to 10% per annum beginning on January 1, 2022 and (iii) provided for the lender’s right to redeem some or all of the outstanding balance of the Note for shares of our common stock beginning July 1, 2022, subject to certain limitations.
In February 2021, we closed an underwritten public offering of our common stock for net proceeds of $35.5 million. We also entered into a securities purchase agreement with Syntone Ventures, for the sale of an additional $3.0 million of shares which concurrent private placement closed in February 2021. Following partial exercise of the underwriters’ overallotment option, in a separate concurrent private placement, we issued an additional $1.0 million of shares of common stock to GMS Ventures at a purchase price of $1.00 per share.
During the year ended September 30, 2021, warrants to purchase an aggregate of 3,642,138 shares of common stock with a weighted averaged exercise price of $0.9866 were exercised for aggregate gross proceeds of $3.6 million.
During the year ended September 30, 2021, we sold 2,855,190 shares of common stock under our ATM Offering and generated $7.2 million in gross proceeds from the ATM Offering and paid fees to the sales agent of $0.2 million. In October 2021 and November 2021, we sold an additional 1,773,974 shares of common stock under and generated $3.5 million in net proceeds from the ATM Offering after payment of fees to the sales agent of $0.1 million.
On November 16, 2021, we received $10.0 million in net proceeds from issuance of an unsecured promissory note, or 2021 Note, with face amount of $10.2 million. The note bears interest at a rate of 9.5% per annum, matures January 1, 2023, and includes an original issue discount of $0.2 million. We may prepay all or a portion of the note at any time by paying 105% of the outstanding balance elected for pre-payment.
In November 2021, we issued in an underwritten public offering an aggregate of 46,000,000 shares of common stock at a purchase price per share of $1.25 for $54.0 million in net proceeds after payment of underwriter discounts and commissions and other underwriter offering costs. GMS Ventures purchased an aggregate of 16,000,000 shares of common stock in the public offering at the public offering price per share. In connection with the underwritten public offering we issued the underwriter warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 2,100,000 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $1.5625 per share, which warrants have a 5-year term.
We evaluated whether there are conditions or events, considered in the aggregate, that raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. As of September 30, 2021, we had stockholders’ equity of $4.6 million. In addition, a $10.9 million unsecured promissory note, which bears interest at a rate of 7.5% per annum compounding daily, matures January 1, 2023, as amended, and a $0.9 million loan granted pursuant to the PPP of the CARES Act, which matures on May 2, 2022 are outstanding as of September 30, 2021. Our current cash resources of $14.5 million as of September 30, 2021 together with the $3.5 million in net proceeds from the sale of shares of common stock under our ATM Offering in October 2021 and November 2021 and net proceeds of $54.0 million received in November 2021 from the public offering are expected to fund our operations through the anticipated approval of the ONS-5010 BLA expected in the first calendar quarter of 2023, at least one year from the issuance date of this report. We do not anticipate making any material capital expenditures in fiscal 2022 as we believe our facilities and equipment held at the year ended September 30, 2021 are sufficient for at least twelve months subsequent to the date of filing this report.
Our future operations are highly dependent on a combination of factors, including (i) the timely and successful completion of additional financing discussed above, (ii) our ability to complete revenue-generating partnerships with pharmaceutical companies, (iii) the success of our research and development, (iv) the development of competitive therapies by other biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies, and, ultimately, (v) regulatory approval and market acceptance of our proposed future products.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for each of the years presented:
Operating Activities
During the year ended September 30, 2021, we used $54.3 million of cash in operating activities resulting primarily from our net loss of $53.2 million. This use of cash was partially offset by $6.0 million of non-cash items such as stock-based compensation, non-cash interest expense, change in fair value of warrant liability, gain on settlement of lease termination obligation, loss on equity method investment and depreciation and amortization expense. The net cash outflow of $7.1 million from changes in our operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to an increase in prepaid expenses of $1.7 million for prepayments associated with ONS 5010 development costs, a decrease in accrued expenses of $5.3 million primarily due to the settlement of lease termination obligation and payments to sites for accrued costs, decrease in accounts payable of $0.2 million and $0.2 million of payments for operating leases. These outflows were partially offset by a decrease in other assets of $0.3 million.
During the year ended September 30, 2020, we used $31.8 million of cash in operating activities resulting primarily from our net loss of $35.2 million and the change in our operating assets and liabilities of $3.0 million. This use of cash was
partially offset by $4.7 million of non-cash items such as change in fair value of redemption feature, non-cash interest expense, stock-based compensation, change in fair value of warrant liability, impairment of property and equipment, loss on extinguishment of debt, loss on lease termination, and depreciation and amortization expense. The change in our operating assets and liabilities of $1.3 million was primarily due to an increase in our prepaid expenses of $0.3 million associated with our ONS 5010 development costs and a decrease in our accounts payable and operating lease liability of $1.7 million primarily due to payments in fiscal 2020 offset by an increase in accrued expenses of $0.7 million associated with our ONS 5010 development costs and clinical trial costs.
Investing Activities
During the year ended September 30, 2020, we used cash of $0.9 million in investing activities for the initial investment in our planned PRC joint venture.
Financing Activities
During the year ended September 30, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $56.2 million, primarily attributable to $39.5 million in net proceeds from the registered direct offering and concurrent private placements in February 2021 for an aggregate of 42,607,394 shares of our common stock and accompanying 2,116,364 warrants to purchase shares of our common stock, $6.8 million in net proceeds from the sale of common stock under the ATM Offering and $10.0 million in net proceeds from issuance of an unsecured promissory note with face amount of $10.2 million in November 2020. Additionally, we received $3.6 million in net proceeds from common stock warrants exercised. We also made $3.7 million in debt and finance lease obligations payments.
During the year ended September 30, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $37.2 million, primarily attributable to $9.2 million in net proceeds from a February 2020 registered direct offering and concurrent private placement; $16.0 million in net proceeds from the initial private placement to Syntone; and $9.2 million in net proceeds from the registered direct offering in June 2020, and $1.0 million from a concurrent private placement that closed in July 2020. We also received $1.1 million in net proceeds from the exercise of common stock warrants and $0.9 million in proceeds from the PPP loan. We made $0.3 million in debt and finance lease obligations payments during the year ended September 30, 2020.
Description of Indebtedness
In November 2020, we entered into a note purchase agreement with Streeterville Capital, LLC, a Utah limited liability company pursuant to which we issued an unsecured promissory note in the original principal amount of $10.2 million for $10.0 million in cash proceeds. The unsecured note bears interest at a rate of 7.5% per annum compounding daily, matures January 1, 2022, and includes an original issue discount of $0.2 million. We may prepay all or a portion of the unsecured note at any time by paying 105% of the outstanding balance elected for pre-payment. On November 16, 2021, we entered into a note amendment (the “Note Amendment”) which, among other things, (i) extended the maturity date to January 1, 2023, (ii) increased the interest rate from 7.5% per annum to 10% per annum beginning on January 1, 2022 and (iii) provided for the lender’s right to redeem some or all of the outstanding balance of the Note for shares of our common stock beginning July 1, 2022, subject to certain limitations.
On November 16, 2021, we received $10.0 million in net proceeds from issuance of an unsecured promissory note, or 2021 Note, with face amount of $10.2 million. The note bears interest at a rate of 9.5% per annum compounding daily, matures January 1, 2023, and includes an original issue discount of $0.2 million. We may prepay all or a portion of the note at any time by paying 105% of the outstanding balance elected for pre-payment.
While the unsecured notes are outstanding, we agreed to keep adequate public information available, maintain our Nasdaq listing, and refrain from undertaking certain “Variable Security Issuances” without the noteholders’ consent, subject to certain limited exempt issuances, in addition to other negative covenants. The unsecured notes provide that in the event of default if we breach our negative covenants under the purchase agreements, undertake certain “Fundamental Transactions” (as defined therein), along with other customary events of default, in addition to providing for a default rate of 14%, the noteholder has the right to increase the outstanding balance by 5%.
Funding Requirements
We plan to focus in the near term on the submission of a Biologics License Application for ONS-5010 with the FDA to support the generation of commercial revenues. We anticipate we will incur net losses and negative cash flow from operations for the foreseeable future. We may not be able to initiate commercialization of ONS-5010 if, among other things, the FDA does not approve our application arising out of our current clinical trials when we expect, or at all, or if we are not able to secure sufficient funding of our expected post-launch commercial costs.
Our primary uses of capital are, and we expect will continue to be, compensation and related expenses, manufacturing and facility costs, external research and development services, laboratory and related supplies, legal and other regulatory expenses, and administrative and overhead costs. Our future funding requirements will be heavily determined by the resources needed to support the marketing and development of our lead product candidate and any other product candidates we may choose to pursue.
We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents as of September 30, 2021 of $14.5 million together with the $3.5 million in net proceeds from the sale of shares of common stock under our ATM Offering in October 2021 and November 2021 and net proceeds of $54.0 million received in November 2021 from the public offering are expected to fund our operations through the anticipated approval of the ONS-5010 BLA expected in the first calendar quarter of 2023. We do not anticipate making any material capital expenditures in fiscal 2022 as we believe our facilities and equipment held at the year ended September 30, 2021 are sufficient for at least twelve months subsequent to the date of filing this report. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we expect. We will need to raise substantial additional capital in order to support our post-launch commercial operations until we generate sufficient revenue. We plan to finance our future operations with a combination of proceeds from potential strategic collaborations, sale of the development and commercial rights to our drug product candidates, the issuance of equity securities, the issuance of additional debt, and revenues from potential future product sales, if any. If we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, your ownership will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect your rights as a holder of our common stock. There are no assurances that we will be successful in obtaining an adequate level of financing for the development and commercialization of ONS-5010 or any other current or future product candidates. Alternatively, we will be required to, among other things, modify our clinical trial plans for ONS-5010 in additional indications, make reductions in our workforce, scale back our plans and place certain activities on hold, discontinue our development programs, liquidate all or a portion of our assets, and/or seek protection under the provisions of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of pharmaceutical products, we are unable to estimate the exact amount of our working capital requirements. Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including:
● the number and characteristics of the product candidates we pursue;
● the scope, progress, results and costs of researching and developing our product candidates, and conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials;
● the timing of, and the costs involved in, obtaining regulatory approvals for our product candidates;
● the cost of manufacturing our product candidates and any drugs we successfully commercialize;
● our ability to establish and maintain strategic collaborations, licensing or other arrangements and the financial terms of such agreements;
● the costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, defending and enforcing patent claims, including litigation costs and the outcome of such litigation; and
● the timing, receipt and amount of sales of, or milestone payments related to or royalties on, our current or future product candidates, if any.
See Item 1A “Risk Factors” for additional risks associated with our substantial capital requirements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reported period. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our audited consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our applicable personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual costs. The majority of our service providers require advance payments; however, some invoice us in arrears for services performed, on a pre-determined schedule or when contractual milestones are met. We make estimates of our prepaid expenses and accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in the consolidated financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of the estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to:
● vendors in connection with preclinical development activities
● CMOs for the production of preclinical and clinical trial materials;
● CROs in connection with clinical trials; and
● clinical trial sites.
We base our expenses related to preclinical studies and clinical trials on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with multiple research institutions and CROs that conduct and manage preclinical studies and clinical trials on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the expense. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of patients and the completion of clinical trial milestones. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the estimate, we adjust the accrual or prepaid accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in reporting amounts that are too high or too low
in any particular period. To date, we have not made any material adjustments to our prior estimates of accrued research and development expenses.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2018, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued ASU No. 2018 13, Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820): Disclosure Framework - Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement ("ASU 2018-13"), which removes and modifies some existing disclosure requirements and adds others. ASU 2018-13 modifies the disclosure requirements for fair value measurements and removes the requirement to disclose (1) the amount of and reasons for transfers between Level 1 and Level 2 of the fair value hierarchy, (2) the policy for timing of transfers between levels, and (3) the valuation processes for Level 3 fair value measurements. ASU 2018-13 requires disclosure of changes in unrealized gains and losses for the period included in other comprehensive income (loss) for recurring Level 3 fair value measurements held at the end of the reporting period and the range and weighted average of significant unobservable inputs used to develop Level 3 fair value measurements. The Company adopted ASU 2018-13 on October 1, 2020 and the adoption of this standard did not have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements.
In January 2020, FASB issued ASU 2020-01, Investments-Equity Securities (Topic 321), Investments-Equity Method and Joint Ventures (Topic 323), and Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815), which, generally, provides guidance for investments in entities accounted for under the equity method of accounting. ASU 2020-01 is effective for all entities with fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, including interim periods therein. The Company is currently evaluating the impact of adopting this guidance to its consolidated financial statements.