ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in the Cayman Islands on June 4, 2020 formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our business combination using cash derived from the proceeds of our initial public offering consummated on August 25, 2020 (the “Public Offering”), our shares, debt or a combination of cash, shares and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a business combination will be successful.
Agreement for Business Combination
On December 21, 2020, we entered into a merger agreement, with Beam Merger Sub, Inc. (“Merger Sub”) and Ouster, Inc. (“Ouster”), relating to a proposed business combination transaction (the “Business Combination”) between the Company and Ouster (the “Merger Agreement”).
Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, the Company will domesticate as a Delaware corporation (and will be renamed “Ouster PubCo”) and Merger Sub, a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company, will merge with and into Ouster, the separate corporate existence of Merger Sub will cease and Ouster will be the surviving corporation and a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (the “Merger”). In connection with the consummation of the Business Combination, the Company will change its name to “Ouster, Inc.”
The Merger Agreement contains customary representations, warranties and covenants by the parties thereto and the closing is subject to certain conditions as further described in the Merger Agreement.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from June 4, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Public Offering, identifying a target for our business combination, and activities in connection with the proposed acquisition of Ouster. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities. We are incurring expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with completing a business combination.
For the period from June 4, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $2,702,566, which consisted of operating costs of $2,763,620, offset by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $57,914 and an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $3,140.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On August 25, 2020, we consummated the Public Offering of 20,000,000 units, at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $200,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 6,000,000 private placement warrants to the Sponsor at a price of $1.00 per warrant, generating gross proceeds of $6,000,000.
Following the Public Offering, and the sale of the private placement warrants, a total of $200,000,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $11,597,631 in transaction costs, including $4,000,000 of underwriting fees, $7,000,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $597,631 of other costs.
For the period from June 4, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $729,512, which consisted of our net loss of $2,702,566, interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $57,914, an unrealized gain on marketable securities of $3,140 and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which provided $2,034,108 of cash.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $200,061,054. We may withdraw interest to pay our taxes, if any. Through December 31, 2020, we have not withdrawn any amounts to pay for our tax obligations. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (which interest shall be net of taxes payable) to complete our business combination. To the extent that our share capital is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete a business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $697,957. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants.
We monitor the adequacy of our working capital in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business prior to our initial business combination. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay the Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, utilities, secretarial and administrative support services, provided to the Company. We began incurring these fees on August 21, 2020 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of a business combination and the Company’s liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per unit, or $7,000,000 in the aggregate. A portion of such amount not to exceed 40% of the total amount of deferred underwriting commissions held in the Trust Account may be paid at the sole discretion of the Company to parties who may or may not participate in the Public Offering (but who are members of FINRA) that assist us in consummating a business combination. The election to make such payments to such parties will be solely at the discretion of our management team. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
On December 4, 2020, we entered into an agreement with a service provider, pursuant to which the service provider will serve as the placement agent for us in connection with a proposed private placement (the “Proposed Transaction”) of our equity or equity-linked securities (the “Equity Securities”). We agreed to pay the service provider a cash fee of equal to 50% of 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the total fair market of the Equity Securities sold in the Proposed Transaction subject to a minimum fee of $1,000,000 and reimbursable expenses not to exceed $50,000 without our prior written consent.
On December 4, 2020, we entered into an agreement with a service provider, pursuant to which the service provider will serve as media relations, due diligence, and transaction preparation in connection with a proposed business combination. We agreed to pay the service provider a cash fee of (i) $15,000 per month until the consummation of a business combination, (ii) $200,000 payable only upon consummation of a business combination and (iii) a discretionary performance bonus in the amount of $200,000 upon the consummation of the business combination, at our sole discretion.
On December 5, 2020, we entered into an agreement with a service provider, pursuant to which the service provider will serve as the co-placement agent for us in connection with a proposed private placement (the “Transaction”) of our equity or equity-linked securities (the “Securities”). We agreed to pay the service provider a cash fee of $2,800,000, payable at the closing of the business combination and a cash fee equal to 50% of 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the total Securities sold in the Transaction subject to a minimum fee of $2,200,000.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our consolidated balance sheet.
Net Income (Loss) Per Ordinary Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Net income per common share, basic and diluted for Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the Trust Account, net of applicable taxes, if any, by the weighted average number of shares of Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption outstanding for the period. Net loss per common share, basic and diluted for non-redeemable Class B ordinary shares is calculated by dividing net income less income attributable to Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption, by the weighted average number of shares of non-redeemable Class B ordinary shares outstanding for the period presented.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.