Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in the Cayman Islands on August 20, 2020 formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, amalgamation, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our business combination using cash derived from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, shares and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a business combination will be successful.
Recent Developments
On December 23, 2020, we entered into a Business Combination Agreement, by and among the Company, Owl Rock, and the Dyal Capital Partners (“Dyal”) division of Neuberger Berman Group LLC to form Blue Owl Capital Inc. (“Blue Owl”), a publicly-traded alternative asset management firm that would have over $45.0 billion in assets under management.
Pursuant to the transaction, the Company, which currently holds $275 million in cash in its Trust Account, will combine with Blue Owl at an estimated $12.5 billion pro forma equity value. Cash proceeds in connection with the transaction will be funded through a combination of the Company’s cash in its Trust Account and a $1.5 billion fully committed, common stock private placement of our common equity at $10.00 per share.
The transaction is expected to close in the first half of 2021, subject to customary closing conditions as further described in the Business Combination Agreement which is filed as Exhibit 2.1 to this Annual Report.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any operating revenues to date. Our only activities from inception through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, and identify a target for our business combination, and activities in connection with the proposed Blue Owl Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the Initial Public Offering. We expect that we will incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for expenses in connection with completing the initial business combination (including the proposed Blue Owl Business Combination).
For the period from August 20, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $261,631, which consists of operating and formation costs of $299,659 offset by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $38,028.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On October 27, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 25,000,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $250,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 4,666,667 Private Placement Warrants to the Sponsor at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant, generating gross proceeds of $7,000,000.
On November 9, 2020, we sold an additional 2,500,000 Units for total gross proceeds of $25,000,000 in connection with the underwriters’ partial exercise of their Over-allotment Option. Simultaneously with the partial closing of the Over-allotment Option, we also consummated the sale of an additional 333,333 Private Placement Warrants at $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant, generating total proceeds of $500,000.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the partial exercise of the Over-allotment Option and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $275,000,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $15,714,288 in transaction costs, including $5,500,000 of underwriting fees, $9,625,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $589,288 of other offering costs.
For the period from August 20, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 net cash used in operating activities was $550,911. Net loss of $261,631 was impacted by formation expenses paid by the Sponsor of $5,000 and interest earned on marketable securities of $38,028. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $256,252 of cash from operating activities.
At December 31, 2020, we had investments held in the Trust Account of $275,038,028. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account, which interest shall be net of taxes payable and excluding deferred underwriting commissions, to complete our initial business combination. We may withdraw interest from the Trust Account to pay taxes, if any. To the extent that our share capital or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete an initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
At December 31, 2020, we had cash of $928,766 held outside of the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily for activities necessary to consummate an initial business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an initial business combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete an initial business combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. In the event that an initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $2,000,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants, at a price of $1.50 per warrant, at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. We may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such initial business combination.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, secretarial, and administrative support services provided to the Company. We began incurring these fees on October 22, 2020 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of an initial business combination and the Company’s liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $9,625,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete an initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A Ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that features redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Loss per Ordinary Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Net income per ordinary share, basic and diluted for Class A redeemable ordinary shares is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the Trust Account by the weighted average number of Class A redeemable ordinary shares outstanding since original issuance. Net loss per ordinary share, basic and diluted for Class B non-redeemable ordinary shares is calculated by dividing the net loss, less income attributable to Class A redeemable ordinary shares, by the weighted average number of Class B non-redeemable ordinary shares outstanding for the periods presented.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.