ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on June 23, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”). We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants (as defined below), our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
Recent Developments
On February 15, 2021, the Company entered into a business combination agreement by and among itself, Project Olympus Merger Sub, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary (“Merger Sub”), and Owlet Baby Care Inc. (“Owlet”) (“Business Combination Agreement”). Owlet provides a data-driven connectivity platform to the nursey for parents. If approved, Merger Sub will merge with and into Owlet, with Owlet surviving the merger as a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (the “Merger”). In addition, in connection with the consummation of the transactions contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement (the “Closing”), the Company will be renamed “Owlet, Inc.” and is referred to below as “New Owlet” as of the time following such change of name.
As a consequence of the Merger, each share of the Company’s Class B common stock that is issued and outstanding as of immediately prior to the Effective Time will automatically convert into a share of New Owlet Class A common stock (“New Owlet common stock”) on a one-for-one basis in accordance with the terms of the Company’s amended and restated certificate of incorporation, dated September 14, 2020. The proposed business combination with Owlet will have no effect on the Company’s Class A common stock that is issued and outstanding as of immediately prior to the Effective Time, which will continue to remain outstanding.
As a consequence of the Merger, at the Effective Time, (i) each share of Owlet capital stock that is issued and outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time will be cancelled and converted into the right to receive the number of shares of New Owlet common stock equal to the Exchange Ratio (as defined in the Business Combination Agreement), rounded down to the nearest whole share; (ii) each option to purchase shares of Owlet common stock, whether vested or unvested, that is outstanding and unexercised as of immediately prior to the Effective Time will be assumed by New Owlet and will automatically become an option (vested or unvested, as applicable) to purchase a number of shares of New Owlet common stock equal to the number of shares of Owlet common stock subject to such option immediately prior to the Effective Time multiplied by the Exchange Ratio, rounded down to the nearest whole share, at an exercise price per share equal to the exercise price per share of such option immediately prior to the Effective Time divided by the Exchange Ratio, rounded up to the nearest whole cent, except that, subject to specified limitations, holders of vested options may instead elect to receive a cash payment in lieu of assumption of a portion of their vested options up to an aggregate cap of $10 million; and (iii) each share of Owlet common stock that is subject to a risk of forfeiture or right of repurchase at the original purchase price as of immediately prior to the Effective Time shall be subject to the same risk of forfeiture or right of repurchase (proportionately adjusted to reflect the Exchange Ratio) which risk of forfeiture or right of repurchase shall lapse in accordance with the same vesting schedule as that of the Owlet restricted stock.
The Merger is expected to close in the second quarter of 2021, following the receipt of the required approval by the Company’s stockholders and the fulfillment of other customary closing conditions.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from June 23, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for our initial public offering (the “Initial Public Offering”), described below, and the search for a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on investments held in the Trust Account (as defined below). We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from June 23, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $427,187, which consists of operating costs of $480,436, offset by interest income on investments held in the Trust Account of $53,249.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Until the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, our only source of liquidity was an initial purchase of shares of our Class B common stock by the Sponsor and loans from our Sponsor.
On September 17, 2020, we completed the Initial Public Offering of 23,000,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, which includes the full exercise by the underwriters of the over-allotment option to purchase an additional 3,000,000, Units generating gross proceeds of $230,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we completed the sale of 6,600,000 warrants (the “Private Placement Warrants”) at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant in a private placement to our Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $6,600,000.
Following the Initial Public Offering, including the full exercise of the over-allotment option by the underwriters’ and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $230,000,000 was placed in a trust account (the “Trust Account”) and we had $1,977,519 of cash held outside of the Trust Account, after payment of certain costs related to the Initial Public Offering, and available for working capital purposes. We incurred $12,948,806 in transaction costs, including $4,204,000 of underwriting fees, $8,050,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $694,806 of other offering costs.
For the period from June 23, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $455,960. Net loss of $427,187 was affected by interest earned on investments held in the Trust Account of $53,249 and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which provided $24,476 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and investments held in the Trust Account of $230,053,249. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account, to complete our Business Combination. We may withdraw interest to pay franchise and income taxes. During the period ended December 31, 2020, we did not withdraw any interest earned on the Trust Account. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $1,287,234 outside of the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor, an affiliate of the Sponsor, or our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants, including as to exercise price, exercisability and exercise period. The terms of such loans by our officers and directors, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. The loans would be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination, without interest.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our Business Combination. If we are unable to complete our Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support to the Company. We began incurring these fees on September 14, 2020 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination and the Company’s liquidation.
Certain of the underwriters of the Initial Public Offering are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $8,050,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement. The underwriters did not receive any upfront underwriting discount or commissions on the 1,980,000 Units purchased by the members of our Sponsor that are affiliated with Pacific Investment Management Company LLC, but will receive deferred underwriting commissions with respect to such Units.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, the Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Loss per Common Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Net income per common share, basic and diluted for Class A redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the Trust Account, net of applicable taxes, by the weighted average number of shares of Class A redeemable common stock outstanding for the periods. Net income per common share, basic and diluted for and Class B non-redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing net income less income attributable to Class A redeemable common stock, by the weighted average number of shares of Class B non-redeemable common stock outstanding for the periods presented.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.