Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our results of operations, cash flows, liquidity and capital resources compares Fiscal 2020 to Fiscal 2019 and should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements contained in this report.
The results of operations, cash flows, liquidity and capital resources for Fiscal 2019 compared to Fiscal 2018 are not included in this report on Form 10-K. For a discussion of our results of operations, cash flows, liquidity and capital resources for Fiscal 2019 compared to Fiscal 2018 and certain other financial information related to Fiscal 2019 and Fiscal 2018, refer to the “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II. Item 7 of our 2019 Annual Report on Form 10-K, filed with the SEC on March 30, 2020, which is available on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov and under the Investor Relations section of our website at www.oxfordinc.com.
OVERVIEW
Business Overview
We are a leading branded apparel company that designs, sources, markets and distributes products bearing the trademarks of our Tommy Bahama, Lilly Pulitzer and Southern Tide lifestyle brands and other brands. Tommy Bahama and Lilly Pulitzer, in the aggregate, represent more than 85% of our net sales.
Our business strategy is to develop and market compelling lifestyle brands and products that evoke a strong emotional response from our target consumers. We consider lifestyle brands to be those brands that have a clearly defined and targeted point of view inspired by an appealing lifestyle or attitude. Furthermore, we believe lifestyle brands that create an emotional connection, like Tommy Bahama, Lilly Pulitzer and Southern Tide, can command greater loyalty and higher price points at retail and create licensing opportunities. We believe the attraction of a lifestyle brand depends on creating compelling product, effectively communicating the respective lifestyle brand message and distributing products to consumers where and when they want them. We believe the principal competitive factors in the apparel industry are the reputation, value, and image of brand names; design of differentiated, innovative or otherwise compelling product; consumer preference; price; quality; marketing; product fulfillment capabilities; and customer service. Our ability to compete successfully in the apparel industry is directly related to our proficiency in foreseeing changes and trends in fashion and consumer preference and presenting appealing products for consumers. Our design-led, commercially informed lifestyle brand operations strive to provide exciting, differentiated products each season.
During Fiscal 2020, 77% of our net sales were through our direct to consumer channels of distribution, which consists of our brand-specific full-price retail stores, our e-commerce websites, our Tommy Bahama food and beverage operations and our Tommy Bahama outlets. The remaining 23% of our net sales was generated from our wholesale distribution channels. Our wholesale operations consist of net sales of products bearing our lifestyle brands, which complement our direct to consumer operations and provide access to a larger group of consumers, and the net sales of our Lanier Apparel operating group.
For additional information about our business and each of our operating groups, see Part I, Item 1. Business included in this report. Important factors relating to certain risks which could impact our business, including those resulting from the COVID-19 outbreak, are described in Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors of this report.
Industry Overview
Our operating groups operate in highly competitive apparel markets that continue to evolve rapidly with the expanding application of technology to fashion retail. No single apparel firm or small group of apparel firms dominates the apparel industry, and our direct competitors vary by operating group and distribution channel. The apparel industry is cyclical and very dependent upon the overall level and focus of discretionary consumer spending, which changes as consumer preferences and regional, domestic and international economic conditions change. Increasingly, consumers are choosing to spend less of their discretionary spending on certain product categories, including apparel, while spending
more on services and other product categories. Further, negative economic conditions often have a longer and more severe impact on the apparel industry than on other industries.
The competitive and evolving environment may require that brands and retailers approach their operations, including marketing and advertising, very differently than historical practices and may result in increased operating costs and capital investments to generate growth or even maintain current sales levels. Many of the changes in the industry were accelerated or exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic. While this competition and evolution presents significant risks, especially for traditional retailers who fail or are unable to adapt, we believe it also presents a tremendous opportunity for brands and retailers to capitalize on the changing consumer environment.
We believe our lifestyle brands have true competitive advantages in this new retailing paradigm, and we are leveraging technology to serve our consumers when and where they want to be served. We continue to believe that our lifestyle brands, with their strong emotional connections with consumers, are well suited to succeed and thrive in the long term while managing the various challenges facing our industry.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic has had a significant effect on overall economic conditions and our operations and is the primary reason for a 33% reduction in net sales and a significant net loss in Fiscal 2020 after years of profitable operating results. While our mission remains the enhancement of long-term shareholder value, our focus during this crisis has been (1) the health and well-being of our employees, customers and communities, (2) protecting the reputation, value and image of our brands and (3) preserving liquidity.
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, we saw reduced consumer traffic starting in early March 2020 and temporarily closed all our retail and restaurant locations. We began reopening our stores and restaurants in early May with additional stores and restaurants reopening throughout the Second Quarter of Fiscal 2020. We have reopened substantially all of our direct to consumer locations in a phased approach in accordance with local government guidelines and with additional safety protocols. Substantially all locations are experiencing reduced traffic, limited operating hours and capacity, and seating and other limitations, with such factors impacting individual locations differently. Certain retail stores and restaurants, including several in Hawaii and California, were required to close again for certain periods in the Third and Fourth Quarters of Fiscal 2020 after local jurisdictions reinstated some closure requirements. There can be no assurance that additional closures will not occur as a result of any resurgence of COVID-19 cases and/or additional government mandates or recommendations. Generally, locations with attached restaurants or Marlin Bars, in outdoor centers and in drivable resort vacation destinations performed better than locations in indoor malls in Fiscal 2020. At the same time, the shift from in-store shopping to online shopping has accelerated during the COVID-19 pandemic resulting in 24% growth in our e-commerce businesses during Fiscal 2020.
There is significant uncertainty as to the duration and severity of the pandemic as well as the associated business disruption, impact on discretionary spending and restrictions on our ongoing operations. Thus, the ultimate impact of the pandemic cannot be reasonably estimated at this time. However, the COVID-19 pandemic is expected to continue to have a material adverse impact on our business, results of operations, cash flows and financial condition for the foreseeable future due to the anticipated lower net sales from our bricks and mortar locations; reduced demand from our wholesale customers, several of which filed for bankruptcy in 2020 or are undergoing restructurings or closures; the uncertainty as to the continued strength of our brands’ e-commerce businesses during the pendency of the pandemic and thereafter; overall changes in consumer spending habits and consumer confidence; any potential disruptions to our supply chain; and a slowdown in the U.S. and global economies.
We took several actions in Fiscal 2020 to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, operations and liquidity, which included:
● we furloughed and laid off a significant number of our retail, restaurant and office employees;
● certain salaried employees, including our Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer and other executives, took temporary reductions in base salary during Fiscal 2020;
● our Board of Directors elected to reduce its cash retainers for Fiscal 2020;
● we worked with our suppliers to cancel, delay or suspend future product deliveries;
● we worked with our wholesale customers to identify suitable changes to our business arrangements;
● we negotiated equitable rental arrangements with substantially all of our direct to consumer location landlords, believing that the payment of rents for both the closure and subsequent periods is inappropriate due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, and are continuing those discussions with some landlords;
● under the CARES Act, and other regulations in other countries, we obtained employee retention credits for certain compensation paid to employees even while they were not working during the COVID-19 pandemic and have deferred the payment of the employer portion of FICA;
● we suspended, cancelled or deferred certain capital expenditure projects, reducing our capital expenditures for Fiscal 2020;
● during much of Fiscal 2020, we had drawn down certain amounts on our U.S. Revolving Credit Agreement to increase our cash position and preserve financial flexibility; and
● our Board of Directors reduced the rate of our dividend payable for Fiscal 2020.
Also, we established management committees, reporting to our Chief Executive Officer, to continue to monitor the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact and are taking the necessary measures to protect the health and safety of our employees and customers.
We anticipate that net sales in each of our Tommy Bahama, Lilly Pulitzer and Southern Tide operating groups will continue to be negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic in Fiscal 2021, with the impact being more pronounced in the first half of the year and then beginning to rebound a little more in the second half of the year once more consumers are vaccinated, begin to travel again or otherwise begin to return to a more normal way of life.
Given our net cash position as of January 30, 2021, substantial availability under our U.S. Revolving Credit Agreement and expectation of positive cash flows from operations in Fiscal 2021, among other factors, we believe we have adequate liquidity and the financial discipline to address the near-term challenges related to the COVID-19 pandemic and to position ourselves well to thrive in the post-pandemic retail environment.
Lanier Apparel Exit
In Fiscal 2020, we made the decision to exit our Lanier Apparel business, which is expected to be completed during the second half of Fiscal 2021. In Fiscal 2020 and Fiscal 2019, Lanier Apparel represented 5% and 8%, respectively, of our consolidated net sales. This decision is in line with our stated business strategy of developing and marketing compelling lifestyle brands and takes into consideration the increased challenges faced by the Lanier Apparel business, many of which were magnified by the COVID-19 pandemic. The Lanier Apparel business was primarily focused on moderately priced tailored clothes and related products.
In connection with the planned exit of the Lanier Apparel business, we recorded pre-tax charges of $13 million in the Lanier Apparel operating group during Fiscal 2020. These charges consist of (1) $6 million of inventory markdowns, the substantial majority of which were reversed in Corporate and Other as part of LIFO accounting as the inventory has not been sold as of January 30, 2021, (2) $3 million of employee charges, including severance and employee retention costs, (3) $3 million of operating lease asset impairment charges for leased office space of Lanier Apparel, (4) $1 million of non-cash fixed asset impairment charges, primarily related to leasehold improvements, and (5) $1 million of charges related to our Merida manufacturing facility, which ceased operations in Fiscal 2020. Refer to
Note 11 in our consolidated financial statements included in this report for more information about the Lanier Apparel exit charges.
In addition to these charges incurred in Fiscal 2020, we currently expect to incur incremental Lanier Apparel exit charges totaling approximately $3 million in Fiscal 2021, which are expected to consist of additional employee charges for employees retained during the exit and the acceleration of certain post-exit contractual commitments.
Key Operating Results
The following table sets forth our consolidated operating results from continuing operations (in thousands, except per share amounts) for Fiscal 2020 compared to Fiscal 2019:
The net loss per share in Fiscal 2020 compared to positive net earnings per share in Fiscal 2019 was primarily due to (1) the impact of COVID-19 on the operating results of each of our operating groups resulting in lower sales and lower gross margins, (2) the $60 million Southern Tide impairment charge recognized in the First Quarter of Fiscal 2020, a significant portion of which was non-deductible, (3) the $15 million write off of an information technology project in Tommy Bahama, and (4) $13 million of charges incurred in Fiscal 2020 related to the Lanier Apparel exit, which is expected to be completed in the second half of Fiscal 2021. These items were partially offset by a smaller operating loss in Corporate and Other, which was primarily due to the favorable impact of LIFO accounting primarily due to the reversal of inventory markdowns recognized in the operating groups.
OPERATING GROUPS
We identify our operating groups based on the way our management organizes the components of our business for purposes of allocating resources and assessing performance. Our operating group structure reflects a brand-focused management approach, emphasizing operational coordination and resource allocation across each brand’s direct to consumer, wholesale and licensing operations, as applicable. Our business has historically been operated primarily through our Tommy Bahama, Lilly Pulitzer, Southern Tide and Lanier Apparel operating groups. In Fiscal 2020, we made the decision to exit our Lanier Apparel business, which is expected to be completed during the second half of Fiscal 2021. For additional information about each of our operating groups, see Part I, Item 1. Business and Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements, both included in this report.
STORE COUNT
The table below provides store count information for Tommy Bahama, Lilly Pulitzer and Southern Tide as of the dates specified. The table includes our permanent stores and excludes any pop-up or temporary store locations which have an initial lease term less than or equal to 12 months. Due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, all our stores and restaurants were closed beginning in March 2020. We began reopening our stores and restaurants starting on May 3, 2020 in a phased approach in accordance with local government guidelines and with additional safety protocols implemented with substantially all direct to consumer locations reopened as of January 30, 2021. Certain retail stores and restaurants in some jurisdictions, including Hawaii and California, were required to close again for certain periods in the second half of Fiscal 2020 after local jurisdictions reinstated some closure requirements. Substantially all locations are experiencing reduced traffic, limited operating hours and capacity, seating and other limitations, with such factors impacting individual locations differently.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table sets forth the specified line items in our consolidated statements of operations both in dollars (in thousands) and as a percentage of net sales. We have calculated all percentages based on actual data, but percentage columns may not add due to rounding. Individual line items of our consolidated statements of operations may not be directly comparable to those of our competitors, as classification of certain expenses may vary by company.
The following table presents the proportion of our consolidated net sales by distribution channel for each period presented:
FISCAL 2020 COMPARED TO FISCAL 2019
The discussion and tables below compare certain line items included in our consolidated statements of operations for Fiscal 2020 to Fiscal 2019. Each dollar and percentage change provided reflects the change between these fiscal periods unless indicated otherwise. Each dollar and share amount included in the tables is in thousands except for per share amounts. We have calculated all percentages based on actual data, and percentage columns in tables may not
add due to rounding. Individual line items of our consolidated statements of operations may not be directly comparable to those of our competitors, as classification of certain expenses may vary by company.
Net Sales
Consolidated net sales decreased $374 million, or 33%, in Fiscal 2020 primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, which has had a negative impact on our retail, wholesale and restaurant operations, impacted by, among other things, temporary closures and reduced traffic after locations reopen, while our e-commerce business has generated very strong growth. The decreases in net sales included decreases in (1) full-price retail sales of $213 million, or 56%, (2) wholesale sales of $161 million, or 48%, (3) restaurant sales of $35 million, or 42%, and (4) outlet sales of $26 million, or 45%. These decreases were partially offset by increased e-commerce sales of $62 million, or 24%, primarily due to more demand as consumers shifted to online shopping as well as increased online marketing and promotional events to further engage consumers. The changes in net sales by operating group are discussed below.
Tommy Bahama:
Tommy Bahama net sales decreased $257 million, or 38%, in Fiscal 2020 primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, which had a negative impact on our retail, wholesale and restaurant operations. The decrease in net sales in Tommy Bahama included decreases in (1) full-price retail sales of $145 million, or 54%, (2) wholesale sales of $67 million, or 50%, including a decrease in both full-price and off-price sales, (3) restaurant sales of $35 million, or 42%, and (4) outlet store sales of $27 million, or 46%. These decreases were partially offset by increased e-commerce sales of $17 million, or 13%. The following table presents the proportion of net sales by distribution channel for Tommy Bahama for each period presented:
Lilly Pulitzer:
Lilly Pulitzer net sales decreased $54 million, or 19%, in Fiscal 2020 primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, which had a negative impact on our retail and wholesale operations. The decrease in net sales in Lilly Pulitzer included decreases in (1) retail sales of $69 million, or 60%, and (2) wholesale sales of $24 million, or 40%, primarily due to lower full-price sales. These decreases were partially offset by increased e-commerce sales of $39 million, or 36%, including a 63% increase in full-price e-commerce sales and a 2% increase in e-commerce flash sales to $49 million. The following table presents the proportion of net sales by distribution channel for Lilly Pulitzer for each period presented:
Southern Tide:
Southern Tide net sales decreased $12 million, or 25%, in Fiscal 2020 due to a $15 million, or 39%, decrease in wholesale sales, which was primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by a $1 million, or 15%, increase in e-commerce sales and a $1 million increase in retail store sales resulting from the opening of three Southern Tide retail stores, with the first store opening in the Fourth Quarter of Fiscal 2019. The following table presents the proportion of net sales by distribution channel for Southern Tide for each period presented:
Lanier Apparel:
Lanier Apparel net sales decreased $56 million, or 59%, in Fiscal 2020 primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Lanier Apparel had decreases in net sales in most replenishment, seasonal and other programs for both the branded and private label businesses, including a large pants program for a warehouse club that did not repeat in Fiscal 2020. These decreases were partially offset by $4 million of sales of COVID-19 related personal protective equipment such as masks and gowns.
Corporate and Other:
Corporate and Other net sales increased $5 million, or 23%, in Fiscal 2020 primarily due to increased sales in TBBC as well as increased Duck Head sales.
Gross Profit
The tables below present gross profit by operating group and in total for Fiscal 2020 and Fiscal 2019, as well as the change between those two periods and gross margin by operating group and in total. Our gross profit and gross margin, which is calculated as gross profit divided by net sales, may not be directly comparable to those of our competitors, as the statement of operations classification of certain expenses may vary by company.
The decrease in consolidated gross profit in Fiscal 2020 was due to the lower net sales and lower gross margin. The lower consolidated gross margin reflects lower gross margin in each operating group as discussed below. During Fiscal 2020, we recognized the negative impact of $15 million of inventory markdowns which were partially offset by a $9 million LIFO accounting credit. In Fiscal 2019, we recognized $4 million of inventory markdowns and a $1 million LIFO accounting charge.
Tommy Bahama:
The decrease in gross margin for Tommy Bahama was primarily driven by (1) lower gross margin in the full-price direct to consumer channel primarily due to a change in sales mix as a greater proportion of sales were related to promotion events, (2) lower gross margin in the wholesale channel resulting from a change in sales mix, with a greater proportion of off-price wholesale sales, as well as increased inventory markdowns, (3) lower gross margin in outlet sales as discounts were increased to move product and (4) certain fixed asset and operating lease asset impairment charges related to the restructuring of our Tommy Bahama sourcing operations.
Lilly Pulitzer:
The decrease in gross margin for Lilly Pulitzer was primarily due to (1) lower gross margin in the ecommerce flash sales resulting from increased discounting and increased freight expense, and (2) increased inventory markdowns. These unfavorable items were partially offset by higher initial margins in Fiscal 2020.
Southern Tide:
The decrease in gross margin for Southern Tide was primarily due to (1) increased inventory markdowns and lower profitability on off-price sales related to excess inventory and (2) more significant discounts and allowances in all channels of distribution. These items were partially offset by a change in sales mix with direct to consumer sales representing a larger proportion of net sales in Fiscal 2020.
Lanier Apparel:
The decrease in gross margin for Lanier Apparel was primarily due to (1) the $7 million of Lanier Apparel exit charges in cost of goods sold, including inventory markdowns and charges related to our Merida manufacturing facility, as discussed in Note 11 in the consolidated financial statements included in this report, (2) an increase in inventory markdowns in the First Half of Fiscal 2020, and (3) lower gross margin on various programs due to the challenging tailored clothing market. Each of these items had a more significant gross margin impact on the lower sales volume of Fiscal 2020.
Corporate and Other:
The gross profit in Corporate and Other primarily reflects the gross profit of TBBC, Duck Head and the Lyons, Georgia distribution center as well as the impact of LIFO accounting adjustments. The primary drivers for the higher gross profit were (1) the $11 million net favorable impact of LIFO accounting with a LIFO accounting credit in Fiscal 2020 and a LIFO accounting charge in Fiscal 2019 and (2) the gross profit resulting from higher net sales. The LIFO accounting impact in Corporate and Other in each period primarily reflects (1) a charge in Corporate and Other when inventory that had been marked down to the estimated net realizable value in an operating group in a prior period is
ultimately sold or (2) a credit in Corporate and Other when inventory has been marked down to the estimated net realizable value in an operating group in the current period, but has not been sold as of period end.
SG&A
The lower SG&A in Fiscal 2020 was primarily due to:
● decreased employment costs of $63 million primarily due to reductions in our employment cost in response to COVID-19, including the temporary furlough of substantially all retail and restaurant employees while direct to consumer operations were temporarily closed, lay-offs, reduced hours or pay reductions for certain employees, reductions in incentive compensation amounts, suspension of the company match during Fiscal 2020 for our 401(k) plan and the receipt of certain employee retention credits, partially offset by certain severance amounts, including employee charges associated with the Lanier Apparel exit as discussed in Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements included in this report;
● an $11 million reduction in certain variable expenses including credit card transaction fees, shipping costs, commissions, supplies and other variable expenses;
● a $10 million reduction in occupancy expenses which includes reductions in percent rent, utilities, maintenance and other expenses due to COVID-19 impact on store operations, certain negotiated rent reductions, and fewer Tommy Bahama and Lilly Pulitzer bricks and mortar locations, partially offset by a $3 million operating lease asset impairment charge associated with the Lanier Apparel exit as discussed in Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements included in this report;
● a $6 million decrease in travel expenses as the COVID-19 pandemic halted most business travel;
● a $3 million reduction in advertising expenses;
● a $3 million decrease in Tommy Bahama Japan charges, which related to charges associated with the restructure and exit of our Tommy Bahama Japan operations, with no such charges in Fiscal 2020; and
● decreases in other expense items including communications, samples, and administrative and general expenses.
These decreases in SG&A were partially offset by:
● a $15 million charge for the write off of costs associated with a Tommy Bahama information technology project that has been abandoned and will not be implemented;
● $6 million of increased estimated provisions for credit losses and other charges related to bankruptcies with respect to multiple customers; and
● a $3 million increase in depreciation expense including impairment charges for certain leasehold improvements at certain retail locations and Lanier Apparel office space.
Impairment of goodwill and intangible assets
In Fiscal 2020, impairment charges for goodwill and intangible assets totaling $60 million were recognized in Southern Tide. The impairment charges for Southern Tide primarily reflect the impact of COVID-19 on the operations, plans and strategy of the Southern Tide business. In addition, a small impairment charge was recognized in Lanier Apparel related to a trademark that was not deemed recoverable. Refer to Note 4 in the consolidated financial statements included in this report for additional discussion regarding the impairment charges recognized in Fiscal 2020. There were no impairment charges for goodwill or intangible assets in Fiscal 2019.
Royalties and other operating income
Royalties and other operating income primarily includes income received from third parties from the licensing of our brands. The decreased royalties and other income in Fiscal 2020 was primarily due to lower royalty income in both Tommy Bahama and Lilly Pulitzer.
Operating income (loss)
The lower operating results in Fiscal 2020 were primarily due to (1) the impact of COVID-19 on each operating group, (2) the $60 million Southern Tide impairment charge recognized in the First Quarter of Fiscal 2020, (3) the $15 million write off of an information technology project in Tommy Bahama, and (4) the $13 million of Lanier Apparel exit
charges incurred in Fiscal 2020. These items were partially offset by improved operating results in Corporate and Other, which was primarily due to the favorable impact of LIFO accounting due to the reversal of inventory markdowns recognized in the operating groups. Changes in operating income (loss) by operating group are discussed below.
Tommy Bahama:
The lower operating results for Tommy Bahama in Fiscal 2020 were primarily due to lower sales and lower gross margin partially offset by lower SG&A. The lower SG&A was primarily due to (1) $51 million of lower employment costs, (2) $9 million of lower variable costs such as credit card transaction fees, commissions, shipping fees and supplies, (3) $7 million of lower occupancy costs, (4) a $4 million decrease in advertising expense, (5) a $3 million decrease in travel expense, (6) a $3 million decrease in Tommy Bahama Japan charges, which related to Fiscal 2019 charges associated with the restructure and exit of our Tommy Bahama Japan operations, and (7) decreases in other general and administrative expenses. These decreases were partially offset by (1) a $15 million charge related to the write off of an information technology project in Tommy Bahama that was abandoned in the Fourth Quarter of Fiscal 2020, (2) a $2 million increase in depreciation expense including impairment charges for certain direct to consumer locations and (3) a $1 million increase in provisions for credit losses.
Lilly Pulitzer:
The lower operating income for Lilly Pulitzer in Fiscal 2020 was primarily due to lower sales and lower gross margin partially offset by lower SG&A. The lower SG&A was primarily due to (1) $9 million of lower employment costs, (2) $3 million of lower occupancy costs, (3) a $2 million decrease in travel expense, and (4) reductions in other general and administrative expenses. These decreases in SG&A were partially offset by (1) $3 million of higher marketing expense and (2) increases in other expenses including provisions for credit losses.
Southern Tide:
The lower operating results for Southern Tide in Fiscal 2020 were primarily due to the $60 million impairment charge for goodwill and intangible assets in the First Quarter of Fiscal 2020 as well as lower sales and lower gross margin partially offset by lower SG&A. Lower SG&A for employment costs, advertising, travel and other expenses were partially offset by the SG&A associated with the Southern Tide retail store operations and increased provisions for credit losses.
Lanier Apparel:
In Fiscal 2020, we made the decision to exit our Lanier Apparel business, which is expected to be completed during the second half of Fiscal 2021. The lower operating results for Lanier Apparel in Fiscal 2020 were due to lower sales, $13 million of charges related to the Lanier Apparel exit, and lower gross margin. The Lanier Apparel exit charges primarily consist of inventory markdowns and charges related to our Merida manufacturing facility, which are included in cost of goods sold, and operating lease asset impairment charges, employee charges, and fixed asset impairment charges, which are included in SG&A. Absent the $6 million of Lanier Apparel exit charges included in SG&A, SG&A decreased due to reductions in variable expenses, employment costs and other operating costs partially offset by $4 million of increased estimated provisions for credit losses and other charges related to bankruptcies with respect to multiple Lanier Apparel customers. The Lanier Apparel exit charges are discussed in Note 11 in the consolidated financial statements included in this report.
Corporate and Other:
The smaller operating loss for Corporate and Other was primarily due to the $11 million favorable net impact of LIFO accounting and higher sales.
Interest expense, net
The increased interest expense in Fiscal 2020 was primarily due to higher levels of debt outstanding partially offset by interest income earned on cash invested in money market accounts in Fiscal 2020. During most of Fiscal 2020, to ensure liquidity during the COVID-19 pandemic, we maintained certain cash on our balance sheet by drawing down on the U.S. Revolving Credit Agreement.
Income taxes
Income taxes were a tax benefit in Fiscal 2020 resulting from an operating loss and the impact of certain discrete and other items noted below, as compared to a tax expense in Fiscal 2019 resulting from operating income.
The income tax benefit in Fiscal 2020 reflects the benefit of operating losses that will be realized at a federal rate of 35% pursuant to the CARES Act provision allowing carryback of the Fiscal 2020 loss amounts to pre-U.S. Tax Reform years, as well as a favorable provision to return adjustment for our Fiscal 2019 returns. These favorable impacts were offset by (1) the non-deductibility of certain impairment charges which results in an estimated effective income tax benefit rate of approximately 17% on the impairment charges, (2) estimated book to tax timing differences which may reduce the amount of Fiscal 2020 expenses currently deductible for income tax return purposes, (3) an increase to the reserve for uncertain tax positions and (4) restricted stock which vested in the period with a vesting date price lower than the grant date price. Refer to Note 9 in our consolidated financial statements included in this report for additional information about our income tax expense for Fiscal 2020 and Fiscal 2019.
Net earnings
The net loss per share in Fiscal 2020 compared to positive net earnings per share in Fiscal 2019 was primarily due to (1) the impact of COVID-19 on the operating results of each of our operating groups resulting in lower sales and
lower gross margins, (2) the $60 million Southern Tide impairment charge recognized in the First Quarter of Fiscal 2020, a significant portion of which was non-deductible, (3) the $15 million write off of an information technology project in Tommy Bahama, and (4) $13 million of charges related to the Lanier Apparel exit incurred in Fiscal 2020. These items were partially offset by the smaller operating loss in Corporate and Other, which was primarily due to the favorable impact of LIFO accounting primarily due to the reversal of inventory markdowns recognized in the operating groups.
FINANCIAL CONDITION, LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our primary source of revenue and cash flow is through our design, sourcing, marketing and distribution of branded apparel products bearing the trademarks of our Tommy Bahama, Lilly Pulitzer and Southern Tide lifestyle brands and other owned brands. We distribute our products to our customers via direct to consumer and wholesale channels of distribution.
Our primary uses of cash flow include the purchase of products in the operation of our business from third party contract manufacturers outside of the United States, as well as operating expenses, including employee compensation and benefits, occupancy-related costs, marketing and advertising costs, distribution costs, other general and administrative expenses and the payment of periodic interest and other payments related to our financing arrangements. Additionally, we use cash for the funding of capital expenditures, dividends and repayment of indebtedness. In the ordinary course of business, we maintain certain levels of inventory, extend credit to our wholesale customers and pay our operating expenses. Thus, we require a certain amount of working capital to operate our business.
If cash inflows are less than cash outflows, we have access to amounts under our U.S. Revolving Credit Agreement, subject to its terms, which is described below. We may fund our future cash requirements through various methods, including cash flow from operations, borrowings under our current or additional credit facilities, sales of debt or equity securities, and cash on hand.
As of January 30, 2021 and February 1, 2020, we had $66 million and $52 million, respectively, of cash and cash equivalents on hand, with no borrowings outstanding under our U.S. Revolving Credit Agreement. The increase in cash and cash equivalents at January 30, 2021 was primarily due to $84 million of cash flow from operations, which includes significant decreases in working capital amounts, which was partially offset by cash payments of $35 million for investing activities, $20 million for share repurchases and $17 million for dividends.
As of January 30, 2021, under our U.S. Revolving Credit Agreement, we had $301 million of unused availability, which includes substantially all of our cash and cash equivalents as eligible assets. We believe our U.S. Revolving Credit Agreement and anticipated future positive cash flow from operating activities will provide sufficient cash flow to satisfy our ongoing cash requirements as well as ample opportunity to continue to invest in our brands, direct to consumer initiatives and other strategic initiatives in both the near term and long term.
Key Liquidity Measures
Our working capital ratio is calculated by dividing total current assets by total current liabilities. Current assets as of January 30, 2021 decreased from February 1, 2020 due to lower inventories, receivables and prepaid expenses partially offset by increased income tax receivables and cash and cash equivalents. Current liabilities as of January 30, 2021 increased from February 1, 2020 primarily due to higher current operating lease liabilities, accounts payable and other accrued expenses. Changes in current assets and current liabilities are discussed below.
For the ratio of debt to total capital, debt is defined as short-term and long-term debt, and total capital is defined as debt plus shareholders’ equity. There was no debt outstanding as of January 30, 2021 or February 1, 2020, while shareholders’ equity was $406 million as of January 30, 2021 and $529 million as of February 1, 2020. Shareholders’ equity decreased from February 1, 2020, primarily due to net losses, dividends and shares repurchased during Fiscal 2020. Our debt levels and ratio of debt to total capital in future periods may not be comparable to historical amounts as we continue to assess, and possibly make changes to, our capital structure. Changes in our capital structure in the future, if any, will depend on prevailing market conditions, our liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions, the ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and other factors. The amounts involved may be material.
Balance Sheet
The following tables set forth certain information included in our consolidated balance sheets (in thousands). Below each table are explanations for any significant changes in the balances from February 1, 2020 to January 30, 2021.
Current Assets:
Cash and cash equivalents were $66 million as of January 30, 2021 compared to $52 million as of February 1, 2020. Any cash that is not used to repay amounts outstanding under our U.S. Revolving Credit Agreement is generally invested in money market investment accounts.
The decrease in receivables, net as of January 30, 2021 was primarily due to lower trade receivables resulting from lower wholesale sales, lower credit card receivables and a higher provision for credit losses. Inventories, net, which is net of a $62 million LIFO reserve as of January 30, 2021 and $63 million LIFO reserve as of February 1, 2020, decreased as of January 30, 2021. The lower inventories are a result of significantly lower inventories in each operating group due to a focus on decreasing inventories in the COVID-19 environment including reduced inventory purchases, cancellations of inventory purchases, and liquidation of excess prior season inventory, lower inventory in transit amounts and marking down inventory amounts to amounts expected to be realized. The decreases in the operating groups were partially offset by increased inventory in Corporate and Other resulting from the impact of LIFO accounting which requires the reversal of certain inventory markdowns in the operating groups.
Income tax receivable increased as of January 30, 2021 due to the expected income tax receivable for the benefit of the Fiscal 2020 operating losses, which we expect to carry back to offset prior year taxable income. Prepaid expenses and other current assets decreased as of January 30, 2021 primarily due to lower prepaid advertising, royalties, samples and other prepaid operating expenses.
Non-current Assets:
Property and equipment, net as of January 30, 2021 decreased primarily due to depreciation expense, the write off of costs associated with a Tommy Bahama information technology project and impairment of certain property and equipment during Fiscal 2020, which exceeded capital expenditures during Fiscal 2020. The decrease in intangible assets, net and goodwill as of January 30, 2021 was primarily due to the impairment charges of $60 million in Southern Tide in Fiscal 2020, as discussed in Note 4 of our consolidated financial statements included in this report.
Operating lease assets as of January 30, 2021 decreased primarily due to the recognition of amortization related to existing operating leases, the termination or reduced term of certain operating leases and the impairment of certain operating lease asset amounts exceeding the increased operating lease assets associated with any new or extended operating lease agreements. The increase in other assets, net as of January 30, 2021 was primarily due to a $6 million increase in investment in unconsolidated entities due to the acquisition of an ownership interest in two entities, an increase in non-current deferred tax assets and an increase in assets set aside for potential deferred compensation obligations.
Liabilities:
Current liabilities increased as of January 30, 2021 primarily due to higher operating lease liabilities, as certain rent amounts were withheld during the pendency of discussions with real property landlords, and accrued expenses and other liabilities, including higher expected direct to consumer inventory returns, increased gift card liabilities, increases in other accrued expenses and increased accounts payable. Accrued compensation was comparable as the increased payable for deferred FICA payments allowable pursuant to the CARES Act offset lower incentive compensation amounts.
Non-current portion of operating lease liabilities as of January 30, 2021 decreased primarily due to the payment of operating lease liabilities, classification of certain unpaid amounts while negotiating with landlords regarding operating lease liabilities and reductions in liabilities related to the termination or reduced term of certain operating leases exceeding operating lease liabilities associated with any new or extended operating lease agreements. Other non-current liabilities increased as of January 30, 2021 primarily due to an increase in uncertain tax positions as disclosed in Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements included in this report. Deferred income taxes decreased as of January 30, 2021 primarily due to timing differences associated with impairment and amortization of intangible assets and goodwill, impact of operating lease payable amounts, timing differences associated with inventories, and changes in other current liability amounts.
Statement of Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the net cash flows, including continuing and discontinued operations, resulting in the change in our cash and cash equivalents (in thousands):
Fiscal 2020
Fiscal 2019
Fiscal 2018
Cash provided by operating activities
$
83,850
$
121,926
$
96,377
Cash used in investing activities
(34,651)
(37,421)
(37,397)
Cash used in financing activities
(35,848)
(41,298)
(56,765)
Net change in cash and cash equivalents
$
13,351
$
43,207
$
2,215
Cash and cash equivalents on hand were $66 million and $52 million as of January 30, 2021 and February 1, 2020, respectively. Changes in cash flows in Fiscal 2020 and Fiscal 2019 related to operating activities, investing activities and financing activities are discussed below.
Operating Activities:
In Fiscal 2020 and Fiscal 2019, operating activities provided $84 million and $122 million of cash, respectively. The cash flow from operating activities for each period was primarily the result of net earnings (loss) for the relevant period adjusted, as applicable, for non-cash activities including depreciation, amortization, impairment and equity-based compensation, as well as the net impact of changes in deferred taxes and operating assets and liabilities. In Fiscal 2020, changes in operating assets and liabilities had a significant favorable impact on cash flow from operations, and in Fiscal 2019, changes in operating assets and liabilities had a modest favorable impact on cash flow from operations.
In Fiscal 2020, the more significant changes in operating assets and liabilities were decreases in inventories, and receivables and increases in current liabilities, which increased cash flow from operations, partially offset by an increase in income tax receivables and a decrease in deferred tax liabilities, which decreased cash flow from operations. In Fiscal 2019, the more significant changes in working capital, after considering the non-cash impact of certain reclassifications that resulted from the adoption of the revised lease accounting guidance, were a decrease in receivables and inventories, which increased cash flow from operations, partially offset by decreases in current liabilities, which reduced cash flow from operations.
Investing Activities:
In Fiscal 2020 and Fiscal 2019, investing activities used $35 million and $37 million of cash, respectively. Our capital expenditures, which were $29 million in Fiscal 2020 and $37 million in Fiscal 2019, primarily consist of costs associated with information technology initiatives, including e-commerce capabilities; opening, relocating and remodeling retail stores and restaurants; and facilities enhancements for distribution centers and offices. In addition to our capital expenditures, in Fiscal 2020, we invested $6 million for a minority interest in two separate unconsolidated entities, which operate branded apparel businesses.
On an ongoing basis, our cash flow used in investing activities is expected to primarily consist of our capital expenditure investments in our existing brands as well as any acquisitions of or minority interests in new businesses.
Financing Activities:
In Fiscal 2020 and Fiscal 2019, financing activities used $36 million and $41 million of cash, respectively. During Fiscal 2020, we repurchased $18 million of shares of our common stock pursuant to an open market stock repurchase program, which was suspended on March 17, 2020. During Fiscal 2020 and Fiscal 2019, we paid $17 million and $25 million in dividends, respectively. Both Fiscal 2020 and Fiscal 2019 included certain amounts related to (1) the issuance of equity pursuant to our employee stock purchase plan, (2) the repurchase of equity awards for employee tax
withholding liabilities resulting from the vesting of equity awards during the period and (3) the payment of contingent consideration or other deferred acquisition payment amounts, which are included in other financing activities.
We may borrow or pay down debt depending on whether our cash flow from operating activities exceeds our capital expenditures, dividend payments, acquisitions and any other investing or financing activities. Generally, we anticipate that excess cash, if any, will be used to repay any debt on our U.S. Revolving Credit Agreement.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of January 30, 2021, we had $66 million of cash and cash equivalents on hand, with no borrowings outstanding under our U.S. Revolving Credit Agreement. As of January 30, 2021, under our U.S. Revolving Credit Agreement, we had $301 million of unused availability, which includes substantially all of our cash and cash equivalents as eligible assets. We believe our U.S. Revolving Credit Agreement and anticipated future positive cash flow from operating activities will provide sufficient cash flow to satisfy our ongoing cash requirements as well as ample opportunity to continue to invest in our brands, direct to consumer initiatives and other strategic initiatives in both the near term and long term.
The U.S. Revolving Credit Agreement generally (1) is limited to a borrowing base consisting of specified percentages of eligible categories of assets, (2) accrues variable-rate interest, unused line fees and letter of credit fees based upon average unused availability or utilization, (3) requires periodic interest payments with principal due at maturity (July 2024) and (4) is secured by a first priority security interest in substantially all of the assets of Oxford Industries, Inc. and its domestic subsidiaries, including accounts receivable, books and records, chattel paper, deposit accounts, equipment, certain general intangibles, inventory, investment property (including the equity interests of certain subsidiaries), negotiable collateral, life insurance policies, supporting obligations, commercial tort claims, cash and cash equivalents, eligible trademarks, proceeds and other personal property.
To the extent cash flow needs exceed cash flow provided by our operations we will have access, subject to its terms, to our U.S. Revolving Credit Agreement to provide funding for operating activities, capital expenditures and acquisitions, if any. Our U.S. Revolving Credit Agreement is also used to establish collateral for certain insurance programs and leases and to finance trade letters of credit for product purchases, which reduce the amounts available under our line of credit when issued. As of January 30, 2021, $3 million of letters of credit were outstanding under our U.S. Revolving Credit Agreement.
Covenants, Other Restrictions and Prepayment Penalties
The U.S. Revolving Credit Agreement is subject to a number of affirmative covenants regarding the delivery of financial information, compliance with law, maintenance of property, insurance requirements and conduct of business. Also, the U.S. Revolving Credit Agreement is subject to certain negative covenants or other restrictions including, among other things, limitations on our ability to (1) incur debt, (2) guaranty certain obligations, (3) incur liens, (4) pay dividends to shareholders, (5) repurchase shares of our common stock, (6) make investments, (7) sell assets or stock of subsidiaries, (8) acquire assets or businesses, (9) merge or consolidate with other companies or (10) prepay, retire, repurchase or redeem debt.
Additionally, the U.S. Revolving Credit Agreement contains a financial covenant that applies only if excess availability under the agreement for three consecutive business days is less than the greater of (i) $23.5 million or (ii) 10% of availability. In such case, our fixed charge coverage ratio as defined in the U.S. Revolving Credit Agreement must not be less than 1.0 to 1.0 for the immediately preceding 12 fiscal months for which financial statements have been delivered. This financial covenant continues to apply until we have maintained excess availability under the U.S. Revolving Credit Agreement of more than the greater of (i) $23.5 million or (ii) 10% of availability for 30 consecutive days.
We believe that the affirmative covenants, negative covenants, financial covenants and other restrictions under the U.S. Revolving Credit Agreement are customary for those included in similar facilities entered into at the time we amended the U.S. Revolving Credit Agreement. During Fiscal 2020 and as of January 30, 2021, no financial covenant
testing was required pursuant to our U.S. Revolving Credit Agreement as the minimum availability threshold was met at all times. As of January 30, 2021, we were compliant with all applicable covenants related to the U.S. Revolving Credit Agreement.
Other Liquidity Items:
We anticipate that we will be able to satisfy our ongoing cash requirements, which generally consist of working capital and other operating activity needs, capital expenditures, interest payments on our debt and dividends, if any, primarily from borrowings under our U.S. Revolving Credit Agreement and positive cash flows from operations in the long term. Our need for working capital is typically seasonal with the greatest requirements generally in the fall and spring of each year. Our capital needs will depend on many factors including the results of our operations and cash flows in the COVID-19 environment and beyond, future growth rates, the need to finance inventory levels and the success of our various products. We anticipate that at the maturity of the U.S. Revolving Credit Agreement or as otherwise deemed appropriate, we will be able to refinance the facility or obtain other financing on terms available in the market at that time. The terms of any future financing arrangements may not be as favorable as the terms of the current agreement or current market terms.
On March 23, 2021, our Board of Directors approved a cash dividend of $0.37 per share payable on April 30, 2021 to shareholders of record as of the close of business on April 16, 2021. Although we have paid dividends in each quarter since we became a public company in July 1960, we may discontinue or modify dividend payments at any time if we determine that other uses of our capital, including payment of outstanding debt, funding of acquisitions, funding of capital expenditures or repurchases of outstanding shares, may be in our best interest; if our expectations of future cash flows and future cash needs outweigh the ability to pay a dividend; or if the terms of our credit facility, other debt instruments or applicable law limit our ability to pay dividends. We may borrow to fund dividends in the short term subject to the terms and conditions of our credit facility, other debt instruments and applicable law. All cash flow from operations will not be paid out as dividends in all periods. For details about limitations on our ability to pay dividends, see the discussion of the U.S. Revolving Credit Agreement above.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual cash obligations, as of January 30, 2021, by future period (in thousands):
(1) Principal, interest, unused line fees and letter of credit fees and amounts payable in future periods on our U.S. Revolving Credit Agreement have been excluded from the table above, as the principal amount that will be outstanding and interest rate during any fiscal year will be dependent upon future events which are not known at this time. During Fiscal 2020, we paid $2 million of interest, unused line fees and letter of credit fees.
(2) Amounts included reflect the rent amounts included in determining the operating lease liabilities. Amounts to be paid in future periods for real estate taxes, sales tax, insurance, other operating expenses and contingent rent applicable to the properties pursuant to the respective operating leases have been excluded from the table above, as the amounts payable in future periods are, in most cases, not quantified in the lease agreements or are dependent on factors which may not be known at this time. Such amounts incurred in Fiscal 2020 totaled $30 million. Refer to Note 6 in our consolidated financial statements for disclosures about our operating lease agreements.
(3) Amounts totaling $16 million of deferred compensation obligations, which are included in other non-current liabilities in our consolidated balance sheet as of January 30, 2021, have been excluded from the table above, due to the uncertainty of the timing of the payment of these obligations, which are generally at the discretion of the individual employees or upon the death of the individual.
(4) Non-current deferred tax liability amounts included in our consolidated balance sheet as of January 30, 2021 and discussed in Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements included in this report have been excluded from the above table. Deferred income tax liabilities are calculated based on temporary differences between the tax basis and book basis of assets and liabilities, which will result in taxable amounts in future years when the amounts are settled at their reported financial statement amounts. As the results of these calculations do not have a direct connection with the amount of cash taxes to be paid in any future periods, scheduling deferred income tax amounts by period could be misleading.
(5) Includes an estimated amount for the Fiscal 2020 contingent consideration payment to be paid in Fiscal 2021 associated with the TBBC contingent consideration arrangement. Additional amounts totaling $1 million of contingent consideration amounts, which are included in other non-current liabilities in our consolidated balance sheet as of January 30, 2021, have been excluded from the table above, due to the uncertainty of the amount or timing of these potential obligations, which are dependent upon earnings of TBBC in Fiscal 2021.
Our anticipated capital expenditures for Fiscal 2021, which are excluded from the table above as we are generally not contractually obligated to pay these amounts as of January 30, 2021, are expected to be approximately $35 million in Fiscal 2021. Amounts actually spent in Fiscal 2021 will be impacted by a variety of factors including the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Our capital expenditure amounts in future years will fluctuate from the amounts incurred in prior years depending on the information technology initiatives, direct to consumer location openings, relocations and remodels and other infrastructure requirements deemed appropriate for that year to support future expansion of our businesses.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not entered into agreements which meet the SEC’s definition of an off balance sheet financing arrangement, other than operating leases, and have made no financial commitments to or guarantees with respect to any unconsolidated subsidiaries or special purpose entities.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP in a consistent manner. The preparation of these financial statements requires the selection and application of accounting policies. Further, the application of GAAP requires us to make estimates and judgments about future events that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and related disclosures. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those discussed below. We base our estimates on historical experience, current trends, various other assumptions and, in Fiscal 2020, the uncertain impact of COVID-19 and the Lanier Apparel exit, that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources.
Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe it is possible that other professionals, applying reasonable judgment to the same set of facts and circumstances, could develop and support a range of alternative estimated amounts. We believe that we have appropriately applied our critical accounting policies. However, in the event that inappropriate assumptions or methods were used relating to the critical accounting policies below, our consolidated statements of operations could be misstated.
A detailed summary of significant accounting policies is included in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements contained in this report. The following is a brief discussion of the more significant estimates, assumptions and judgments we use or the amounts most sensitive to change from outside factors.
Revenue Recognition and Accounts Receivable
Our revenue consists of direct to consumer sales, including our retail store, e-commerce and restaurant operations, and wholesale sales, as well as royalty income, which is included in royalties and other income in our consolidated statements of operations. We recognize revenue when performance obligations under the terms of the contracts with our customers are satisfied. Our performance obligations generally consist of delivering our products to our direct to consumer and wholesale customers. Control of the product is generally transferred upon providing the product to consumers in our bricks and mortar retail stores and restaurants, upon physical delivery of the products to consumers in our e-commerce operations and upon shipment from the distribution center to customers in our wholesale operations. Once control is transferred to the customer, we have completed our performance obligations related to the contract and have an unconditional right to consideration for the products sold, as outlined in the contract. Our receivables resulting from contracts with customers in our direct to consumer operations are generally collected within a few days, upon settlement of the credit card transaction. Our receivables resulting from contracts with our customers in our wholesale operations are generally due within one quarter, in accordance with established credit terms.
In the ordinary course of our wholesale operations, we offer discounts, allowances and cooperative advertising support to some of our wholesale customers for certain products. Wholesale sales are recorded net of such discounts, allowances, cooperative advertising support, operational chargebacks and provisions for estimated wholesale returns. As certain allowances, other deductions and returns are not finalized until the end of a season, program or other event which may not have occurred yet, we estimate such discounts, allowances and returns on an ongoing basis to estimate the consideration from the customer that we expect to ultimately receive. We only recognize revenue to the extent that it is probable that we will not have a significant reversal of revenue in a future period. Significant considerations in determining our estimates for discounts, allowances, operational chargebacks and returns for wholesale customers may include historical and current trends, agreements with customers, projected seasonal or program results, an evaluation of current economic conditions, specific program or product expectations and retailer performance. Actual discounts and allowances to our wholesale customers have not differed materially from our estimates in prior years. As of January 30, 2021, our total reserves for discounts, returns and allowances for our wholesale businesses were $6 million and, therefore, if the allowances changed by 10% it would have had a pre-tax impact of $1 million on earnings in Fiscal 2020. The substantial majority of these reserves as of January 30, 2021 relate to our Lanier Apparel business.
We extend credit to certain wholesale customers based on an evaluation of the customer’s financial capacity and condition, usually without requiring collateral. We recognize estimated provisions for credit losses based on our historical collection experience, the financial condition of our customers, an evaluation of current economic conditions and anticipated trends, each of which is subjective and requires certain assumptions. Actual charges for credit losses have not differed materially from our estimates in prior years. The amounts deemed uncollectible have not generally been significant in recent years prior to Fiscal 2020; in Fiscal 2020, we incurred a charge for provisions for credit losses of $4 million. If, in the future, amounts due from significant customer(s) were deemed to be uncollectible as a result of events that occur subsequent to January 30, 2021, this could result in a material charge to our consolidated statements of operations in future periods. As of January 30, 2021, our provision for credit losses was $3 million, and therefore, if the allowance for bad debts changed by 10% it would have had a pre-tax impact of less than $1 million on earnings in Fiscal 2020.
In our direct to consumer operations, consumers have certain rights to return product within a specified period and are eligible for certain point of sale discounts, thus retail store, e-commerce and restaurant revenues are recorded net of estimated returns and discounts, as applicable. We make estimates of reserves for products which were sold prior to the balance sheet date but that we anticipate may be returned by the consumer subsequent to that date. The determination of direct to consumer return reserve amounts requires judgment and consideration of historical and current trends, evaluation of current economic trends and other factors. Our historical estimates of direct to consumer return reserves have not differed materially from actual results. As of January 30, 2021, our direct to consumer return liability was $7 million. A 10% change in the direct to consumer sales return reserve as of January 30, 2021 would have had a less than $1 million impact on gross profit and pre-tax earnings in Fiscal 2020.
Inventories, net
For operating group reporting, inventory is carried at the lower of the first-in, first-out (FIFO) cost or market. We evaluate the composition of our inventories, substantially all of which is finished goods inventory, for identification of distressed inventory at least quarterly. In performing this evaluation, we consider slow-turning products, an indication of lack of consumer acceptance of particular products, prior seasons’ fashion products, broken assortments, discontinued products and current levels of replenishment program products as compared to expected sales. We estimate the amount of goods that we will not be able to sell in the normal course of business and write down the value of these goods as necessary. As the amount to be ultimately realized for the goods is not necessarily known at period end, we must use certain assumptions considering historical experience, inventory quantity, quality, age and mix, historical sales trends, future sales projections, consumer and retailer preferences, market trends, general economic conditions and our anticipated plans to sell the inventory. Also, we provide an allowance for shrinkage, as appropriate, for the period between the last physical inventory count and each balance sheet date. Historically, our estimates of inventory markdowns and inventory shrinkage have not varied significantly from actual results.
For consolidated financial reporting, $116 million, or 94%, of our inventories were valued at the lower of the last-in, first-out (LIFO) cost or market after deducting the $62 million LIFO reserve as of January 30, 2021. The remaining $8 million of our inventories are valued at the lower of FIFO cost or market as of January 30, 2021. LIFO reserves are based on the Producer Price Index (PPI) as published by the United States Department of Labor. We write down inventories valued at the lower of LIFO cost or market when LIFO cost exceeds market value. We deem LIFO accounting adjustments to not only include changes in the LIFO reserve, but also changes in markdown reserves which are considered in LIFO accounting. As our LIFO inventory pool does not correspond to our operating group definitions, LIFO inventory accounting adjustments are not allocated to the respective operating groups. Thus, the impact of accounting for inventories on the LIFO method is reflected in Corporate and Other for operating group reporting purposes.
As of January 30, 2021, we had recorded a reserve of $6 million related to inventory on the lower of FIFO cost or market method and for inventory on the lower of LIFO cost or market method with markdowns in excess of our LIFO reserve. A 10% change in the amount of such markdowns would have a pre-tax impact of less than $1 million on earnings in Fiscal 2020. A change in the markdowns of our inventory valued at the lower of LIFO cost or market method that is not marked down in excess of our LIFO reserve typically would not be expected to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. A change in inventory levels, or the mix by inventory category, at the end of future fiscal years compared to inventory balances as of January 30, 2021 could result in a material impact on our consolidated financial statements as such a change may erode portions of our earlier base year layers for purposes of making our annual LIFO computation. Additionally, a change in the PPI as published by the United States Department of Labor as compared to the indexes as of January 30, 2021 could result in a material impact on our consolidated financial statements as inflation or deflation would change the amount of our LIFO reserve.
Given the significant amount of uncertainty surrounding the year-end LIFO calculation, including the estimate of year-end inventory balances, the proportion of inventory in each inventory category and the year-end PPI, we typically do not adjust our LIFO reserve in the first three quarters of a fiscal year. This policy may result in significant LIFO accounting adjustments in the fourth quarter of the fiscal year resulting from the year over year changes in inventory levels, the PPI and markdown reserves. We do recognize changes in markdown reserves during each of the first three quarters of the fiscal year as those amounts can be estimated on an interim basis.
Accounting for business combinations requires that assets and liabilities, including inventories, are recorded at fair value at the acquisition date. In accordance with GAAP, the definition of fair value of inventories acquired generally will equal the expected sales price less certain costs associated with selling the inventory, which may exceed the actual cost of producing the acquired inventories. Based on the inventory turn of the acquired inventories, amounts are recognized as additional cost of goods sold in the periods subsequent to the acquisition as the acquired inventory is sold in the ordinary course of business. In determining the fair value of the acquired inventory, as well as the appropriate period to recognize the charge in our consolidated statements of operations as the acquired inventory is sold, we must make certain assumptions regarding costs incurred prior to acquisition for the acquired inventory, an appropriate profit allowance, estimates of the costs to sell the inventory and the timing of the sale of the acquired inventory. Such estimates
involve significant uncertainty, and the use of different assumptions could have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets, net
The cost of each acquired business is allocated to the individual tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed or incurred as a result of an acquisition based on their estimated fair values. The assessment of the estimated fair values of assets and liabilities acquired requires us to make certain assumptions regarding the use of the acquired assets, anticipated cash flows, probabilities of cash flows, discount rates and other factors. As a result of our prior acquisitions and any subsequent impairment charges, we had $156 million of intangible assets and $24 million of goodwill in our consolidated balance sheet as of January 30, 2021.
Our intangibles assets primarily consist of trademarks, reacquired rights and customer relationships. Goodwill is recognized as the amount by which the cost to acquire a company or group of assets exceeds the fair value of assets acquired less any liabilities assumed at acquisition. See Note 4 in our consolidated financial statements included in this report for further details about our various intangible assets and goodwill amounts.
The fair values and useful lives of these acquired intangible assets and goodwill are estimated based on our assessment as well as independent third party appraisals in some cases. Such valuations, which are dependent upon a number of uncertain factors, may include a discounted cash flow analysis of anticipated revenues and expenses or cost savings resulting from the acquired intangible asset using an estimate of a risk-adjusted, market-based cost of capital as the discount rate. The valuation of intangible assets and goodwill requires significant judgment due to the variety of uncertain factors, including planned use of the intangible assets as well as estimates of net sales, royalty income, operating income, growth rates, royalty rates for the trademarks, a risk-adjusted, market based cost of capital as the discount rate and income tax rates, among other factors. The use of different assumptions related to these uncertain factors at acquisition or a later date could result in a material change to the amounts of intangible assets and goodwill initially recorded at acquisition, which could result in a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Amortization of intangible assets with finite lives, which primarily consist of trademarks, reacquired rights and customer relationships, is recognized over their estimated useful lives using the straight line method of amortization or another method of amortization that reflects the pattern in which the economic benefits of the intangible assets are consumed or otherwise realized. We amortize our intangible assets with finite lives for periods of up to 20 years. The determination of an appropriate useful life for amortization is based on the remaining contractual period, as applicable, and our plans for the intangible asset, as well as factors outside of our control. Intangible assets with finite lives are reviewed for impairment periodically if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. If expected future discounted cash flows from operations are less than their carrying amounts, an asset is determined to be impaired and a loss is recorded for the amount by which the carrying value of the asset exceeds its fair value. Amortization related to intangible assets with finite lives totaled $1 million during Fiscal 2020 and is anticipated to be $1 million in Fiscal 2021.
Trademarks with indefinite lives and goodwill are not amortized but instead evaluated, either qualitatively or quantitatively, for impairment annually as of the first day of the fourth quarter of our fiscal year or more frequently if events or circumstances indicate that the intangible asset or goodwill might be impaired. The quantitative test includes valuations of each applicable underlying trademark or business using fair value techniques and market comparables, which may include a discounted cash flow analysis or an independent appraisal. The evaluation of the recoverability of trademarks with indefinite lives and goodwill includes valuations based on a discounted cash flow analysis which is typically similar to the analysis performed at acquisition and compares that amount to the carrying value. This valuation approach is dependent upon a number of uncertain factors, including those used in the initial valuation of the intangible assets and goodwill listed above. Such estimates involve significant uncertainty, particularly in light of COVID-19, and if our plans or anticipated results change, the impact on our financial statements could be significant. If this analysis indicates an impairment of a trademark with an indefinite useful life or goodwill, the amount of the impairment is recognized in the consolidated financial statements based on the amount that the carrying value of the intangible asset or goodwill exceeds the estimated fair value of the asset. If our plans or anticipated results change in the future, the impact on our financial statements could be significant.
Intangible assets and goodwill acquired in recent transactions are naturally more susceptible to impairment, primarily since they are recorded at fair value based on operating plans and macroeconomic conditions present at the time of acquisition. Consequently, if operating results, plans for the acquired business and/or macroeconomic conditions change after an acquisition, it could result in the impairment of the acquired intangible assets or goodwill. A change in macroeconomic conditions may not only impact the estimated operating cash flows used in our cash flow models but may also impact other assumptions used in our analysis, including but not limited to, the risk-adjusted market-based cost of capital and/or discount rates. Additionally, we are required to ensure that assumptions used to determine fair value in our analyses are consistent with the assumptions a hypothetical market participant would use. Therefore, the cost of capital discount rates used in our analyses may increase or decrease based on market conditions and trends regardless of whether our actual cost of capital changed.
During Fiscal 2020, we recognized impairment charges for goodwill and intangible assets of Southern Tide of $60 million, resulting in the impairment of all goodwill for Southern Tide and the majority of the indefinite-lived intangible assets for Southern Tide. As noted above, the use of different assumptions related to the estimated fair value of the Southern Tide amounts could have resulted in the determination of a different fair value and a different impairment charge or charges in different periods. In Fiscal 2019 and Fiscal 2018, no impairment charges related to intangible assets or goodwill were recognized.
More recent acquisitions of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible asset amounts that have been impaired recently, as they have been recorded at fair value, typically are more sensitive to changes in assumptions than our other intangible asset and goodwill amounts. Thus, the $9 million of indefinite-lived intangible assets of Southern Tide have the least excess of fair value over book value as of January 30, 2021, The estimated fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible assets of Tommy Bahama, Lilly Pulitzer and TBBC and the goodwill of Lilly Pulitzer and TBBC are each substantially higher than the net book value of the respective assets.
Other Fair Value Measurements
For many assets and liabilities, the determination of fair value may not require the use of many assumptions or other estimates. However, in some cases the assumptions or inputs associated with the determination of fair value as of a measurement date may require the use of many assumptions and may be internally derived or otherwise unobservable. We use certain market-based and internally derived information and make assumptions about the information in (1) determining the fair values of assets and liabilities acquired as part of a business combination, (2) adjusting recognized assets and liabilities to fair value and (3) assessing recognized assets for impairment, including intangible assets, goodwill and property and equipment.
As noted above, the cost of each acquired business is allocated to the individual tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed or incurred as a result of the acquisition based on its estimated fair value. The assessment of the estimated fair values of assets and liabilities acquired requires us to make certain assumptions regarding the use of the acquired assets, anticipated cash flows, probabilities of cash flows, discount rates and other factors. To the extent information to revise the allocation becomes available during the allocation period the allocation of the purchase price will be adjusted. Should information become available after the allocation period indicating that adjustments to the allocation are appropriate, those adjustments will be included in operating results.
For the determination of fair value for assets and liabilities acquired as part of a business combination, adjusting recognized assets and liabilities to fair value and assessing, and possibly adjusting, recognized assets for impairment, the assumptions, or the timing of changes in these assumptions, that we make regarding the valuation of these assets could differ significantly from the assumptions made by other parties. The use of different assumptions could result in materially different valuations for the respective assets and liabilities, which would impact our consolidated financial statements.
In connection with certain acquisitions, we have entered into contingent consideration arrangements to compensate the sellers if certain targets are achieved. For a contingent consideration arrangement as of the date of acquisition we must determine the fair value of the contingent consideration which would estimate the discounted fair value of any expected payments. Such valuation requires assumptions regarding anticipated cash flows, probabilities of
cash flows, discount rates and other factors, each requiring a significant amount of judgment. Subsequent to the date of acquisition, we are required to periodically adjust the liability for the contingent consideration to reflect the fair value of the contingent consideration by reassessing any valuation assumptions as of the balance sheet date.
From time to time, we may recognize asset impairment or other charges related to certain leased space associated with exiting retail or office space or otherwise. In these cases, we must determine the net loss related to the space if the anticipated cash outflows for the space exceed the estimated cash inflows related to the space. While estimated cash outflows are generally known since there is an underlying lease, the estimated cash inflows for sublease rental income, if any, and other costs are often very subjective if there is not a sub-lease agreement in place at that time since those amounts are dependent upon many factors including, but not limited to, whether a sub-tenant will be obtained and the time required to obtain the sub-tenant as well as the rent payments and any tenant allowances agreed with the sub-tenant as part of the future lease negotiations. Also, it is possible that we could negotiate a lease termination in the future that would differ from the amount of the required payments pursuant to the lease agreement. Thus, our estimate of a charge related to an operating lease asset or other lease obligation could change significantly as we obtain better information in the future or if our current assumptions do not materialize. The assumptions made by another party related to such leases could be different than the assumptions made by us.
Income Taxes
Income taxes included in our consolidated financial statements are determined using the asset and liability method. Under this method, income taxes are recognized based on amounts of income taxes payable or refundable in the current year as well as the impact of any items that are recognized in different periods for consolidated financial statement reporting and tax return reporting purposes. As certain amounts are recognized in different periods for consolidated financial statement and tax return reporting purposes, financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities differ, resulting in the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities. The deferred tax assets and liabilities reflect the estimated future tax effects attributable to these differences, as well as the impact of net operating loss, capital loss and federal and state credit carry-forwards, each as determined under enacted tax laws and rates expected to apply in the period in which such amounts are expected to be realized or settled.
We recognize deferred tax assets to the extent we believe it is more likely than not that these assets will be realized. In making such a determination, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable income, taxable income in carryback years, tax-planning strategies, and results of recent operations. Valuation allowances are established when we determine that it is more-likely-than-not that some portion or all of a deferred tax asset will not be realized.
Valuation allowances, which total $6 million as of January 30, 2021, are analyzed periodically and adjusted as events occur or circumstances change that would indicate adjustments to the valuation allowances are appropriate. Valuation allowance amounts could have a material impact on our consolidated statements of operations in the future if assumptions related to realizability of the deferred tax assets changed significantly. Additionally, the timing of recognition of a valuation allowance or any reversal of a valuation allowance requires a significant amount of judgment to assess all the positive and negative evidence, particularly when operating results in the respective jurisdiction have changed or are expected to change from losses to income or from income to losses. As realization of deferred tax assets and liabilities is dependent upon future taxable income in specific jurisdictions, changes in tax laws and rates and shifts in the amount of taxable income among state and foreign jurisdictions may have a significant impact on the amount of benefit ultimately realized for deferred tax assets and liabilities.
As a global company, we are subject to income taxes in a number of domestic and foreign jurisdictions. Our income tax provision involves many uncertainties due to not only the timing differences of income for financial statement reporting and tax return reporting, but also the application of complex tax laws and regulations, which are subject to interpretation and judgment. The use of different assumptions or a change in our assumptions related to book to tax timing differences, our determination of whether foreign investments or earnings are permanently reinvested, the ability to realize uncertain tax positions, the appropriateness of valuation allowances, transfer pricing practices, the impact of our tax planning strategies or a shift in earnings among jurisdictions each could have a significant impact on our income tax rate. Additionally, factors impacting income taxes, including changes in tax laws or interpretations, court
case decisions, statute of limitation expirations or audit settlements, could have a significant impact on our income tax rate. A decrease in our consolidated income tax benefit rate from 24.0% to 23.0% during Fiscal 2020 would have reduced net earnings by $1 million.
Income tax expense recorded during interim periods is generally based on the expected tax rate for the year, considering projections of earnings and book to tax differences as of the balance sheet date. The tax rate ultimately realized for the year may increase or decrease due to actual operating results or book to tax differences varying from the amounts on which our interim calculations were based. Any changes in assumptions related to the need for a valuation allowance, the ability to realize an uncertain tax position, changes in enacted tax rates, the expected operating results in total or by jurisdiction for the year, or other assumptions are accounted for in the period in which the change occurs. As certain of our foreign operations are in a loss position and realization of a future benefit for the losses is uncertain, a variance in losses in such jurisdictions from our expectations can have an impact on our expected annual tax rate.
See Note 1 and Note 9 in our consolidated financial statements included in this report for further discussion of income taxes.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
Refer to Note 1 in our consolidated financial statements included in this report for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements issued by the FASB that we have not yet adopted that may have a material effect on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
SEASONALITY
Each of our operating groups is impacted by seasonality as the demand by specific product or style, as well as by distribution channel, may vary significantly depending on the time of year. For information regarding the impact of seasonality on our business operations, see Part I, Item 1, Business, included in this report.