ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company's financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the Company's financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to the Company's plans and strategy for its business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the Company's actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied, by these forward-looking statements. Please also see the section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K titled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
The discussion and analysis below has been organized as follows:
•Executive Summary, including a description of the business and significant events that are important to understanding the results of operations and financial condition;
•Results of operations, including an explanation of significant differences between the periods in the specific line items of the statements of operations;
•Financial condition addressing the Company's liquidity position, sources and uses of cash, capital resources and requirements, commitments, and off-balance sheet arrangements; and
•Critical accounting policies which are most important to both the portrayal of the Company's financial condition and results of operations.
Executive Summary
Introduction and Overview
Oyster Point Pharma, Inc. is a clinical stage biopharmaceutical company focused on the discovery, development and commercialization of first-in-class pharmaceutical therapies to treat ocular surface diseases. The Company's lead product candidate OC-01 (varenicline) nasal spray, a highly selective nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) agonist, is being developed as a nasal spray to treat the signs and symptoms of dry eye disease. Based on OC-01 (varenicline) nasal spray’s clinical trial results and its novel mechanism of action, the Company believes OC-01 (varenicline) nasal spray, if approved by the FDA, has the potential to become the new standard of care and redefine how dry eye disease is treated for millions of patients.
The Company has no products approved for sale and has not generated revenue since its inception in 2015. The Company expects to finance its operations through private and public equity or debt financing, collaborative or other arrangements with corporate sources or through other sources of financing.
Since its formation in June 2015, the Company has devoted substantially all of its resources to developing its product candidates. The Company has incurred significant operating losses to date. The Company’s net losses were $70.5 million and $45.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had an accumulated deficit of $154.8 million. The Company expects that its operating expenses will increase as it advances its product candidates through preclinical and clinical development, seeks regulatory approval, and prepares for and, if approved, proceeds to commercialization; acquires, discovers, validates and develops additional product candidates; obtains, maintains, protects and enforces its intellectual property portfolio; and hires additional personnel. In addition, the Company has incurred and will continue to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company.
The Company plans to continue to use third party service providers, including CROs and CMOs, to carry out its preclinical and clinical development and to manufacture and supply the materials to be used during the development and commercialization of its product candidates.
Recent Events
Submission of the NDA for OC-01 (varenicline) nasal spray to FDA
On December 17, 2020, the Company submitted a 505(b)(2) NDA to the FDA for OC-01 (varenicline) nasal spray for the treatment of signs and symptoms of dry eye disease. The MYSTIC, ONSET-1 and ONSET-2 clinical trials showed statistically significant improvements in Schirmer’s Score (an objective, reproducible, and quantifiable measure of natural tear film production), as compared to control, which was the primary endpoint in all studies. Key secondary endpoints in ONSET-1 and ONSET-2 included change from baseline in symptoms as assessed by eye dryness score. In both of these pivotal studies, there was statistically or nominally statistically significant improvement in symptom scores at Day 28, and in ONSET-2 as early as Day 14, as compared to control. All doses studied in the clinical trial program were well-tolerated with no serious drug related adverse events.
Submission of the Phase 2 clinical trial protocol for Neurotrophic Keratopathy (NK) to the FDA
On November 30, 2020, the Company submitted to the FDA a protocol to initiate a clinical study in adult patients with NK, a degenerative disease characterized by decreased corneal sensitivity and poor corneal healing. The submission was made to the Company’s IND application for OC-01 (varenicline) nasal spray in dry eye disease. NK is the second of a number of important potential indications the Company is evaluating for OC-01 (varenicline) nasal spray, illustrating the Company's commitment to treating unmet needs related to ocular surface diseases. Enrollment of the first patient in the OLYMPIA Phase 2 study in NK is planned for the first half of 2021.
Entry into $100 million At-the-Market Sales Agreement (ATM) with Cowen and Company, LLC
On November 5, 2020, the Company entered into an at-the-market sales agreement (or ATM) with Cowen and Company, LLC, pursuant to which the Company may offer and sell shares of the Company's common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $100 million. The ATM was entered into by the Company concurrently with a registration statement on Form S-3. Under the registration statement, the Company may offer and sell, in one or more offerings, up to an aggregate of $300 million of any combination of securities registered thereunder, consisting of shares of common and preferred stock, debt securities and warrants.
The Impact of the SARS-CoV-2 Virus Pandemic
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the SARS-CoV-2 virus outbreak to be a pandemic. Also, in March of 2020, due to the SARS-CoV-2 virus pandemic, the Company experienced an impact at select clinical trial sites where ophthalmology practices were closed, or subjects were unable to attend visits, or where clinical trial sites did not feel comfortable putting their staff or subjects into a Controlled Adverse Environment (CAE®), which limited the Company's ability to assess the related secondary endpoint in its ONSET-2 study for those subjects. The Company then conducted a further post-hoc analysis on the data, which led to the discovery of additional treatment benefits in the 1.2 mg/ml dose group that were not captured with the statistical method used for analysis of the secondary endpoint.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, financial results of the Company were not significantly affected by the SARS-CoV-2 virus pandemic. However, the extent to which the SARS-CoV-2 virus outbreak affects the Company’s future financial results and operations will depend on future developments which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information which may emerge concerning the severity of the outbreak, and current or future domestic and international actions to contain it and treat it. The Company continues to evaluate the impact of the SARS-CoV-2 virus pandemic on its trials, expected timelines and costs, as well as potential supply-chain challenges as it prepares itself for commercialization of the OC-01 (varenicline) nasal spray candidate and as it continues to learn more about the impact of the SARS-CoV-2 virus pandemic on the industry.
The Company continues to evaluate and develop pipeline candidates for the potential treatment of various medical indications. The ongoing SARS-CoV-2 virus pandemic may impact access to supplies necessary to conduct preclinical studies, cause delay to the timelines to initiate or complete in vitro or in vivo animal studies, or indirectly impact the operation of contract organizations that are necessary for the Company to advance preclinical projects. If the SARS-CoV-2 virus pandemic continues and persists for an extended period of time, the Company could experience significant disruptions to its clinical development timelines, which could adversely affect its business, financial condition and results of operations.
The ultimate impact of the SARS-CoV-2 virus pandemic or a similar health epidemic is highly uncertain and subject to change. The Company has taken a variety of measures in an effort to ensure the availability and functioning of the Company's
critical infrastructure and to promote the safety and security of its employees. These measures include requiring remote working arrangements for employees, which will continue through at least the second quarter of 2021 and investing in personal protective equipment for the future return to the office. In addition, Company management is continuously evaluating and developing an implementation plan for employees’ safe return to the office once that option becomes feasible. The Company will continue to actively monitor the evolving situation related to the SARS-CoV-2 virus pandemic and may take further actions that alter its operations, including those that may be required by federal, state or local authorities, or that the Company determines are in the best interests of its employees, partners and other third-parties with whom the Company does business. At this point, the full extent to which the SARS-CoV-2 virus pandemic may affect the Company’s business, operations, preclinical and clinical development and commercialization timelines and plans, including the resulting impact on its expenditures and capital needs, remains uncertain.
For further discussion of the risks that the Company faces as a result of the SARS-CoV-2 virus pandemic refer to Part II, Item 1A, Risk Factors, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Components of Operating Results
Revenue
The Company did not generate any revenue from product sales in 2020 or 2019.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
The Company’s research and development expenses consist of expenses incurred in connection with the development of its product candidates. These expenses consist primarily of:
•fees paid to third parties to conduct certain research and development activities on the Company’s behalf and consulting costs;
•certain payroll-related expenses, including salaries and bonuses, employee benefit costs and stock-based compensation expense for employees dedicated to the Company’s research and product development (payroll-related expense);
•costs related to acquiring and manufacturing clinical trial materials and costs for manufacturing of pre-approval inventory of the product candidates under development;
•costs for laboratory supplies, product acquisition and license costs; and
•costs related to regulatory compliance requirements.
The Company expenses both internal and external research and development expenses as they are incurred.
The Company does not allocate its costs by product candidate, as a significant amount of research and development expenses includes internal costs, such as payroll and other personnel expenses, laboratory supplies, and external costs, such as fees paid to third parties to conduct research and development activities on the Company's behalf. Several of the Company's departments support multiple product candidate research and development programs, and therefore the costs cannot be allocated to a particular product candidate or development program. The Company tracks its research and development expenses by type of activity: clinical and preclinical, chemistry, manufacturing and controls (CMC), and other costs.
The Company is focusing substantially all of its resources on the development of its product candidates, particularly OC-01 (varenicline) nasal spray. The Company expects its research and development expenses to increase for at least the next few years, as it seeks to initiate additional clinical trials for its product candidates, complete its clinical programs, and prepare for the potential regulatory approval of these product candidates. Predicting the timing or cost to complete the Company’s clinical programs or validation of its commercial manufacturing and supply processes is difficult and delays may occur because of many factors, including factors outside of the Company’s control. For example, if the FDA or other regulatory authorities were to require the Company to conduct clinical trials beyond those that it currently anticipates, the Company could be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on the completion of clinical development. Furthermore, the Company is unable to predict when or if its product candidates will receive regulatory approval with any certainty.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of the following:
•certain payroll-related expenses, including salaries, bonuses, employee benefits and stock-based compensation expense (payroll-related expense);
•professional fees for legal, consulting, accounting and tax services, as well as insurance expense;
•commercial planning expenses, marketing and promotional expense;
•rent, office equipment, and utilities;
•information technology costs; and
•and other general operating expenses not otherwise classified as research and development expenses.
The Company anticipates that its selling, general and administrative expenses will increase as a result of increased personnel costs, commercial planning expenses, expanded infrastructure and higher consulting, legal and accounting services costs associated with complying with the applicable stock exchange and SEC requirements, investor relations costs and director and officer insurance premiums associated with being a public company.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net consists primarily of interest income earned on money market funds, which are included in cash and cash equivalents on the Company's balance sheets.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes the Company's results of operations for the periods indicated (in thousands, except percentages):
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased by $6.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The Company's clinical, preclinical expense was $1.3 million lower in 2020 primarily due to the completion of the ONSET-2 Phase 3 clinical trial in May 2020. The Company incurred higher CMC expense in the amount of $6.3 million primarily due to the continued advancement of OC-01 (varenicline) nasal spray, as well as higher employee headcount, which resulted in an increase in payroll-related expenses. Other research and development expense increased by $1.1 million. The increase was due to higher costs primarily related to data management and regulatory costs in connection with the advancement of the OC-01 (varenicline) nasal spray and NDA submission in the amount of $3.2 million, as well as a $2.9 million fee paid to the FDA in connection with the NDA submission in December of 2020. This increase was partially offset by the $5 million license payment to Pfizer in 2019, as further described in Note 9, Commitments and Contingencies.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $17.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by additional payroll-related expenses of $9.0 million due to an increase in headcount, higher other general and administrative expenses of $5.5 million due to expansion of the Company's organization, as well as additional costs incurred by the Company due to operating as a publicly traded company. The Company incurred higher commercial planning expenses of $3.1 million in anticipation of a U.S. launch of OC-01 (varenicline) nasal spray, if approved by the FDA, in the fourth quarter of 2021.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net decreased by $1.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to a lower rate of return on money market funds earned during the period.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the Company had cash and cash equivalents of $192.6 million and $139.1 million, respectively.
On November 5, 2020, the Company entered into an at-the-market sales agreement (or ATM) with Cowen and Company, LLC, pursuant to which the Company may offer and sell shares of the Company's common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $100 million. The ATM was entered into by the Company concurrently with a registration statement on Form S-3. Under the registration statement, the Company may offer and sell, in one or more offerings, up to an aggregate of $300 million of any combination of securities registered thereunder, consisting of shares of common and preferred stock, debt securities and warrants.
On May 19, 2020, the Company completed a follow-on public offering selling 4,312,500 shares of common stock at a price to the public of $28.00 per share. The net proceeds from the offering were $112.6 million.
Future Funding Requirements
Based on the current business plan, management believes that its available cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to fund the Company's planned operations for at least 12 months from the filing date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
On December 17, 2020, the Company submitted a 505(b)(2) NDA to the FDA for its first lead product candidate, OC-01 (varenicline) nasal spray for the treatment of signs and symptoms of dry eye disease. The Company expects to incur sales and marketing expenses with the commercialization of OC-01 (varenicline) nasal spray, if approved for sale, as well as increased research and development expenses as it develops additional product candidates. Since inception, the Company has incurred recurring losses and negative cash flows from operations. The Company generated net losses of $70.5 million and $45.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and had an accumulated deficit of 154.8 million as of December 31, 2020. The Company has historically financed its operations primarily through the sale and issuance of its securities. In addition, the Company has incurred and will continue to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company. The Company does not expect to generate any meaningful revenue unless and until it obtains regulatory approval of and commercializes any of its product candidates or decides to enter into collaborative agreements with third parties. The Company is subject to all of the risks typically related to the development of new product candidates, and it may encounter unforeseen expenses, difficulties, complications, delays and other unknown factors that may adversely affect its business. The Company will continue to require additional capital to continue developing its product candidates and fund operations for the foreseeable future. The Company may seek to raise capital through private or public equity or debt financings, collaborative or other arrangement with corporate sources, or through other sources of financing. The Company anticipates that it will need to raise substantial additional capital, the requirements for which will depend on many factors, including:
•the scope, timing, rate of progress and costs of the Company's drug discovery efforts, preclinical development activities, laboratory testing and clinical trials for the Company's product candidates;
•the number and scope of clinical programs the Company decides to pursue;
•the cost, timing and outcome of preparing for and undergoing regulatory review of the Company's product candidates;
•the scope and costs of development and commercial manufacturing activities;
•the cost and timing associated with commercializing of the Company's product candidates, if they receive marketing approval;
•the extent to which the Company acquires or in-licenses other product candidates and technologies;
•the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing the Company's intellectual property rights and defending intellectual property-related claims;
•the Company's ability to establish and maintain collaborations on favorable terms, if at all;
•its efforts to enhance operational systems and the Company's ability to attract, hire and retain qualified personnel, including personnel to support the development of the Company's product candidates and, ultimately, the sale of the Company's products, following FDA approval;
•the Company's implementation of operational, financial and management systems; and
•any current or future potential effects of the SARS-CoV-2 virus pandemic on the Company's business, operations, preclinical and clinical development and commercialization timelines and plans; and
•the costs associated with being a public company.
A change in the outcome of any of these or other variables with respect to the development of any of the Company's product candidates could significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate.
Furthermore, the Company's operating plans may change in the future, and it will continue to require additional capital to meet operational needs and capital requirements associated with such operating plans. If additional funds are raised by issuing equity securities, the Company's stockholders may experience dilution. Any future debt financing into which the Company might enter may impose upon it additional covenants that restrict the Company's operations, including limitations on its ability to incur liens or additional debt, pay dividends, repurchase its common stock, make certain investments or engage in certain merger, consolidation or asset sale transactions. Any debt financing or additional equity that it raises may contain terms that are not favorable to the Company or its stockholders.
Adequate funding may not be available to the Company on acceptable terms or at all, and any uncertainty and volatility in capital markets caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus pandemic may negatively impact the availability and cost of capital. The Company's failure to raise capital as and when needed could have a negative impact on its financial condition and ability to pursue its business strategies. If the Company is unable to raise additional funds when needed, it may be required to delay, reduce, or terminate some or all of its development programs and clinical trials or may also be required to sell or license to others rights to its product candidates in certain territories or indications that it would prefer to develop and commercialize itself. If the Company is required to enter into collaborations and other arrangements to supplement its funds, it may have to give up certain rights that limit its ability to develop and commercialize the product candidates or may have other terms that are not favorable to the Company or its stockholders, which could materially affect its business and financial condition. See the section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K titled “Risk Factors” for additional risks associated with the Company's substantial capital requirements.
Cash Flow Discussion
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash for each of the periods presented below:
Cash Flows Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities increased by $17.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, due to higher net loss adjusted for non-cash items, partially offset by an increase in working capital of $3.2 million driven primarily by the timing of payments to the Company's service providers. The Company's higher net loss was driven by the continued development of the Company's product candidates, as well as costs incurred in connection with the NDA submission for OC-01 (varenicline) nasal spray in December 2020.
Cash Flows Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities increased by $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily related to payments for equipment to be used in the manufacturing of OC-01 (varenicline) nasal spray.
Cash Flows Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities decreased by $62.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to the lower net proceeds generated from the Company's follow-on equity offering in May 2020 compared to the net proceeds received from the Company's IPO in November 2019 and from the issuance of redeemable preferred stock in February and April 2019.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes the Company's contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
___________________
(1) The Company leases office facilities in Princeton, New Jersey under two non-cancellable operating leases with an expiration date July 31, 2022. The minimum lease payments above do not include any related common area maintenance charges or real estate taxes.
(2) The Company leases certain office equipment under finance leases with expiration dates in August 2022 and August 2023.
In February 2021, the Company entered into a lease agreement for laboratory and office space in New Jersey for a three-year term beginning on March 1, 2021 and ending on February 29, 2024. Total future minimum lease payments under this agreement are $0.4 million.
In October 2019, the Company entered into a non-exclusive patent license agreement with Pfizer (License Agreement), which granted the Company non-exclusive rights under Pfizer’s patent rights covering varenicline tartrate to develop, manufacture, and commercialize the Company's OC-01 (varenicline) nasal spray product candidate. Under the terms of the
License Agreement, the Company made an upfront payment to Pfizer of $5.0 million. If the Company successfully commercializes OC-01 (varenicline) nasal spray, it may be required to pay a single milestone payment in low double-digit millions and tiered royalties on net sales of OC-01 (varenicline) nasal spray at percentages ranging from the mid-single digits to the mid-teens. The royalty obligation to Pfizer will commence upon first commercial sale of OC-01 (varenicline) nasal spray and will expire upon the later of (a) the expiration of all regulatory or data exclusivity granted to Pfizer in connection with varenicline in the United States; and (b) the expiration or abandonment of the last valid claims of the licensed patents. These commitments are not included in the table above due to uncertainty of timing of any such payments.
Critical Accounting Policies, Significant Judgments and Use of Estimates
The Company's financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires the application of appropriate technical accounting rules and guidance as well as the use of estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. These estimates are based on the Company's historical experience and on various other factors that it believes are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. The Company's significant accounting policies are summarized in Item 15 - Note 1, Nature of Business, Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies, to the Financial Statements. The Company identifies its most critical accounting policies as those that are the most pervasive and important to the portrayal of the Company's financial position and results of operations, and that require the most difficult, subjective and/or complex judgments by management regarding estimates about matters that are inherently uncertain. The future effects of the SARS-CoV-2 virus pandemic on the Company's results of operations, cash flows, and financial position are unclear, however the Company believes it has used reasonable estimates and assumptions in preparing the interim condensed financial statements. The Company's critical accounting policies include stock-based compensation, accrued research and development expense, and income taxes.
Stock-Based Compensation
Prior to the IPO, the fair value of the Company’s common stock underlying the stock options was determined by the BOD with assistance from management and, in part, on input from an independent third-party valuation firm. The BOD determined the fair value of common stock by considering a number of objective and subjective factors, including valuations of comparable companies, sales of convertible preferred stock, operating and financial performance, the lack of liquidity of the Company’s common stock and the general and industry-specific economic outlook. Subsequent to the IPO, the fair value of the Company’s common stock is based on the closing quoted market price of its common stock as reported by the NASDAQ Global Select Market on the date of grant.
In determining fair value of the stock options granted, the Company uses the Black-Scholes model, which requires the input of several assumptions. These assumptions include: estimating the length of time employees will retain their vested stock options before exercising them (expected term), the estimated volatility of the Company’s common stock price over the expected term (expected volatility), risk-free interest rate and expected dividend rate. Changes in the following assumptions can materially affect the estimate of fair value and ultimately how much stock-based compensation expense is recognized.
Expected term. The expected term is calculated using the simplified method which is used when there is insufficient historical data about exercise patterns and post-vesting employment termination behavior. The simplified method is based on the mid-point between the vesting date and the end of the contractual term.
Expected volatility. As the Company has a limited trading history of its common stock, the expected volatility is estimated based on the third quartile of the range of the observed volatilities for comparable publicly traded biotechnology and pharmaceutical related companies over a period equal to the expected term of the stock option grants. The comparable companies are chosen based on industry, stage of development, size and financial leverage of potential comparable companies.
Risk-free interest rate. The risk-free interest rate is based on the implied yield currently available on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with a remaining term equivalent to the expected term of the stock award.
Expected dividend rate. The Company has not paid and does not anticipate paying any dividends in the near future. Accordingly, the Company has estimated the dividend yield to be zero.
Accrued Research and Development Expense
The Company is a party to various agreements with CMOs and CROs. Research and development accruals are estimated based on the level of services performed, progress of the studies, including the phase or completion of events, and contracted costs. The estimated costs of research and development provided, but not yet invoiced, are included in accrued liabilities on the balance sheet. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the original estimates, the Company will adjust the accrual accordingly. Payments made to CMOs and CROs under these arrangements in advance of the performance of the related services are recorded as prepaid expenses and other current assets until the services are rendered. Actual results could differ from estimates.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes in accordance with ASC 740, using the asset and liability method whereby deferred tax asset and liability amounts are determined based on the differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities. The differences are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that are in effect for the year in which they are expected to affect taxable income. Valuation allowances are established where necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amounts expected to be realized.
The Company assesses all material positions taken in any income tax return, including all significant uncertain positions, in all tax years that are still subject to assessment or challenge by relevant taxing authorities. Assessing an uncertain tax position begins with the initial determination that the position meets the more-likely-than-not threshold and is measured at the largest amount of benefit that is greater than fifty percent likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement.
As of each balance sheet date, unresolved uncertain tax positions must be reassessed, and the Company will determine whether the factors underlying the more-likely-than-not threshold assertion have changed and the amount of the recognized tax benefit is still appropriate. The recognition and measurement of tax benefits requires significant judgment. Judgments concerning the recognition and measurement of a tax benefit might change as new information becomes available. The Company's policy is to recognize interest and penalties related to the underpayment of income taxes as a component of income tax expense or benefit. To date, there have been no interest or penalties charged in relation to the unrecognized tax benefits.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Since the Company's inception, the Company has not engaged in any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (JOBS Act) permits an “emerging growth company” such as Oyster Point Pharma, Inc. to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. However, the Company has chosen to irrevocably “opt out” of such extended transition period, and as a result, it will comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. The Company intends to rely on other exemptions provided by the JOBS Act, including without limitation, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act.
The Company will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest to occur of: (1) the last day of its first fiscal year in which it has total annual revenues of more than $1.07 billion; (2) the date it qualifies as a “large accelerated filer,” with at least $700.0 million of equity securities held by non-affiliates; (3) the date on which it has issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period; and (4) the last day of the fiscal year ending after the fifth anniversary of its initial public offering.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a summary of recently issued accounting guidance applicable to the Company, see Item 15 - Note 1, Nature of Business, Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies, to the Financial Statements.