ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should read the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We design, develop and manufacture sequencing systems to help scientists resolve genetically complex problems. Based on our novel Single Molecule, Real-Time (SMRT®) sequencing technology, our products enable: de novo genome assembly to finish genomes in order to more fully identify, annotate and decipher genomic structures; full-length transcript analysis to improve annotations in reference genomes, characterize alternatively spliced isoforms in important gene families, and find novel genes; targeted sequencing to more comprehensively characterize genetic variations; and real-time kinetic information for epigenome characterization. Our technology provides high accuracy, ultra-long reads, uniform coverage and the ability to simultaneously detect epigenetic changes. PacBio® sequencing systems, including consumables and software, provide a simple and fast end-to-end workflow for SMRT sequencing.
Our current products include the Sequel II and Sequel IIe instruments, and SMRT Cell 8M, which when used together are capable of sequencing up to approximately eight million DNA molecules simultaneously, and the previous generation Sequel instrument and Sequel SMRT Cell 1M, which, when used together are capable of sequencing up to approximately one million DNA molecules simultaneously. In October 2020, we launched the Sequel IIe System, which has increased computational capacity, and is designed to enable customers to generate PacBio HiFi reads more efficiently.
Our customers and our scientific collaborators have published numerous peer-reviewed articles in journals including Nature, Science, Cell, PNAS and The New England Journal of Medicine highlighting the power and applications of SMRT sequencing in projects such as finishing genomes, structural variation discovery, isoform transcriptome characterization, rare mutation discovery and the identification of chemical modifications of DNA related to virulence and pathogenicity. Our research and development efforts are focused on developing new products and further improving our existing products including continuing chemistry and sample preparation improvements to increase throughput and expand our supported applications. By providing access to genetic information that was previously inaccessible, we enable scientists to confidently increase their understanding of biological systems.
Senior Management
Our President and Chief Executive Officer Christian O. Henry was appointed effective September 14, 2020, succeeding Dr. Michael Hunkapiller who announced his retirement, which was effective at the end of the year 2020. Our Chief Financial Officer Susan G. Kim was appointed effective September 28, 2020, succeeding Susan K. Barnes who retired on August 7, 2020. Our Vice President and Chief Accounting Officer Eric E. Schaefer was appointed effective May 26, 2020, and our Chairman of the Board Dr. John F. Milligan was appointed effective September 14, 2020. On December 31, 2020, the Board of Directors appointed Mark Van Oene to the role of Chief Operating Officer and designated him as the Company’s principal operating officer, and appointed Peter Fromen to the role of Chief Commercial Officer, effective in each case upon his commencement of employment with the Company on January 8, 2021.
2021 Strategic Objectives
For 2021, we have outlined three strategic objectives:
Expand our commercial reach;
Accelerate our product development pipeline; and
Drive market leadership in whole-genome clinical sequencing
Expanding our commercial reach includes hiring senior level team members with extensive commercial experience. From December 2020 through January 2021, we hired a Chief Commercial Officer, a Vice President of Commercial Operations, a Vice President of Strategic Marketing, a Vice President of Product Marketing, and a Senior Director of Product Marketing. During 2021, we expect to more than double our number of quota-carrying field sales personnel from 22 at the end of 2020 to more than double by the end of 2021. In addition, we plan to expand our commercial support activities and invest in more sales tools. We also intend to invest more heavily in marketing programs to increase the awareness of our products to a broader number of potential customers. As a result of these commercial expansion activities, we expect our sales, general, and administrative expense to increase significantly in 2021 as compared to 2020.
Accelerating our product development pipeline includes significantly expanding our research and development team in an effort to accelerate the development of multiple new products. In association with the collaboration we entered into with Invitae Corporation (“Invitae”) in January 2021, as described below, we plan to develop a new platform with production-scale high-throughput capability, which will be in addition to other new products we already have in development. In order to develop these multiple products in parallel, we anticipate hiring over 50 additional people into our Research and Development departments. In addition, we expect to increase our spending on outside development costs. As a result, we expect our research and development expense to increase significantly in 2021 as compared to 2020.
We believe that with the capabilities of our SMRT technology, we can be a market leader in whole-genome clinical sequencing. Leading institutions such as Children’s Mercy Kansas City, Invitae and Stanford University have adopted the use of our products to study rare and inherited disease. We believe the market opportunity for clinical sequencing is very large, and could drive significant revenue growth for the company. In an effort to accelerate this growth, we entered into the collaboration with Invitae, who is a market leader in medical genetic testing, and has the desire to sequence hundreds of thousands of genomes annually with our technology. We will continue to pursue additional partnerships to further drive the adoption of whole-genome clinical sequencing.
Cash Position
Cash, cash equivalents and investments, excluding short-term and long-term restricted cash, at December 31, 2020 totaled $318.8 million, compared to $49.1 million at December 31, 2019. In February 2021, we issued the 1.50% Convertible Senior Notes due 2028 (the “Notes”) in the aggregate principal amount of $900.0 million. Please refer to the Liquidity and Capital Resources section below for additional details relating to the Notes and other financing and cash considerations.
Invitae Collaboration
In January 2021 we entered into a multi-year collaboration with Invitae Corporation, or Invitae, to begin development of a production-scale high-throughput sequencing platform, or Program Products, leveraging the power of PacBio’s highly accurate HiFi sequencing to expand Invitae’s whole genome testing capabilities in the future. In connection with the development of the Program Products, Invitae will provide funds to the Company equal to certain development costs incurred by the Company. Under the development agreement, we will be primarily responsible for conducting a development program to develop the Program Products pursuant to a schedule and budget. We will make decisions regarding the development program jointly with Invitae. The development program is expected to last approximately sixty months, but may be shorter or longer. We have the right to broadly commercialize Program Products with other customers.
As a benefit of its contribution, Invitae will be entitled to preferred pricing on the Program Products if and when they are available for commercial sale. Each Program Product will have a preferential pricing period. During the initial period of preferred pricing for each Program Product, Invitae may purchase the Program Product at a substantially reduced margin until it has recouped a mutually agreed multiple of its contributed funds. Subsequently, for up to three years after the initial period of preferred pricing, Invitae has the right to purchase the Program Product at a price higher than the initial preferred pricing period but within a specified price range.
We and Invitae may terminate our collaboration if the other party remains in material breach of agreement following a cure period to remedy the material breach. In addition, our agreement with Invitae includes certain other circumstances for termination by each party, including circumstances where Invitae may terminate for delays, IP concerns, change in control, or without cause.
In certain termination circumstances, (i) we will be obligated to refund all or a portion of the development funds advanced by Invitae and/or (ii) we will owe Invitae a share of the revenue generated from the sale of the Program Products if and when they are commercialized until such time as Invitae has recouped the funds provided to us, and in certain circumstances, a mutually agreed-upon return.
We expect to incur significant development costs over the duration of the collaboration, including $20-25 million expected to be incurred during 2021. The Company is still evaluating the accounting impact of the agreement, including whether the funding received by the Company from Invitae represents discounts toward future supplies, funding of development efforts, or a combination of both. There can be no assurances that the development program will be successful or that the Program Products will become ready for commercial sale.
COVID-19 Update
The COVID-19 pandemic and efforts to control its spread have significantly curtailed the movement of people, goods, and services worldwide, including in the regions in which we sell our products and services and conduct our business operations. The financial results for the year ended December 31, 2020 were impacted negatively as many of our customers in multiple regions around the world shut down operations for various periods of time in efforts to curb the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic. This resulted in lower product revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019. A significant number of our customer sites that had shut down due to COVID-19 have re-opened. In addition, a significant number of customers have delayed purchases or difficulties obtaining funding for capital expenditures due to the negative impact of the pandemic on their businesses. This dynamic continues to negatively impact the recognition of revenue related to the sale of our Sequel and Sequel II/IIe instruments and associate consumables and software. Due to the uncertain scope and duration of the pandemic, we cannot reasonably estimate the future impact to our operations and financial results.
In response to local stay-at-home orders and in alignment with CDC recommendations, we have limited our manufacturing and commercial operations based in Menlo Park, California. We will, however, continue to provide consumables, instruments and support to scientists at government, academic, and commercial labs that remain open. To aid in containing the spread of COVID-19, we have implemented remote-work options and are limiting employee travel. We are monitoring this rapidly evolving situation.
Even after the COVID-19 pandemic has subsided, we may continue to experience an adverse impact to our business as a result of its global economic impact, including any recession that has occurred or may occur in the future. Specifically, difficult macroeconomic conditions, decreases in discretionary capital spending, increased and prolonged unemployment or a decline in consumer confidence as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic could have a continuing adverse effect on the demand for some of our products. Such economic disruption could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and liquidity. The degree of impact of COVID-19 on our business will depend on several factors, such as the duration and the extent of the pandemic, as well as actions taken by governments, businesses and consumers in response to the pandemic, all of which continue to evolve and remain uncertain at this time. See the Risk Factors section for further discussion of the possible impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
A discussion of our comparison between 2020 and 2019 is presented below. A discussion of the changes in our results of operations between the years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018 has been omitted from this Annual Report on Form 10-K but may be found in Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on February 28, 2020, which is available free of charge on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov and our corporate website (www.pacb.com).
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
Total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $78.9 million compared to $90.9 million for 2019.
Product revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $65.4 million, compared to $77.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Product revenue of $65.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of $34.3 million from sales of Sequel, Sequel II and Sequel IIe instruments and $31.1 million from sales of consumables, compared to total product revenue of $77.7 million for the same period during 2019, consisting of $45.1 million from sales of Sequel and Sequel II instruments and $32.6 million from sales of consumables. The decrease in instrument sales was primarily attributable to a lower number of instrument shipments and installations due to COVID-19 as discussed above. The decrease in consumable sales was primarily attributable to lower utilization of the installed base of instruments during certain periods of 2020 due to COVID-19 as discussed above. The negative impact of COVID-19 on our customers will likely continue to adversely impact our revenues during 2021.
Service and other revenue was $13.5 million and $13.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and was primarily derived from product maintenance agreements sold for our installed instrument base.
Gross Profit
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $32.6 million, resulting in a gross margin of 41% while gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $34.6 million, resulting in a gross margin of 38%. Gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2019 was negatively impacted by product transition costs, including inventory reserves taken in connection with the transition from Sequel to Sequel II.
Cost of product revenue was $35.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $44.8 million for 2019. Cost of product revenue decreased by $9.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 primarily resulting from lower product shipments. In addition, during the year ended December 31, 2019, we incurred product transition costs including an inventory reserve taken in connection with the transition from Sequel to Sequel II.
Cost of service revenue was $10.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $11.5 million for 2019.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $4.5 million, or 8%, compared to 2019. The increase in research and development expense was primarily driven by an increase of $3.4 million in compensation expenses and an increase of $1.7 million of higher product development costs. Research and development expenses included stock-based compensation expenses of $7.1 million and $7.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
We expect research and development expenses to increase significantly in 2021, as we intend to hire a significant number of additional personnel in our research and development departments. We estimate costs associated with the Invitae collaboration will amount to $20 - $25 million during 2021. Stock-based compensation included in research and development expense is expected to increase significantly in 2021.
Sales, General and Administrative Expense
Sales, general and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $2.7 million, or 4%, to $72.8 million compared to $75.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in sales, general and administrative expense was primarily attributable to a decrease in professional services of $6.7 million, primarily resulting from $12.7 million higher acquisition-related legal and professional fees incurred for the year ended December 31, 2019, partially offset by a $6.0 million merger advisory fee incurred in the first quarter of 2020; an increase of $2.9 million in salary and bonus expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 and an increase of $1.0 million in stock-based compensation as a result of resuming the Employee Stock Purchase Plan (“ESPP”) in 2020 and higher executive-level stock-based compensation. Sales, general and administrative expense included stock-based compensation expense of $8.2 million and $6.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
We expect sales, general, and administrative expense to increase significantly in 2021, as we added a number of senior level executives to our commercial organization in early 2021, and we plan to more than double our number of quota-carrying sales representatives during the year. Stock-based compensation included in sales, general, and administrative expense is expected to increase significantly in 2021.
Gain from Reverse Termination Fee from Illumina
As part of the Termination Agreement, Illumina paid us a Reverse Termination Fee of $98.0 million in the first quarter of 2020. Pursuant to the Termination Agreement, in the event that, on or prior to September 30, 2020, we entered into a definitive agreement providing for, or consummated, a Change of Control Transaction, then we may have been required to repay the Reverse Termination Fee (without interest) to Illumina in connection with the consummation of such Change of Control Transaction. We deferred the gain from the Reverse Termination Fee from Illumina until the date when the associated contingency was resolved. On October 1, 2020, the contingency clauses lapsed and we recorded the $98.0 million as a part of other income.
Gain from Continuation Advances from Illumina
As part of the Termination Agreement, Illumina paid us Continuation Advances of $18.0 million during the fourth quarter of 2019 and $34.0 million during the first quarter of 2020. We recorded the $34.0 million and $18.0 million as a part of other income for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Up to the full $52.0 million of Continuation Advances paid to us are repayable without interest to Illumina if, within two years of March 31, 2020, we enter into, or consummate a Change of Control Transaction or raise at least $100 million in a single equity or debt financing (that may have multiple closings), with the amount repayable dependent on the amount raised by us.
Resulting from the issuance and sale of $900 million of our 1.50% Convertible Senior Notes due 2028, $52.0 million of Continuation Advances were paid without interest to Illumina in February 2021. Refer to Note 11. “Subsequent Events” within the Consolidated Financial Statements on Item 8 of this report for additional details.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $2.3 million compared to 2019, as the debt agreement with Deerfield entered into in February 2013 (the “Facility Agreement”) matured in February 2020.
Other Income, Net
The increase in Other income, net was primarily driven by a $1.0 million foreign exchange gain recognized for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a $0.1 million foreign exchange loss recognized for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash, cash equivalents and investments at December 31, 2020 totaled $318.8 million, compared to $49.1 million at December 31, 2019. The increase was attributable to the proceeds from our public offerings of common stock completed in August 2020 and November 2020, as well as the Reverse Termination Fee and Continuation Advances we received from Illumina, partially offset by cash used in operations and a $16.0 million repayment of debt in the first quarter of 2020. We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and investments will be sufficient to fund our projected operating requirements for at least the next 12 months from the date of filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
As part of the Termination Agreement with Illumina, up to $52.0 million of the Continuation Advances that we received from Illumina are repayable without interest to Illumina if, within two years of March 31, 2020, we enter into, or consummate a Change of Control Transaction or raise at least $100 million in a single equity or debt financing (may have multiple closings), with the amount repayable dependent on the amount raised by us.
On February 9, 2021, we entered into an Investment Agreement with SB Northstar LP (the “Purchaser”), a subsidiary of SoftBank Group Corp., relating to the issuance and sale to the Purchaser of $900 million in aggregate principal amount of the Company’s 1.50% Convertible Senior Notes due 2028 (the “Notes”). As a result of the Notes, $52.0 million of Continuation Advances were paid without interest to Illumina in February 2021. Refer to Note 11. “Subsequent Events” within the Consolidated Financial Statements on Item 8 of this report for additional details.
Factors that may affect our capital needs include, but are not limited to, the pace of adoption of our products which affects the sales of our products and services; our ability to obtain new collaboration and customer arrangements; the progress of our research and development programs; initiation or expansion of research programs and collaborations; the purchase of patent licenses; future acquisitions; manufacturing costs, service costs, the impact of product quality, litigation costs, including the costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing intellectual property rights; costs of developing new and enhanced products; and other factors. There can be no assurance that funds will be available on favorable terms, or at all.
Operating Activities
Our primary uses of cash in operating activities are for the development of ongoing product enhancements and future products, manufacturing, and support functions related to our sales, general and administrative activities.
In 2020, cash provided by operating activities was $19.5 million, reflecting a net income of $29.4 million, which include a gain from the Reverse Termination Fee received from Illumina of $98.0 million and a gain from the Continuation Advances from Illumina of $34.0 million. However, the Continuation Advances are considered a financing activity and therefore an associated $34.0 million adjustment has been reflected to cash provided by operating activities. The net income of $29.4 million included non-cash expense items such as stock-based compensation of $17.5 million and depreciation of $6.4 million. The change in net operating assets and liabilities was primarily attributed to an increase of $4.1 million in accrued expenses and an increase of $5.0 million in other liabilities, partially offset by a decrease of $5.1 million in accounts payable.
In 2019, cash used in operating activities was $78.3 million, reflecting a net loss of $84.1 million, adjusted for non-cash items such as stock-based compensation of $16.4 million and depreciation of $7.3 million. The change in net operating assets and liabilities was primarily attributed to a decrease of $3.9 million in inventory, partially offset by an increase of $6.7 million in accounts receivable.
Investing Activities
Our investing activities consist primarily of capital expenditures and investment purchases, sales and maturities.
In 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $219.3 million, comprised of net purchases of investments of $218.3 million and purchases of property and equipment of $1.0 million.
In 2019, net cash provided by investing activities was $62.0 million, comprised of net purchase of investments of $64.8 million and net purchase of property and equipment of $2.8 million.
Financing Activities
In 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $251.8 million, comprised of total net proceeds of $187.5 million from our August 2020 and November 2020 underwritten public equity offerings after deducting underwriter commissions and paid offering expenses, $34.0 million of Continuation Advances from Illumina and proceeds of $46.4 million from the issuance of common stock through our equity compensation plans, partially offset by $16.0 million we repaid for the remaining outstanding principal to Deerfield upon the maturity of the Facility Agreement.
In 2019, cash provided by financing activities was $26.5 million, comprised of $18.0 million of Continuation Advances from Illumina and net proceeds of $8.5 million from the issuance of common stock through our equity compensation plans.
Underwritten Public Equity Offering
In August 2020, we entered into an underwriting agreement, relating to the public offering of 19,430,000 shares of our common stock, $0.001 par value per share, at a price to the public of $4.47 per share. Under the terms of the underwriting agreement, we also granted the underwriters a 30-day option to purchase up to an additional 2,914,500 shares of our common stock, which was subsequently exercised in full, and the offering including the sale of shares of common stock subject to the underwriters’ option, closed in August 2020. In total, we sold 22.3 million shares of our common stock. We paid a commission equal to 6% of the gross proceeds from the sale of shares of our common stock. The total net proceeds to us from the offering after deducting the underwriting discount were approximately $93.9 million, excluding approximately $0.3 million of offering expenses.
In November 2020, we entered into an underwriting agreement, relating to the public offering of 6,096,112 shares of our common stock, $0.001 par value per share, at a price to the public of $14.25 per share. Under the terms of the underwriting agreement, we also granted the underwriters a 30-day option to purchase up to an additional 914,416 shares of our common stock, which was subsequently exercised in full, and the offering including the sale of shares of common stock subject to the underwriters’ option, closed in November 2020. In total, we sold 7.0 million shares of our common stock. We paid a commission equal to 6% of the gross proceeds from the sale of shares of our common stock. The total net proceeds to us from the offering after deducting the underwriting discount were approximately $93.9 million, excluding approximately $0.3 million of offering expenses, $0.2 million of which was unpaid as of December 31, 2020.
In total, for the year ended December 31, 2020, we issued 29.4 million shares of our common stock through our two underwritten public offerings with an average offering price of $6.40. The total net proceeds to us from the two offerings, after deducting the underwriting commission and offering expenses, were approximately $187.2 million.
Debt Facility Agreement
In February 2013, we entered into a debt facility agreement with Deerfield, pursuant to which we received $20.5 million in funding and issued promissory notes in the aggregate principal amount of $20.5 million. The promissory notes bore simple interest at a rate of 8.75% per annum, payable quarterly in arrears commencing on April 1, 2013 and on the first business day of each January, April, July and October thereafter. The debt facility agreement had a maximum term of seven years. We received net proceeds of $20.0 million, representing $20.5 million of gross proceeds, less a $500,000 facility fee, before deducting other expenses of the transaction. On June 23, 2017, pursuant to a partial exercise by the promissory notes holders of their right to elect to receive up to 25% of the net proceeds from any financing that includes an equity component, we paid $4.5 million of outstanding principal, together with accrued and unpaid interest, to one of the promissory notes holders with proceeds from our underwritten public equity offering. As of December 31, 2019, a balance of $16.0 million aggregate principal amount of debt remained outstanding under this facility and was presented as “Notes payable, current” on the consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2019.
In February 2020, upon the maturity of the debt, we repaid the remaining outstanding principal of $16.0 million and interest to Deerfield.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is based upon our Consolidated Financial Statements, which we have prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, cost of revenue, and operating expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Management based its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgements about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
An accounting policy is deemed to be critical if it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the estimate is made, if different estimates reasonably could have been used, or if changes in the estimate that are reasonably likely to occur could materially impact the financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
Our revenue is generated primarily from the sale of products and services. Product revenue primarily consists of sales of our instruments and related consumables; Service and other revenue consist primarily of revenue earned from product maintenance agreements.
We account for a contract with a customer when there is a legally enforceable contract between us and the customer, the rights of the parties are identified, the contract has commercial substance, and collectability of the contract consideration is probable. Revenues are recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers or services are performed, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. Taxes we collect concurrent with revenue-producing activities are excluded from revenue.
Our instrument sales are generally sold in a bundled arrangement and commonly include the instrument, instrument accessories, installation, training, and consumables. Additionally, our instrument sale arrangements generally include a one year period of service. For such bundled arrangements, we account for individual products and services separately if they are distinct, that is, if a product or service is separately identifiable from other items in the bundled package and if a customer can benefit from it on its own or with other resources that are readily available to the customer. Our customers cannot benefit from our instrument systems without installation, and installation
can only be performed by us or qualified distributors. As a result, the system and installation are considered to be a single performance obligation recognized after installation is completed except for sales to qualified distributors, in which case the system is distinct and recognized when control has transferred to the distributor which typically occurs upon shipment.
The consideration for bundled arrangements is allocated between separate performance obligations based on their individual standalone selling price (“SSP”). The SSP is determined based on observable prices at which we separately sell the products and services. If a SSP is not directly observable, then we will estimate the SSP by considering multiple factors including, but not limited to, overall market conditions, including geographic or regional specific factors, internal costs, profit objectives, pricing practices and other observable inputs.
We recognize revenues as performance obligations are satisfied by transferring control of the product or service to the customer or over the term of a product maintenance agreement with a customer. Our revenue arrangements generally do not provide a right of return.
Contract liabilities and contract assets - Contract liabilities consist of deferred revenue. We record deferred revenues when cash payments are received or due in advance of our performance for product maintenance agreements. Deferred revenue is recognized over the related performance period, generally one year to three years, on a straight-line basis as we are standing ready to provide services and a time-based measure of progress best reflects the satisfaction of the performance obligation.
Other practical expedients and exemptions - Customers generally are invoiced upon acceptance of the system, which is also the start of the one year service period. As such, there is typically not more than a one year difference between the receipt of cash and the provision of services. Therefore, we apply the practical expedient and do not account for any potential significant financing benefit. However, it is noted that some customers will pre-order extended service periods at the time of the initial system sale. These customers may choose to make quarterly or annual payments or prepay multiple years of service upfront but there is no pricing difference between these different payment options. As such, no significant financing component is believed to exist with any of our existing arrangements.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value on a first-in, first-out (“FIFO”) basis. The cost basis of our inventory is reduced for any products that are considered excessive or obsolete based upon assumptions about future demand, market conditions and the release of new products that may supersede old ones. If actual future demand or market conditions are less favorable than those projected by management, additional inventory write-downs may be required, which could have a material adverse effect on the results of our operations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Please see “Note 3. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies”, subsection titled “Recent Accounting Pronouncements”, in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information regarding applicable recent accounting pronouncements.
Contractual Obligations, Commitments and Contingencies
The following table provides our future contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
(1)Maintenance, insurance, taxes and contingent rent obligations are excluded.
Other Purchase Commitments
In addition, we had other purchase commitments of an estimated amount of approximately $18.2 million as of December 31, 2020, consisting of open purchase orders and contractual obligations in the ordinary course of business, including commitments with contract manufacturers and suppliers for which we have not received the goods or services, and acquisition and licensing of intellectual property. A majority of these purchase obligations are due within a year. Although open purchase orders are considered enforceable and legally binding, the terms generally allow us the option to cancel, reschedule and adjust our requirements based on our business needs prior to the delivery of goods or performance of services.
License Agreements
Payments related to licensing and other arrangements not included in the contractual obligations table include amounts related to cancelable license agreements with third parties for certain patent rights and technology. Under the terms of these agreements, we may be obligated to pay royalties based on revenue from the sales of licensed products, or minimum royalties, whichever is greater, and license maintenance fees. The future license maintenance fees and minimum royalty payments under the license agreements are not deemed to be material.
The table above reflects only payment obligations that are fixed and determinable. Future royalties under our license agreements are not included in the table above because we cannot, at this time, determine when or if the events triggering any such payment obligations will occur or the amounts that will become potentially payable.
Legal Proceedings
Please see Item 3 “Legal Proceedings” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into standard indemnification arrangements. Pursuant to these arrangements, we indemnify, hold harmless, and agree to reimburse the indemnified parties for losses suffered or incurred by the indemnified party in connection with any trade secret, copyright, patent or other intellectual property infringement claim by any third party with respect to its technology, or from claims relating to our performance or non-performance under a contract, any defective products supplied by us, or any negligent acts or omissions, or willful misconduct, committed by us or any of our employees, agents or representatives. The term of these indemnification agreements is generally perpetual after the execution of the agreement. The maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make under these agreements is not determinable because it involves claims that may be made against us in future periods, but have not yet been made. To date, we have not incurred costs to defend lawsuits or settle claims related to these indemnification agreements.
We also enter and have entered into indemnification agreements with our directors and officers that may require us to indemnify them against liabilities that arise by reason of their status or service as directors or officers, except as prohibited by applicable law. In addition, we may have obligations to hold harmless and indemnify third parties involved with our fundraising efforts and their respective affiliates, directors, officers, employees, agents or other representatives against any and all losses, claims, damages and liabilities related to claims arising against such parties pursuant to the terms of agreements entered into between such third parties and us in connection with such fundraising efforts. To the extent that such indemnification obligations apply to the lawsuits described in “Note 6. Commitments and Contingencies” in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, any associated expenses incurred are included within the related accrued litigation expense amounts. No additional liability associated with such indemnification agreements has been recorded at December 31, 2020.