ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The information in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes set forth in Part II, Item 8, as well as the discussion included in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors,” of this Report. All amounts and percentages are approximate due to rounding.
Cautionary Notice Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Report, including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding our financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. When used in this Report, words such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions, as they relate to us or our management, identify forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other SEC filings. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. No assurance can be given that results in any forward-looking statement will be achieved and actual results could be affected by one or more factors, which could cause them to differ materially. The cautionary statements made in this Report should be read as being applicable to all forward-looking statements whenever they appear in this Report. For these statements, we claim the protection of the safe harbor for forward-looking statements contained in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
The forward-looking statements contained in this Report and the Exhibits attached hereto are based on our current expectations and beliefs concerning future developments and their potential effects on us taking into account information currently available to us. There can be no assurance that future developments affecting us will be those that we have anticipated. These forward-looking statements involve a number of risks, uncertainties (some of which are beyond our control) or other assumptions that may cause actual results or performance to be materially different from those expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements. Should one or more of these risks or uncertainties materialize, they could cause our actual results to differ materially from the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified in the section titled, “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Report. Except as required by law, we are not undertaking any obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. You should not take any statement regarding past trends or activities as a representation that the trends or activities will continue in the future. Accordingly, you should not put undue reliance on these statements.
Overview
Ranpak is a leading provider of environmentally sustainable, systems-based, product protection solutions and end-of-line automation solutions for e-commerce and industrial supply chains. Since our inception in 1972, we have delivered high quality protective packaging solutions, while maintaining our commitment to environmental sustainability. We assemble our protective packaging systems and provide the systems and paper consumables to customers, which include direct end-users and our network of exclusive paper packaging solution distributors, who in turn place the systems with and sell paper to commercial and industrial users for the conversion of paper into packaging materials. We operate manufacturing facilities in Concord Township, Ohio; Kansas City, Missouri; Raleigh, North Carolina; and Reno, Nevada in the United States, in Heerlen and Kerkrade, the Netherlands as well as
Nyrany, Czech Republic. In the second quarter of 2020, we opened a new production facility for our automation business in Kerkrade, the Netherlands, located approximately three miles from our Heerlen location, to enhance our production capacity in our automation business. We also maintain sales and administrative offices in Paris, France; Laoshan, China; Shanghai, China; Tokyo, Japan; and Singapore. We are a global business that generated approximately 61.0% of our 2020 net revenue outside of the United States.
As of December 31, 2020, we had an installed base of approximately 117.4 thousand protective packaging systems serving a diverse set of distributors and end-users. We generated net revenue of $298.2 million in 2020. Additionally, we generated net revenue of $163.1 million in the Successor Period and $106.4 million in the 1H 2019 Predecessor Period.
The Ranpak Business Combination
On June 3, 2019, we consummated the acquisition of all outstanding and issued equity interests of Rack Holdings, Inc. (“Rack Holdings”) pursuant to a stock purchase agreement for consideration of $794.9 million, which reflects a post-closing adjustment of $0.7 million for net working capital and additional consideration, and €140.0 million ($160.8 million) in cash, (i) $341.5 million and €140.0 million of which, respectively, was used by the Seller to repay outstanding indebtedness and unpaid transaction expenses as contemplated by the stock purchase agreement and (ii) the remainder of which was paid to Rack Holdings L.P. (“Seller”).
The Company (then One Madison Corporation) was deemed to be the accounting acquirer in the Ranpak Business Combination, as a result of which the Company allocated its purchase price to Rack Holdings’ assets and liabilities at fair value, which created a new basis of accounting. Until the consummation of the Ranpak Business Combination, Rack Holdings operated as a separate business holding all of the historical assets and liabilities related to our business.
The Ranpak Business Combination was financed, in part, with debt of approximately $534.6 million, which became Ranpak’s direct obligation upon the consummation of the Ranpak Business Combination. Upon the consummation of the Ranpak Business Combination on June 3, 2019, Rack Holdings’ then-existing debt, which amounted to approximately $487.6 million as of such date, was repaid in full. In December 2019, the Company closed a public offering of its Class A common stock generating net proceeds of approximately $107.7 million that was used to pay down the First Lien Dollar Term Facility.
Following the Ranpak Business Combination, we have hired, and expect to hire additional staff and implement procedures and processes to address regulatory and other customary requirements applicable to operating public companies. We have incurred additional annual expenses for, among other things, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, director fees, and additional internal and external accounting, legal and administrative resources, including increased audit and legal fees. We estimated that these incremental costs on an annual basis would amount to approximately $2.0 million or more per year, resulting in higher operating expenses in future periods. The closing of the Ranpak Business Combination also resulted in the elimination of certain non-recurring expenses incurred prior to the Ranpak Business Combination, which amounted to $35.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Factors Affecting the Comparability of Our Results of Operations
The following factors may have affected the comparability of Ranpak’s results of operations between the periods presented in this Report and may affect the comparability of its results of operations in future periods.
Effect of Currency Fluctuations. As a result of the geographic diversity of Ranpak’s operations, it is exposed to the effects of currency translation. Currency transaction exposure results when Ranpak generates net revenue in one currency at one time and incurs expenses in another currency at another time, or when it realizes gain or loss on intercompany transfers. While Ranpak seeks to limit its currency transaction exposure by matching the currencies in which it incurs sales and expenses, it may not always be able to do so.
In addition, Ranpak is subject to currency translation exposure because the operations of its subsidiaries are measured in their functional currency which is the currency of the primary economic environment in which the subsidiary operates. Any currency balances that are denominated in currencies other than the functional currency of the subsidiary are re-measured into the functional currency, with the resulting gain or loss recorded in the foreign currency (gains) losses line-item in Ranpak’s income statement. In turn, subsidiary income statement balances that are denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar are translated into U.S. dollars, Ranpak’s functional currency, in consolidation using the average exchange rate in effect during each fiscal month during the period, with any related gain or loss recorded as foreign currency translation adjustments in other comprehensive income (loss). The assets and liabilities of subsidiaries that use functional currencies other than the U.S. dollar are translated into U.S. dollars in consolidation using period end exchange rates, with the effects of foreign currency translation adjustments included in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss).
Ranpak does not currently hedge its foreign currency transaction or translation exposure. As a result, significant currency fluctuations could impact the comparability of its results between periods, while such fluctuations coupled with material mismatches in net revenue and expenses could also adversely impact its cash flows. See “Qualitative and Quantitative Disclosures About Market Risk.”
Acquisitions. On February 28, 2017, Ranpak acquired e3neo for total consideration of $3.3 million, including contingent consideration of $1.1 million which was paid in full in 2018, plus an earn-out opportunity, which was not earned and, in April 2020, we entered into a settlement arrangement with the former majority owner of e3neo to provide, among other things, for a payment to the earn-out counterparties in the amount of approximately $1.6 million. All amounts were paid by the end of October 2020. See Note 10, “Acquisition” to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report.
In October 2020, we acquired certain amortizable intangible assets, including patents and other intellectual property, from a European manufacturer in a €1.1 million (or $1.3 million) asset acquisition transaction. Please refer to Note 9, “Goodwill, Long-Lived, and Intangible Assets, net” to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report for further detail.
While recent acquisitions have been relatively small, any significant future business acquisitions may impact the comparability of Ranpak’s results in future periods with those for prior periods.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in rapid changes in market and economic conditions around the world as COVID-19 continues to spread. We derive a significant portion of our revenue from sales of Void-Fill, Cushioning and Wrapping solutions to e-commerce end-users and demand from these end-users has been strong, offsetting reductions in demand for these products from customers in other industries. However, social distancing and similar measures adopted in many jurisdictions around the world have impacted our ability to demonstrate and install our protective packaging systems and Automation products and, as a result, such demonstrations and installations have been delayed. If social distancing measures continue for an extended period of time, growth in our protective packaging system base, acquisition of new customers and sales of Automation products may be adversely affected. We believe that these impacts are not unique to us and that our industry competitors have been impacted in a similar fashion. We are deemed an essential business under the Memorandum on Identification of Essential Critical Infrastructure Workers During COVID-19 Response issued by the United States Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency and pursuant to state decisions in states where our domestic production and distribution facilities are located. We continue to operate our production and distribution facilities, both domestically and internationally, albeit subject to social distancing and other measures to promote a safe operating environment. While we have experienced limited delays in receiving certain supplies we use to assemble our packaging systems, to date, these measures have not materially impacted the cost of producing and distributing our products, the cost and availability of raw materials and components, and we have encountered minimal disruption in our ability to fulfill customer orders. We continue to monitor our liquidity position closely and have extended payment terms to certain of our customers when necessary, while correspondingly seeking extended terms from our key suppliers. While we do not currently expect COVID-19 to have a material impact on our business, results of operations, financial condition or liquidity, at the time of this filing, we cannot predict the extent to which we will ultimately be impacted due to the evolving and highly uncertain nature and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic. See “Risk Factors” located previously in this Report. We will continue to evaluate the nature and extent of the impact to our business, results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows.
Key Performance Indicators and Other Factors Affecting Performance
Ranpak uses the following key performance indicators and monitors the following other factors to analyze its business performance, determine financial forecasts, and help develop long-term strategic plans:
Protective Packaging Systems Base - Ranpak closely tracks the number of protective packaging systems installed with end-users as it is a leading indicator of underlying business trends and near-term and ongoing net revenue expectations. Ranpak’s installed base of protective packaging systems also drives its capital expenditure budgets. The following table presents Ranpak’s installed base of protective packaging systems by product line as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Paper Costs. Paper is a key component of Ranpak’s cost of sales and paper costs can fluctuate significantly between periods. Ranpak purchases both 100% virgin and 100% recycled paper, as well as blends, from various suppliers for conversion into the paper consumables it sells. The cost of paper supplies is Ranpak’s largest input cost, and it negotiates supply and pricing arrangements with
most of its paper suppliers annually, with a view towards mitigating fluctuations in paper cost. Nevertheless, as paper is a commodity, its price on the open market, and in turn the prices Ranpak negotiates with suppliers at a given point in time, can fluctuate significantly, and is affected by several factors outside of Ranpak’s control, including supply and demand and the cost of other commodities that are used in the manufacture of paper, including wood, energy and chemicals. The market for Ranpak’s solutions is competitive and it may be difficult for Ranpak to pass on increases in paper prices to its customers immediately, or at all, which has in the past and could in the future adversely affect its operating results.
Basis of Presentation
Net Revenue. Revenue from contracts with customers is recognized using a five-step model consisting of the following: (1) identify the contract with a customer; (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (5) recognize revenue when (or as) we satisfy a performance obligation. Performance obligations are satisfied when we transfer control of a good or service to a customer, which can occur over time or at a point in time. The amount of revenue recognized is based on the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services, including the expected value of variable consideration. The customer’s ability and intent to pay the transaction price is assessed in determining whether a contract exists with the customer. If collectability of substantially all of the consideration in a contract is not probable, consideration received is not recognized as revenue unless the consideration is nonrefundable and we no longer have an obligation to transfer additional goods or services to the customer or collectability becomes probable.
We sell our paper products to end-users primarily through an established distributor network and direct sales to select end-users. Our protective packaging solutions fall into four broad categories: Void-Fill, Cushioning, Wrapping, and End-of-Line Automation. The Void-Fill protective systems convert paper to fill empty spaces in secondary packages and protect objects. The Cushioning protective systems convert paper into cushioning pads. The Wrapping protective systems create pads or paper mesh to securely wrap and protect fragile items as well as to line boxes and provide separation when shipping multiple objects. The end-of-line Automation solutions include capital equipment which can size, pad, fill, flap, lid, tape and/or label the product in an integrated fashion with the speed and flow of the customer’s packaging line.
Charges for rebates and other allowances are recognized as a deduction from revenue on an accrual basis in the period in which the associated revenue is recorded. When we estimate our rebate accruals, we consider customer-specific contractual commitments including stated rebate rates and history of actual rebates paid.
We also charge many customers a quarterly/annual fee for the use of our protective packaging systems on a per-unit basis, which is generally billed in advance, recorded as deferred revenue upon billing and subsequently recorded as net revenue on a straight-line basis when earned over the period. Net revenue also includes sales of Ranpak Automation’s highly automated box sizing system to certain higher volume customers. See Note 8, “Revenue Recognition, Contracts with Customers” to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report.
Cost of Goods Sold. Cost of goods sold consists primarily of raw materials, mainly paper, depreciation of protective packaging systems and salaries, wages, benefits and bonuses for employees and contractors engaged in the conversion and production of paper. For Ranpak Automation cost of sales consists of equipment components and related labor to assemble the end-of-line solutions. Costs related to systems maintenance billed to customers are recorded as cost of goods sold as incurred.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses consist primarily of salaries, benefits, and bonuses for sales and marketing, executive, finance and accounting, human resources and administrative employees, third-party legal, accounting and other professional services, insurance (including auto, workers’ compensation and general liability), corporate travel and entertainment and facilities rent and utilities.
Transaction Costs. Transaction costs consist primarily of one-time professional fees and costs related to acquiring a business or engaging in equity transactions that are unable to be capitalized.
Depreciation and Amortization Expense. Depreciation and amortization expense is comprised primarily of amortization of customer and distributor relationships and to a lesser extent building and leasehold improvements. Our intangible customer and distributor relationship assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over the useful life of the asset. All of these assets reflect the valuations ascribed to them through fair value accounting in conjunction with the Ranpak’s Business Combination. Depreciation related to production equipment and our protective packaging systems is included in cost of goods sold.
Other Operating Expense (Income), Net. Other operating expense (income), net, includes losses on the return of equipment, mainly protective packaging systems, by customers, R&D expenses and litigation-related settlements. Returned systems are typically refurbished or disposed for salvage value.
Interest Expense. Interest expense includes mainly the interest incurred and accrued on our outstanding indebtedness, as well as amortization of deferred financing costs, mainly debt origination and commitment fees.
Foreign Currency (Gain) Loss. Foreign currency (gain) loss consists of foreign currency remeasurement, mainly consisting of conversion gains and losses on our Euro-denominated term facility, and, to a lesser extent, transaction losses and gains. See “- Factors Affecting the Comparability of Ranpak’s Results of Operations - Effect of Currency Fluctuations” above.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit). Income tax expense (benefit) consists mainly of taxes payable to national, state and local authorities. We follow the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, deferred income taxes are recognized for the tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts and the tax basis of the assets and liabilities. In assessing the ability to realize deferred tax assets, we consider whether it is more likely than not that some portion, or all, of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. We evaluate for uncertain tax positions at each reported balance sheet date.
Emerging Growth Company. Section 102(b)(1) of the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (“JOBS Act”) exempts an Emerging Growth Company (“EGC”) from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies (that is, those that have not had a Securities Act of 1933, as amended, registration statement declared effective or do not have a class of securities registered under the Exchange Act) are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies but any such election to opt out is irrevocable. We have elected not to opt out of such extended transition period which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, we, as an EGC, can adopt the new or revised standard at the time private companies adopt the new or revised standard. This may make comparison of our financial statements with another public company that is not an EGC or that is an EGC which has opted out of using the extended transition period, difficult or impossible because of the potential differences in accounting standards used.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth Ranpak’s results of operations for 2020, the Successor Period, and the 1H 2019 Predecessor Period, with line items presented in millions of dollars.
The Ranpak Business Combination is accounted for under the scope of business combination guidance in ASC 805. Accordingly, the Ranpak Business Combination is accounted for using the acquisition method which requires the Company to record the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed from Rack Holdings (see Note 10, “Acquisition”).
In addition, in our discussion below, we include certain unaudited, non-GAAP pro forma data for 2020, the Successor Period, and the 1H 2019 Predecessor Period. This data is based on our historical financial statements included elsewhere in this Report, adjusted (where applicable) to remove the effect of costs incurred to consummate the Ranpak Business Combination, other one-time costs incurred due to the Company entering into the Ranpak Business Combination and for purchase accounting adjustments related to the Ranpak Business Combination as well as to reflect a constant currency presentation between periods for the convenience of readers. We refer to these data as pro forma data in our discussion. However, such pro forma data have not been prepared in accordance with Article 11 of Regulation S-X. We reconcile this data to our GAAP data for the same period under “Presentation and Reconciliation of GAAP to Non-GAAP Measures” for 2020 and 2019.
Comparison of 2020 to the Successor Period and 1H 2019 Predecessor Period
Net Revenue
The following table and the discussion that follows compares Ranpak’s net revenue by geographic region and by product line for 2020 and 2019 on a GAAP basis and on a non-GAAP, pro forma basis as described above and in the discussion below. See also “Presentation and Reconciliation of GAAP to Non-GAAP Measures” for further details:
Net revenue for 2020 was $298.2 million. Net revenue for the Successor Period was $163.1 million, and $106.4 million in the 1H 2019 Predecessor Period, for a combined $269.5 million in 2019. Net revenue increased $28.7 million or 10.6% as a result of an increase in the volume of Ranpak’s paper consumable products of approximately 13.1 percentage points (“pp”), partially offset by a 5.2 pp decrease in the price of Ranpak’s paper consumable products and a decrease of approximately 0.6 pp in sales of automated box sizing equipment. Net revenue on a combined basis was positively impacted by increases in cushioning, void-fill, and wrapping, partially offset by decreases in other sales. On a combined basis, cushioning increased $7.0 million, or 5.9%, to $125.7 million from $118.7 million, void-fill increased $13.2 million, or 11.8%, to $125.0 million from $111.8 million, wrapping increased $12.4 million, or 47.0%, to $38.8 million from $26.4 million, while other sales decreased $3.9 million, or 31.0% to $8.7 million from $12.6 million, in each case for 2020 compared to 2019. Other net revenue includes automated box sizing equipment and non-paper revenue from packaging systems installed in the field. Pro forma net revenue was $298.9 million for 2020, a $21.5 million, or 7.8%, increase on a constant currency basis from pro forma net revenue of $277.4 million for 2019 after adjusting to a constant currency in both periods and purchase accounting adjustments related to revenue recognition in 2019.
Net revenue in North America for 2020 totaled $127.4 million. Net revenue in North America was $81.8 million in the Successor Period and $50.1 million in the 1H 2019 Predecessor Period for a combined $131.9 million in 2019. Net revenue in North America decreased $4.5 million, or 3.4% attributable to a decline in cushioning and void-fill volumes, partially offset by an increase in wrapping sales. Pro forma net revenue in North America was $127.4 million for 2020, a $5.0 million, or 3.8%, decrease from pro forma net revenue in North America of $132.4 million for 2019 after purchase accounting adjustments.
Net revenue in Europe/Asia for 2020 totaled $170.8 million. Net revenue in Europe/Asia was $81.3 million in the Successor Period and $56.3 million in the 1H 2019 Predecessor Period, for a combined $137.6 million in 2019. Net revenue in Europe/Asia increased $33.2 million or 24.1% driven primarily by growth in wrapping, void-fill, and cushioning sales. Pro forma net revenue in Europe/Asia was $171.5 million for 2020, a $26.5 million, or 18.3%, increase from pro forma net revenue of $145.0 million for 2019 after purchase accounting adjustments and adjusting for constant currency.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold for 2020 totaled $175.6 million. Cost of goods sold was $97.4 million in the Successor Period and $61.2 million in the 1H 2019 Predecessor Period, for a combined $158.6 million in 2019. Cost of goods sold increased $17.0 million or 10.7% due to increases in sales year over year and higher depreciation expense of $7.6 million due to the Ranpak Business Combination fair value adjustments, an increase in non-recurring operating costs in automation, offset by a decrease in the price of paper. Pro forma cost of goods sold increased by $17.3 million, or 10.9%, to $175.9 million in 2020 from $158.6 million for 2019 after adjusting to a constant currency in both periods and purchase accounting adjustments of $2.1 million for 2019. As a result, on a pro forma basis, net revenue minus cost of goods sold as a percentage of net revenue decreased by 1.6 pp to 41.2% in 2020 from 42.8% for 2019.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses
SG&A expenses for 2020 was $72.5 million. SG&A was $37.7 million in the Successor Period and $23.8 million in the 1H 2019 Predecessor Period, for a combined $61.5 million in 2019. SG&A expenses increased $11.0 million or 17.9% due to severance costs, non-cash equity compensation costs, increased support of growth initiatives, and increased costs associated with being a public company. Pro forma SG&A expenses increased by $17.3 million, or 31.1%, to $72.9 million in 2020 from $55.6 million for 2019 after adjusting to a constant currency in both periods. As a percentage of pro forma net revenue, pro forma SG&A increased to 24.4% in 2020 from 20.0% in 2019 on a constant currency basis.
Transaction Costs
We incurred transaction costs of $2.2 million associated with the Warrant Exchange and other transactions in 2020. We incurred approximately $0.3 million in the Successor Period and $7.4 million in the 1H 2019 Predecessor Period for a combined $7.7 million associated with the Ranpak Business Combination.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expenses for 2020 were $31.5 million. Depreciation and amortization expenses were $17.2 million in the Successor Period and $17.7 million in the 1H 2019 Predecessor Period, for a combined $34.9 million in 2019. Depreciation and amortization expenses decreased $3.4 million, or 9.7% due to the Ranpak Business Combination fair value adjustments, their related amortizable lives and changes in currency rates. Pro forma depreciation and amortization expenses decreased by $3.1 million, or 8.9%, to $31.7 million in 2020 from $34.8 million for 2019 on a constant currency basis. As a percentage of pro forma net revenue, pro forma depreciation and amortization expenses decreased to 10.6% in 2020 from 12.5% in 2019 on a constant currency basis.
Other Operating Expense, Net
Other operating expense, net for 2020 was $4.7 million. Other operating expense, net was $2.4 million in the Successor Period and $2.2 million in the 1H 2019 Predecessor Period, for a combined $4.6 million in 2019, nearly flat to the current year. Pro forma other operating expense, net, was $5.0 million in 2020 and 2019 on a constant currency basis. As a percentage of pro forma net revenue, pro forma other operating expense, net, decreased to 1.7% in 2020 from 1.8% in 2019 on a constant currency basis.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for 2020 was $30.2 million. Interest expense was $27.3 million in the Successor Period and $20.2 million in the 1H 2019 Predecessor Period, for a combined $47.5 million in 2019. Interest expense decreased $17.3 million, or 36.4%. Interest expense decreased due to decreased debt levels and lower interest rates, as well as transaction-related expenses in June 2019 and December 2019, which included a write-off of deferred financing fees and the termination of an interest rate swap. Interest expense in 2020 also includes the $8.2 million Exit Payment (defined herein, refer to “Liquidity and Capital Resources” in Item 7 for further information). Pro forma interest expense decreased by $5.8 million, or 16.2%, to $30.1 million in 2020 compared to $35.9 million for 2019 on a constant currency basis. As a percentage of pro forma net revenue, pro forma interest expense decreased to 10.1% in 2020 from 12.9% in 2019.
Foreign Currency (Gain) Loss
Foreign currency loss for 2020 was $6.1 million. Foreign currency loss was $0.7 million in the Successor Period and foreign currency gain was $2.2 million in the 1H 2019 Predecessor Period, for a combined gain of $1.5 million in 2019. Foreign currency loss increased $7.6 million due to favorable movements in Euro exchange rates, as well as the net impact of the re-measurement of Ranpak’s Euro-denominated term facility and its Euro-denominated intercompany note to a Dutch subsidiary in the Predecessor periods. Pro forma foreign currency loss was $6.2 million in 2020 compared to a gain of $1.5 million for 2019 on a constant currency basis. As a percentage of pro forma net revenue, pro forma foreign currency (gain) loss decreased to 2.1% in 2020 from 0.5% in 2019.
Income Tax Benefit
Income tax benefit for 2020 was $1.2 million, or an effective tax rate of 6.2%. Income tax benefit was $2.7 million in the Successor Period and $4.9 million in the 1H 2019 Predecessor Period, for a combined benefit of $7.6 million in 2019. The fluctuation in the effective tax rate between periods was primarily attributable to a jurisdictional mix of income between periods and discrete tax expense of $1.3 million recorded in the third quarter of 2020. The effective tax rate differs from the U.S. federal statutory rate due primarily to benefits derived from the U.S. foreign derived intangible income deduction, tax credits available in the United States, and income in foreign jurisdictions that are taxed at different rates than the U.S. statutory tax rate.
Net Loss
Net loss for 2020 was $23.4 million. Net loss was $17.2 million in the Successor Period and $19.0 million in the 1H 2019 Predecessor Period, for a combined net loss of $36.2 million in 2019. Net loss decreased $12.8 million, or 35.4%. Pro forma net loss was $23.4 million in 2020 compared to pro forma net loss of $11.0 million for 2019 on a constant currency basis. The change was primarily due to the reasons discussed above.
EBITDA and AEBITDA
EBITDA for 2020 was $67.9 million compared to a combined $84.5 million in 2019. Adjusting for transaction costs associated with the Ranpak Business Combination, constant currency and other one-time costs, pro forma AEBITDA for 2020 totaled $93.7 million, an increase of $6.4 million, or 7.3% on a constant currency basis from $87.3 million in 2019.
Comparison of 2019 to 2018
Discussions of 2018 items and full year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Report can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for 2019.
Presentation and Reconciliation of GAAP to Non-GAAP Measures
As noted above, we believe that in order to better understand the performance of the Company, providing non-GAAP financial measures to users of our financial information is helpful. Ranpak believes presentation of these non-GAAP measures is useful because they are many of the key measures that allow management to evaluate more effectively its operating performance and compare the results of its operations from period to period and against its peers without regard to financing methods or capital structure. Management does not consider these non-GAAP measures in isolation or as an alternative to similar financial measures determined in accordance with GAAP. Additionally, as a result of the Ranpak Business Combination, we believe that users of our financial information will find that non-GAAP, pro forma data is useful when comparing the current and prior periods. The computations of EBITDA and AEBITDA may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures of other companies. These non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered as alternatives to, or more meaningful than, measures of financial performance as determined in accordance with GAAP or as indicators of operating performance.
The following tables and related notes reconcile certain non-GAAP measures including the non-GAAP pro forma measures, to GAAP information presented in this Report for 2020 and 2019:
(see subsequent footnotes)
(1)
Adjust for percentage of completion revenue recognition change.
(2)
Adjust for percentage of completion revenue recognition change for cost of sales.
(3)
Adjust tax provision at 21.0% corporate rate for items adjusted above.
(4)
Reconciliations of EBITDA and AEBITDA for each period presented are to net (loss) income, the nearest GAAP equivalent, and accordingly include the adjustments shown in the “Adj.” column to net (loss) income of each table.
(5)
Adjustments are related to non-recurring costs such as: unrealized non-cash (gains) losses on translation of the Predecessor debt, private equity monitoring fees, non-cash (gain) loss on the disposal of machines, acquisition costs, severance and a revenue recognition adjustment related to e3neo acquisition. Certain costs related to being a public company, such as additional staff, legal and accounting costs that were not included in the Predecessor are also included in AEBITDA.
(6)
Effect of Euro constant currency adjustment to a rate of $1.15 U.S. Dollar to €1.00 as follows:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity describes the ability of a company to generate sufficient cash flows to meet the cash requirements of its business operations, including working capital needs, capital expenditures, debt service, acquisitions, other commitments and contractual obligations. We evaluate liquidity in terms of cash flows from operations and other sources and the sufficiency of such cash flows to fund our operating, investing, and financing activities.
We believe that our estimated cash from operations together with borrowing capacity under the revolving portion of the Facilities will provide us with sufficient resources to cover our current requirements. We may also, from time to time, seek to access the equity markets, if appropriate. Our main liquidity needs relate to capital expenditures and expenses for the production and maintenance of protective packaging systems placed at end-user facilities, working capital, including the purchase of paper raw materials, and payments of principal and interest on our outstanding debt. We expect our capital expenditures to increase as we continue to grow our business. Our future capital requirements and the adequacy of available funds will depend on many factors, and if we are unable to obtain needed additional funds, we may have to reduce our operating costs or incur additional debt, which could impair our growth prospects and/or otherwise negatively impact our business. Further, volatility in the equity and credit markets resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic could make obtaining new equity or debt financing more difficult or expensive.
We had $48.5 million in cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020 and $19.7 million as of December 31, 2019. Excluding deferred financing costs, we had $439.8 million in debt, $1.7 million of which was classified as short-term, as of December 31, 2020, compared to $428.2 million in debt, $1.6 million of which was classified as short-term, as of December 31, 2019. In December 2019, we closed a public offering of our Class A common stock generating net proceeds of approximately $107.7 million that was used to pay down long-term debt. At December 31, 2020, we did not have amounts outstanding under our $45.0 million revolving credit facility, and we had no borrowings under such facility through March 4, 2021.
Debt Profile
Ranpak’s previous credit facilities were repaid in connection with the consummation of the Ranpak Business Combination, and were replaced with the following facilities: (i) a $378.2 million dollar-denominated first lien term facility (the “First Lien Dollar Term Facility”) and a €140.0 million euro-denominated first lien term facility (the “First Lien Euro Term Facility” and, together with the First Lien Dollar Term Facility, the “First Lien Term Facility”), and (ii) a $45.0 million revolving facility (together, the “New Credit Facilities”). The material terms of the New Credit Facilities are summarized in Note 11, “Long-Term Debt” to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report.
Debt Before the Ranpak Business Combination
Prior to the Ranpak Business Combination, the Company had two first lien credit facilities, a United States Dollar Tranche (“US$ Tranche”) and a Euro Tranche (“Euro Tranche”), a revolving credit facility and a second lien credit facility. The first lien credit facilities included: (i) a seven-year Term Loan (US$ Tranche) facility in the amount of $233.4 million, (ii) a seven-year Term Loan (Euro Tranche) facility in the amount of €157.0 million, and (iii) a five-year $30.0 million revolving credit facility, of which the equivalent of $13.0 million may be denominated in Euros (collectively, the “Old Credit Facilities”). In March 2017, Ranpak raised $45 million of incremental First Lien (US$ Tranche) debt and used the proceeds to pay down a portion of the Second Lien (US$ Tranche), the results of which saved Ranpak 400 basis points on the applicable interest rate on $45 million of its outstanding debt. Borrowings under the US$ Tranche bore interest in an amount based on either the Adjusted Eurodollar rate (the greater of 1.00% or LIBOR) plus 3.25% or a Base Rate plus 2.75% (the higher of the Federal Funds effective rate plus ½ of 1%, prime, or the Adjusted Eurodollar rate plus 1%). Borrowings under the Euro Tranche bore interest in an amount based on the Adjusted EURIBOR rate (the
greater of 1.00% or EURIBOR) plus 3.25%. Interest on LIBOR and EURIBOR rate loans were payable at the end of the applicable interest periods.
Borrowings under the revolving credit facility bore interest in an amount based on either the base rate or Adjusted Eurodollar rate plus a variable margin that is dependent on the First Lien Net Leverage Ratio. The first lien credit facilities were secured by a first priority security interest in substantially all of the Company’s assets. Principal payments on the first lien term loan facilities were due quarterly and were based on 1% of the annual outstanding balances. Additionally, per the credit agreement, Ranpak was required to make additional annual pre-payments, based on consolidated excess cash flow calculation results.
The second lien credit facility was an eight-year US$ Tranche in the amount of $135.0 million. Borrowings under the US$ Tranche bore interest in an amount based on either the Adjusted Eurodollar rate (the greater of 1.00% or LIBOR) plus 7.25% or a base rate plus 6.25%. The second lien credit agreement was secured by a second priority security interest in substantially all of Ranpak’s assets and includes default provisions and contained a covenant similar to the first lien credit facility described above.
The Old Credit Facilities were repaid in full upon the consummation of the Ranpak Business Combination and replaced with the New Credit Facilities.
Debt After the Ranpak Business Combination
In connection with the stock purchase agreement related to the Ranpak Business Combination, One Madison obtained a debt commitment letter (as amended and restated, supplemented or otherwise modified, the “debt commitment letter”), pursuant to which the Goldman Sachs Lending Partners LLC and certain affiliated investment entities thereof (collectively, the “Lenders”) committed to provide senior secured credit facilities to, in part, (i) fund the Ranpak Business Combination, (ii) repay and terminate the existing indebtedness of Ranpak (the “debt refinancing”) and (iii) pay all fees, premiums, expenses and other transaction costs incurred in connection with the foregoing. The aggregate commitment of the senior secured credit facilities consists of a $289.2 million dollar-denominated first lien term facility and a €140.0 million euro-denominated first lien term facility (with the ability to reduce the dollar-denominated first lien term facility and correspondingly increase the euro-denominated first lien term facility in an amount of up to €60.0 million), a $45.0 million revolving facility (including the right to bring in additional lenders to provide commitments with respect to the revolving facility in an amount of up to $30.0 million and additional borrowing capacity available for letters of credit in an amount of up to $5.0 million), a $100.0 million first lien contingency term facility and a $100.0 million second lien contingency term facility. Upon the consummation of the Ranpak Business Combination, the New Credit Facilities became the direct obligations of certain subsidiaries of Ranpak (collectively, the “borrowers”) and were secured by substantially all of Ranpak’s assets.
Each of the First Lien Term Facility, and the first lien contingency term facility accrue interest at a rate of LIBOR plus 3.75% (assuming a first lien net leverage ratio of less than 5.00:1.00). The second lien contingency term facility accrues interest at a rate of LIBOR plus 7.50%. No amounts have been drawn on under the second lien contingency. The first lien term facility and first lien contingency term facility mature on the seventh anniversary of the date of the closing of the Ranpak Business Combination, June 3, 2026. The revolving facility matures on the fifth anniversary of the date of the Closing June 3, 2024. The second lien contingency term facility matures on the eighth anniversary of the date of the Closing, June 3, 2027 but was not available for us to borrow against at December 31, 2020.
The revolving facility includes borrowing capacity available for letters of credit of up to $5 million. Any issuance of letters of credit will reduce the amount available under the revolving facility.
In addition, the debt financing provides the borrowers with the option to increase commitments under the debt financing in an aggregate amount not to exceed the greater of $95 million and 100% of trailing-twelve months consolidated EBITDA, plus any voluntary prepayments of the debt financing (and, in the case of the revolving facility, to the extent such voluntary prepayments are accompanied by permanent commitment reductions under the revolving facility), plus unlimited amounts subject to the relevant net leverage ratio tests and certain other conditions.
The obligations of the borrowers under the debt financing and certain of their respective obligations under hedging arrangements and cash management arrangements are unconditionally guaranteed by the direct parent of each borrower and each existing and subsequently acquired or organized direct or indirect wholly-owned U.S. or Dutch restricted subsidiary (collectively, the “guarantors”), in each case, other than certain excluded subsidiaries and subject to other customary limitations set forth in the definitive documentation with respect to the debt financing. The debt financing is secured by a security interest in substantially all of the assets of the borrowers and the guarantors (and including a pledge of the equity interests of each borrower and of each guarantor and of their respective direct, wholly-owned restricted subsidiaries), in each case subject to customary exceptions.
The revolving facility requires the borrowers to maintain a maximum first lien net leverage ratio 9.10:1.00 based on the amount of the initial first lien term loans under the debt financing actually borrowed on the closing date based on providing at least a 35% cushion to consolidated EBITDA for the most recent four fiscal quarter periods ending prior to the date of the closing. This “springing” financial covenant is tested on the last day of each fiscal quarter, but only if on such date the sum of (i) the principal amount of outstanding revolving loans under the revolving facility, (ii) drawings on letters of credit under the revolving facility and (iii) the face amount of non-cash collateralized letters of credit under the revolving facility in excess of an amount to be set forth in the definitive documentation with respect to the debt financing exceeds 35% of the total revolving commitments under the revolving facility.
The senior secured credit facilities also contain a number of customary negative covenants. Such covenants, among other things, will limit or restrict the ability of each of the borrowers, their restricted subsidiaries, and where applicable, the direct parent holding companies of the borrowers, to:
•
incur additional indebtedness, issue disqualified stock and make guarantees;
•
incur liens on assets;
•
engage in mergers or consolidations or fundamental changes;
•
sell assets;
•
pay dividends and distributions or repurchase capital stock;
•
make investments, loans and advances, including acquisitions;
•
amend organizational documents;
•
enter into certain agreements that would restrict the ability to pay dividends;
•
repay certain junior indebtedness;
•
engage in transactions with affiliates; and
•
in the case of the direct parent holding companies of the borrowers, engage in activities other than passively holding the equity interests in the borrowers.
The aforementioned restrictions are subject to certain exceptions including (i) the ability to incur additional indebtedness, liens, investments, dividends and distributions, and prepayments of junior indebtedness subject, in each case, to compliance with certain financial metrics and certain other conditions and (ii) a number of other traditional exceptions that grant the borrowers continued flexibility to operate and develop their businesses. The senior secured credit facilities also contain certain customary representations and warranties, affirmative covenants and events of default.
Under the First Lien Term Facility agreement, our lower leverage ratio at December 31, 2020 requires us to pay our lenders an $8.2 million exit payment fee (the “Exit Payment”), which we expect to pay in the first quarter of 2021.
Amendment to First Lien Credit Facilities
On February 14, 2020, Ranger Packaging LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“U.S. Borrower”), Ranpak B.V., a private limited liability company under the laws of the Netherlands (the “Dutch Borrower”; the U.S. Borrower and the Dutch Borrower, the “Borrowers”), Ranger Pledgor LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“Holdings”), certain other subsidiaries of Holdings, certain lenders party to Amendment No. 1 (as defined below) and Goldman Sachs Lending Partners LLC (the “Administrative Agent”) entered into the Amendment No. 1 to First Lien Credit Agreement (“Amendment No. 1”) to amend the New Credit Facilities.
Among other things, the Amendment No. 1 amends the New Credit Facilities such that (x) the requirement of the Borrowers to apply a percentage of excess cash flow to mandatorily prepay term loans under the New Credit Facilities commences with the fiscal year ending December 31, 2021 (instead of the fiscal year ending December 31, 2020) and (y) the aggregate amount per fiscal year of capital stock of any parent company of the U.S. Borrower that is held by directors, officers, management, employees, independent contractors or consultants of the U.S. Borrower (or any parent company or subsidiary thereof) that the U.S. Borrower may repurchase, redeem, retire or otherwise acquire or retire for value has been increased to the greater of $10,000,000 and 10% of Consolidated AEBITDA (as defined in the New Credit Facilities) (increased from the greater of $7,000,000 and 7% of Consolidated AEBITDA) as of the last day of the most recently ended quarter for which financial statements have been delivered.
Borrower Assumption Agreement
On July 1, 2020, in the following order, (i) Rack Holdings Inc. merged with and into Ranger Packaging LLC, with Ranger Packaging LLC as the surviving entity of such merger and (ii) Ranger Packaging LLC merged with and into Ranpak Corp., with Ranpak Corp. as the surviving entity of such merger (clauses (i) and (ii) collectively, the “Reorganization”). Contemporaneously with the Reorganization, Ranger Packaging LLC, Ranpak Corp., Ranger Pledgor LLC, certain other subsidiaries of Ranger Pledgor LLC and Goldman Sachs Lending Partners LLC entered into the Borrower Assumption Agreement whereby, among other things, Ranpak Corp. assumed all obligations, liabilities and rights of Ranger Packaging LLC as the “U.S. Borrower” under the New Credit Facilities.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth Ranpak’s summary cash flow information for the periods indicated:
Cash Flows Provided by Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $63.8 million in 2020. Cash used in operating activities in the Successor Period of $9.6 million and cash provided by operating activities in the 1H 2019 Predecessor Period of $16.7 million combined for $26.3 million in cash provided by operating activities in 2019. The changes in operating cash flows are due to cash earnings and increases in the changes in working capital. The $8.2 million Exit Payment is included in operating activities.
Cash Flows Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $34.5 million in 2020. Cash used in investing activities in the Successor Period of $657.1 million and $10.8 million in the 1H 2019 Predecessor Period combined for $667.9 million in cash used by investing activities in 2019. The changes are predominantly due to cash used for the Ranpak Business Combination and capital expenditures related to our protective packaging systems, as well as cash used in an acquisition of intangible assets.
Cash Flows Provided (Used in) by Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities was $1.6 million in 2020 and reflects payment of debt. Net cash provided by financing activities in the Successor Period of $665.4 million and cash used in financing activities in the 1H 2019 Predecessor Period of $14.4 million combined for $651.0 million in cash provided by financing activities in 2019, primarily related to the debt and stock transactions relative to the Ranpak Business Combination.
Contractual Obligations and Other Commitments
Ranpak has leased production facilities in Reno, Nevada; Kansas City, Missouri; and Raleigh, North Carolina in the United States and in Nyrany, Czech Republic, as well as several leased sales and administrative offices. The leases for the four leased production facilities expire in September 2023, July 2025, December 2024 and April 2026, respectively. Ranpak recognizes rent expense on a straight-line basis over the relevant lease period.
Ranpak has various contractual obligations and commercial commitments that are recorded as liabilities in its audited consolidated financial statements. Other items, such as purchase obligations and other executory contracts, are not recognized as liabilities, but are required to be disclosed. The table below presents Ranpak’s significant enforceable and legally binding obligations and future commitments as of December 31, 2020.
Ranpak does not have any other material contractually binding obligations to make cash payments. While Ranpak enters into agreements, generally annually, to fix the supplier price for the purchase of paper raw materials, none of these agreements provide for minimum purchase volumes.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Ranpak did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies
The accounting principles followed by Ranpak and the methods of applying these principles are in accordance with U.S. GAAP, which often require the judgment of management in the selection and application of certain accounting principles and methods. Ranpak considers the following accounting policies to be critical to understanding its financial statements because the application of these policies requires significant judgment on the part of management, which could have a material impact on Ranpak’s financial statements. The following accounting policies include estimates that require management’s subjective or complex judgments about the effects of matters that are inherently uncertain. For information on Ranpak’s significant accounting policies, including the policies discussed below, see Note 2, “Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report.
Revenue Recognition. Revenue from contracts with customers is recognized using a five-step model consisting of the following: (i) identify the contract with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the Company satisfies a performance obligation. Performance obligations are satisfied when the Company transfers control of a good or service to a customer, which can occur over time or at a point in time. The amount of revenue recognized is based on the consideration to which the Company expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services, including the expected value of variable consideration. The customer’s ability and intent to pay the transaction price is assessed in determining whether a contract exists with the customer. If collectability of substantially all of the consideration in a contract is not probable, consideration received is not recognized as revenue unless the consideration is nonrefundable and the Company no longer has an obligation to transfer additional goods or services to the customer or collectability becomes probable.
The Company sells its products to end-users primarily through an established distributor network and direct sales to select end-users. The Company’s protective packaging solutions fall into four broad categories: Void-Fill, Cushioning, Wrapping, and End-of-Line Automation. The Void-Fill protective systems convert paper to fill empty spaces in secondary packages and protect objects. The Cushioning protective systems convert paper into cushioning pads. The Wrapping protective systems create pads or paper mesh to securely wrap and protect fragile items as well as to line boxes and provide separation when shipping multiple objects.
Sales taxes collected from customers and remitted to governmental authorities are accounted for on a net basis and therefore are excluded from net revenue on the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Charges for rebates and other allowances are recognized as a deduction from revenue on an accrual basis in the period in which the associated revenue is recorded. When we estimate our rebate accruals, we consider customer-specific contractual commitments including stated rebate rates and history of actual rebates paid. Our rebate accruals are reviewed at each reporting period and adjusted to reflect data available at that time. We adjust the accruals to reflect any differences between estimated and actual amounts. These adjustments impact the amount of net revenue recognized by us in the period of adjustment. Charges for rebates and other allowances were approximately 10.9%, 11.3%, and 11.3% of revenue in 2020, Successor Period and the 1H 2019 Predecessor Period, respectively. Refer to Note 8, “Revenue Recognition, Contracts with Customers,” of the Notes to consolidated financial statements for further discussion of revenue.
The Company recognizes incremental costs to fulfill a contract as an asset if such incremental costs are expected to be recovered, relate directly to a contract or anticipated contract, and generate or enhance resources that will be used to satisfy performance obligations in the future.
The Company recognizes incremental costs to obtain a contract as an expense when incurred if the amortization period of the asset that otherwise would have been recognized is one year or less. For example, the Company generally expenses sales commissions when incurred because the contract term is less than one year. These costs are recorded within sales and marketing expenses.
Goodwill and Identifiable Intangible Assets, net. Goodwill represents the excess of the total purchase consideration over the fair value of the underlying net assets, largely arising from the assembled workforce, new customers and the replacement of customer and technology attrition. Goodwill is not subject to amortization but is tested for impairment annually as of October 1, through a qualitative or quantitative assessment and when events and circumstances indicate that the estimated fair value of a reporting unit may no longer exceed its carrying value. If the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess, limited to the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
Identifiable intangible assets consist primarily of patents, customer/distributor relationships, and trademarks. We amortize finite lived identifiable assets over the shorter of their stated or statutory duration or their estimated useful lives, generally ranging from 10 to 15 years, on a straight-line basis and periodically review them for impairment. Trademarks are accounted for as indefinite-lived intangible assets and, accordingly, are not subject to amortization.
We use the acquisition method of accounting for all business combinations and do not amortize goodwill or intangible assets with indefinite useful lives. Goodwill and intangible assets with indefinite useful lives are tested for possible impairment annually during the fourth quarter of each fiscal year or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. See Note 9, “Goodwill, Long-Lived and Identifiable Intangible Assets, net” of the Notes to consolidated financial statements for further details.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets. The Company reviews its long-lived assets, including finite-lived intangible assets and property, plant, and equipment, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. For long-lived assets, except goodwill, an impairment loss is indicated when the undiscounted future cash flows estimated to be generated by the asset group are not sufficient to recover the unamortized balance of the asset group. If indicators exist, the loss is measured as the excess of carrying value over the asset groups’ fair value, as determined based on discounted future cash flows, asset appraisals or market values of similar assets.
See Note 5, “Property, Plant and Equipment” of the Notes to consolidated financial statements for further details.
Derivative Financial Instruments. The Company uses derivatives as part of the normal business operations to manage its exposure to fluctuations in interest rates associated with variable interest rate debt. The Company has established policies and procedures that govern the risk management of these exposures. The primary objective in managing these exposures is to decrease the volatility of cash flows affected by changes in interest rates.
We use interest rate swap contracts to manage interest rate exposures. Derivatives are recorded in the Consolidated Balance Sheets at fair value. Changes in the fair value of derivatives designated as cash flow hedges are recorded in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), and subsequently reclassified into earnings in the period the hedged forecasted transaction affects earnings. If a derivative is deemed to be ineffective, the change in fair value of the derivative is recognized directly in earnings. The changes in the fair values of derivatives not designated as hedges are recognized directly in earnings, as a component of interest expense. Prior to September 25, 2019, the Company did not apply hedge accounting to its outstanding interest rate swap, and changes in fair value were recorded directly to interest expense.
See Note 12, “Derivative Instruments,” of the Notes to consolidated financial statements for further details.
Income Taxes. The Company accounts for income taxes under the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements. Under this method, the Company determines deferred tax assets and liabilities on the basis of the differences between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities by using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. The effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
The Company recognizes deferred tax assets to the extent that we believe that these assets are more likely than not to be realized. In making such a determination, management considers all available positive and negative evidence, including future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable income, tax-planning strategies, and results of recent operations. If we determine that we would be able to realize our deferred tax assets in the future in excess of their net recorded amount, we would make an adjustment to the deferred tax asset valuation allowance, which would reduce the provision for income taxes.
The Company records uncertain tax positions in accordance with ASC Topic 740, Income Taxes (“ASC 740”) on the basis of a two-step process in which (i) we determine whether it is more likely than not that the tax positions will be sustained on the basis of the technical merits of the position and (ii) for those tax positions that meet the more-likely than-not recognition threshold, we recognize the largest amount of tax benefit that is more than 50 percent likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement with the related tax authority.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
For recently issued and adopted accounting pronouncements, see Note 2, “Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report.