Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Introduction
The following discussion is intended to provide investors with an understanding of our financial condition and results of our operations and should be read in conjunction with our historical Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes. Unless the context otherwise requires, references to “we,” “us,” “our,” and “PAGP” are intended to mean the business and operations of PAGP and its consolidated subsidiaries.
Our discussion and analysis includes the following:
•Executive Summary
•Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
•Recent Accounting Pronouncements
•Results of Operations
•Liquidity and Capital Resources
A comparative discussion of our 2019 to 2018 operating results and performance measures can be found in Item 7. “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Results of Operations” included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 filed with the SEC on February 27, 2020.
Executive Summary
Company Overview
We are a Delaware limited partnership formed in 2013 that has elected to be taxed as a corporation for United States federal income tax purposes. As of December 31, 2020, our sole cash-generating assets consisted of (i) a 100% managing member interest in GP LLC, an entity that has also elected to be taxed as a corporation for United States federal income tax purposes and (ii) an approximate 79% limited partner interest in AAP through our direct ownership of approximately 193.1 million AAP units and indirect ownership of approximately 1.0 million AAP units through GP LLC. GP LLC is a Delaware limited liability company that also holds the non-economic general partner interest in AAP. AAP is a Delaware limited partnership that, as of December 31, 2020, directly owned a limited partner interest in PAA through its ownership of approximately 245.8 million PAA common units (approximately 31% PAA’s total outstanding common units and Series A preferred units combined). AAP is the sole member of PAA GP, a Delaware limited liability company that directly holds the non-economic general partner interest in PAA.
PAA’s business model integrates large-scale supply aggregation capabilities with the ownership and operation of critical midstream infrastructure systems that connect major producing regions to key demand centers and export terminals. As one of the largest midstream service providers in North America, PAA owns an extensive network of pipeline transportation, terminalling, storage and gathering assets in key crude oil and NGL producing basins (including the Permian Basin) and transportation corridors and at major market hubs in the United States and Canada. PAA’s assets and the services it provides are primarily focused on crude oil, NGL and natural gas. PAA’s business activities are conducted through three operating segments: Transportation, Facilities and Supply and Logistics. See “-Results of Operations-Analysis of Operating Segments” for further discussion.
Recent Events and Outlook
During the first quarter of 2020, COVID-19 escalated into a global pandemic, which led to widespread shelter-in-place or similar requirements throughout North America and across the world, resulting in significantly reduced energy demand. As a result, North American producers responded aggressively by shutting in significant levels of production early in the second quarter, which mitigated the pace of crude oil inventory builds and the risk of testing storage maximums. Subsequently, United States refinery utilization increased, the previously steep contango market structure tempered, and crude oil prices improved to more constructive levels. Over the course of the second half of the year, the more constructive price environment allowed oil and gas producers to return to production wells that were previously shut-in, resume completion activities and begin to increase drilling activities during the third quarter at a level that is lower than pre-pandemic, but likely at a level that is sufficient to offset natural declines.
While prices have rebounded to levels that are near pre-pandemic levels, drilling activity is at a fraction of pre-pandemic levels as evidenced by the Lower 48 rig count, which is approximately 40% of peak levels reached in 2020 pre-COVID-19. Many oil and gas producers in the United States have publicly stated their intention to reduce capital investment in oil and gas drilling activities in 2021 as they strive to improve their financial metrics and increase returns to shareholders. Accordingly, we expect oil and gas drilling activities to continue to be lower than pre-pandemic levels which in turn will slow the growth in oil production, relative to pre-pandemic expectations of production growth. We expect that the combination of a muted growth in production, with excess pipeline capacity in most of our operating areas will have a negative impact on our business relative to pre-pandemic levels, with the impacts in 2021 being more pronounced than in 2020.
Similar to the actions taken by oil and gas producers, we have implemented a number of initiatives, as described below, to ensure that we are positioned to manage through the current challenging market environment. Longer term, we expect global demand for hydrocarbons will recover, which should drive higher production levels in key onshore shale basins, which should support growing demand for our assets. Also see Items 1. and 2. “Business and Properties-Global Petroleum Market Overview and Fundamental Themes” for additional information.
Our response to the challenging near-term market conditions has been to focus on measures to strengthen our balance sheet, liquidity and long-term financial flexibility. These actions include significantly reducing our capital program, reducing the amount of our common equity distributions, progressing asset sales, and reducing costs, while remaining focused on operating safely and responsibly.
Specifically, since April, we have reduced our 2020/2021 capital program by $950 million, or 41%, and have decreased PAA’s common unit distributions and our Class A share distributions by 50% versus the distributions paid in February 2020, which reflects a reduction of $525 million on an annualized basis. We have also completed approximately $450 million of asset sales. While each of these actions should contribute to a stronger balance sheet and enhanced liquidity and long-term financial flexibility, we can provide no assurance that we will be able to effect certain future actions (such as additional capital reductions, asset sales and expense reductions) and additional actions may be necessary to achieve our balance sheet, liquidity and financial security objectives. See “Risk Factors-Risks Related to PAA’s Business” in Item 1A.
While some modifications in our operations have been necessary to deal with risks associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, we have not experienced any material constraints in our ability to continue our essential business functions and have not incurred any significant additional operating costs as a result of the pandemic. We remain focused on the health and safety of our workforce, and have modified our operations in ways that we believe are prudent and appropriate in order to protect our employees while continuing to operate our assets in an effective, safe and responsible manner.
In addition, many governments have enacted or are contemplating measures to provide aid and economic stimulus in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. These measures include actions by both the United States federal government and the government of Canada. There has been no material direct impact to our financial position, results of operations or cash flows resulting from these measures. However, our Canadian subsidiary participated in a wage subsidy program during the second, third and fourth quarters of 2020 for subsidies totaling approximately $23 million. The impact of such subsidies is included in the line items “Field operating costs” and “Segment general and administrative expenses” of the applicable segments. See “-Results of Operations-Analysis of Operating Segments” for further discussion.
Overview of Operating Results, Capital Investments and Other Significant Activities
The macroeconomic and industry specific challenges discussed above have resulted in a number of impairment charges recognized during 2020 as discussed further below. See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources” for additional discussion of the expected and potential impact of COVID-19 and related market conditions on our business.
We recognized a net loss of $2.440 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to net income of $2.062 billion recognized for the year ended December 31, 2019. The net loss for the period was driven by goodwill impairment losses of $2.515 billion and was also impacted by non-cash impairment charges of approximately $914 million related to the write-down of certain pipeline and other long-lived assets, certain of our investments in unconsolidated entities, and assets upon classification as held for sale. In addition, we recognized approximately $233 million of inventory valuation adjustments due to declines in commodity prices primarily during the first quarter of 2020.
Our results for the comparative period were also impacted by:
•Less favorable results from our Supply and Logistics segment due to less favorable crude oil differentials, lower NGL margins and the unfavorable impact of the mark-to-market of certain derivative instruments, resulting in higher losses recognized in 2020 compared to 2019, partially offset by the favorable impact of contango market conditions during 2020;
•Less favorable results from our Transportation segment driven by lower volumes from shut-ins of crude oil production, reduced drilling and completion activity and compressed regional basis differentials, a portion of which are covered by minimum volume commitments that will be made up or paid for in future periods, and lower pipeline loss allowance revenue in 2020 due to lower prices and volumes, partially offset by lower field operating costs;
•Higher depreciation and amortization expense in the 2020 period primarily due to additional depreciation expense associated with acquired assets, the completion of various investment capital projects and a reduction in the useful lives of certain assets;
•A gain of $21 million recognized in the current period related to the sale of a portion of our interest in Saddlehorn Pipeline Company, LLC in February 2020, compared to a non-cash gain of $269 million recognized in the 2019 period related to a fair value adjustment resulting from the accounting for the contribution of our undivided joint interest in the Capline pipeline system for an equity interest in Capline Pipeline Company LLC; partially offset by
•Favorable results from our Facilities segment primarily due to lower field operating costs; and
•The favorable impact on income tax expense of (i) lower income attributable to PAGP as a result of lower earnings at PAA and (ii) lower taxable earnings and lower year-over-year income as impacted by fluctuations in the derivative mark-to-market valuations in our Canadian operations.
See further discussion of our operating results in the “-Results of Operations-Analysis of Operating Segments” and “-Other Income and Expenses” sections below.
We invested $921 million in midstream infrastructure projects during 2020, which primarily related to projects under development in the Permian Basin. See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Investing Activities-Investment Capital Projects” for additional information. Additionally, during the first quarter of 2020, we acquired $310 million of assets, which primarily included a crude oil gathering system located in the Delaware Basin.
We also paid approximately $863 million of cash distributions to our Class A Shareholders and noncontrolling interests during 2020.
In June 2020, PAA completed the issuance of $750 million, 3.80% senior notes due September 2030. We used the net proceeds from this offering of $742 million, after deducting the underwriting discount and offering expenses, to repay the principal amounts of PAA’s 5.00% senior notes due February 2021 in November 2020. See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Financing Activities-Senior Notes” for additional information.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, PAA repurchased 6.6 million common units for $53 million, which includes repurchases of 350,000 common units for $3 million that did not settle until January 2021. See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Financing Activities-Common Equity Repurchase Program” for additional information.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP and rules and regulations of the SEC requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, as well as the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities, at the date of the financial statements. Such estimates and assumptions also affect the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Although we believe these estimates are reasonable, actual results could differ from these estimates. On a regular basis, we evaluate our assumptions, judgments and estimates. We also discuss our critical accounting policies and estimates with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors.
We believe that the assumptions, judgments and estimates involved in the accounting for our (i) estimated fair value of assets and liabilities acquired and identification of associated goodwill and intangible assets, (ii) impairment assessments of goodwill and intangible assets, (iii) fair value of derivatives, (iv) accruals and contingent liabilities, (v) property and equipment, depreciation and amortization expense and asset retirement obligations, (vi) impairment assessments of property and equipment and investments in unconsolidated entities and (vii) inventory valuations have the greatest potential impact on our Consolidated Financial Statements. These areas are key components of our results of operations and are based on complex rules which require us to make judgments and estimates. Therefore, we consider these to be our critical accounting policies and estimates, which are discussed further as follows. For further information on all of our significant accounting policies, see Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Fair Value of Assets and Liabilities Acquired and Identification of Associated Goodwill and Intangible Assets. In accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) guidance regarding business combinations, with each acquisition, we allocate the cost of the acquired entity to the assets and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values at the date of acquisition. If the initial accounting for the business combination is incomplete when the combination occurs, an estimate will be recorded. We also expense the transaction costs as incurred in connection with each acquisition, except for acquisitions of equity method investments. In addition, we are required to recognize intangible assets separately from goodwill.
Determining the fair value of assets and liabilities acquired, as well as intangible assets that relate to such items as customer relationships, acreage dedications and other contracts, involves professional judgment and is ultimately based on acquisition models and management’s assessment of the value of the assets acquired and, to the extent available, third-party assessments.
Impairment Assessments of Goodwill and Intangible Assets. Goodwill and intangible assets with indefinite lives are not amortized but are instead periodically assessed for impairment. Intangible assets with finite lives are amortized over their estimated useful life as determined by management. See Note 8 and Note 10 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of goodwill and intangible assets.
Impairment testing entails estimating future net cash flows relating to the business, based on management’s estimate of future revenues, future cash flows and market conditions including pricing, demand, competition, operating costs and other factors. Uncertainties associated with these estimates include changes in production decline rates, production interruptions, fluctuations in refinery capacity or product slates, economic obsolescence factors in the area and potential future sources of cash flow. In addition, changes in our weighted average cost of capital from our estimates could have a significant impact on fair value. We cannot provide assurance that actual amounts will not vary significantly from estimated amounts. Resolutions of these uncertainties have resulted, and in the future may result, in impairments that impact our results of operations and financial condition.
Fair Value of Derivatives. The fair value of a derivative at a particular period end does not reflect the end results of a particular transaction, and will most likely not reflect the gain or loss at the conclusion of a transaction. We reflect estimates for these items based on our internal records and information from third parties. We have commodity derivatives, interest rate derivatives and foreign currency derivatives that are accounted for as assets and liabilities at fair value on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. The valuations of our derivatives that are exchange traded are based on market prices on the applicable exchange on the last day of the period. For our derivatives that are not exchange traded, the estimates we use are based on indicative broker quotations or an internal valuation model. Our valuation models utilize market observable inputs such as price, volatility, correlation and other factors and may not be reflective of the price at which they can be settled due to the lack of a liquid market. Less than 1% of total annual revenues are based on estimates derived from internal valuation models.
We also have embedded derivatives that are recorded at fair value on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. These embedded derivatives are valued using models that contain inputs, some of which involve management judgment.
Although the resolution of the uncertainties involved in these estimates has not historically had a material impact on our results of operations or financial condition, we cannot provide assurance that actual amounts will not vary significantly from estimated amounts. See