Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) summarizes the significant factors affecting the consolidated operating results, financial condition, liquidity and capital resources of Paya Holdings Inc. and is intended to help the reader understand Paya Holdings Inc., our operations and our present business environment. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements and notes to those statements included in Part II, Item 8 within this Annual Report on Form 10-K. References to “we,” “us,” “our”, “Paya”, “Paya Holdings”, or “the Company” refer to Paya Holdings Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries.
Overview
We are a leading independent integrated payments platform providing card, ACH, and check payment processing solutions via software to middle-market businesses in the United States. Our solutions integrate with customers’ core business software to enable payments acceptance, reconcile invoice detail, and post payment information to their core accounting system. In this manner, we enable our customers to collect revenue from their B2C and B2B customers with a seamless experience and high-level of security across payment types.
Recent Developments
On October 16, 2020, we completed the previously announced business combination with FinTech Acquisition Corp III and completed the transition to becoming a publicly traded company. Our common stock began trading on the Nasdaq Capital Market on October 19, 2020.
During October 2020, we completed the previously announced acquisition of The Payment Group (“TPG”). We plan to integrate TPG’s online billing and software applications into Paya Connect. This will enhance our suite of integration tools, as well as the commerce solutions Paya Connect is able to provide to Paya’s partners and their clients.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic and subsequent shelter-in-place and social distancing policies, as well as the broader economic decline, had a material impact on our business in 2020. Many of our customers experienced a decline in transaction volumes from pre COVID-19 levels. However, given many of our customers leverage our payment technology to accept transactions in a card-not-present environment, their business operations were not impacted dramatically. Further, most of our recurring or contractual transactions are B2B and not tied to consumer discretionary spend and, as such, were not significantly impacted. This was evident by stable or growing volumes in our B2B Goods & Services, Government & Utilities, and Non-Profit verticals. Lastly, we benefited from our lack of concentration in end markets which saw steep declines, such as restaurants, travel, hospitality, and brick-and-mortar retail.
In response to these developments, we took precautionary measures to ensure the safety of our employees, support our customers, and mitigate the impact on our financial position and operations. We seamlessly implemented remote working capabilities for our entire organization with minimal disruption to our operations or key operating performance indicators. We also identified opportunistic expense reductions which increased operating efficiencies and provided additional profitability in the period.
While our business was impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, we have demonstrated resilience due to our portfolio of attractive, less-cyclical end markets. The impact that COVID-19 will have on our consolidated results of operations in 2021 remains uncertain. While we have not seen a meaningful degradation in new customer enrollment or an increase in existing customer attrition as a result of COVID-19, it is possible that those business trends change if economic hardship across the country forces new or additional business closures or other detrimental actions. We will continue to evaluate the nature and extent of these potential impacts to our business, consolidated results of operations, and liquidity.
Factors Affecting Results of Operations
Factors impacting our business, results of operations, and forecasts
A number of factors impact our business, results of operations, financial condition, and forecasts, including, but not limited to, the following:
•Increased adoption of integrated payments solutions. We generate revenue through volume-based rates and per item fees attributable to payment transactions between our customers and their customers. We expect to grow our customer base by bringing on new software partners, continuing to sell payment capabilities to customers of our existing software partners not yet leveraging our payment integrations, and by adding integrations within existing multi-platform software partners to access additional customer bases. Further, we expect to benefit from the natural growth of our partners who are typically growing franchises within their respective verticals.
•Acquisition, retention, and growth of software partnerships. Paya leverages a partner-first distribution network to grow our client base and payment volume. Continuing to innovate and deliver new commerce products and wraparound services is critical to our ability to attract, retain, and grow relationships with software partners in our Paya verticals and adjacent markets.
•Growth in customer life-time value. We benefit from, and aid-in, the growth of online electronic payment transactions to our customers. This is dependent on the sales growth of the customers’ businesses, the overall adoption of online payment methods by their customer bases, and the adoption of our additional integrated payment modules such as our proprietary ACH capabilities. Leveraging these solutions helps drive increased customer retention, as well as higher volume and revenue per customer.
•Pursuit and integration of strategic acquisitions. We look to opportunistically make strategic acquisitions to enhance our scale, expand into new verticals, add product capabilities, and embed payments in vertical software. These acquisitions are intended to increase the long-term growth of the business, while helping us achieve greater scale, but may increase operating expenses in the short-term until full synergies are realized.
•Economic conditions. Changes in macro-level consumer spending trends, including those related to COVID-19, could affect the amount of volumes processed on our platform, thus resulting in fluctuations to our revenue streams.
Key Components of Revenue and Expenses
The period to period comparisons of our results of operations have been prepared using the historical periods included in our consolidated financial statements. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this document.
Revenue
The Company’s business model provides payment services, credit and debit card processing, and ACH processing to customers through enterprise or vertically focused software partners, direct sales, reseller partners, other referral partners, and a limited number of financial institutions. The Company recognizes processing revenues at the time customer transactions are processed and periodic fees over the period the service is performed. Transaction based revenue represents revenue generated from transaction fees based on volume and are recognized on a net basis. Service based fee revenue is generated from charging a service fee, a fee charged to the client for facilitating bankcard processing, which are recognized on a gross basis.
Cost of services
Cost of services includes card processing costs, ACH costs, other fees paid to card networks, and equipment expenses directly attributable to payment processing and related services to customers. These costs are recognized as incurred. Cost of services also includes revenue share amounts paid to reseller and referral partners and are calculated monthly based on monthly customer activity. These expenses are recognized as transactions are
processed. Accrued revenue share represents amounts earned during the month but not yet paid at the end of the period.
Selling general & administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries, wages, commissions, marketing costs, professional services costs, technology costs, occupancy costs of leased space, and bad debt expense. Stock based compensation expense is also included in this category.
Depreciation & Amortization
Depreciation and amortization consist primarily of amortization of intangible assets, including customer relationships, internally developed software, acquired customer lists, trade names, and to a lesser extent, depreciation on our investments in property, equipment, and software. We depreciate and amortize our assets on a straight-line basis. These lives are 3 years for computers and equipment and acquired internal-use software, 5 years for furniture, fixtures, and office equipment, and the lesser of the asset useful life or remaining lease term for leasehold improvements. Repair and maintenance costs are expensed as incurred and included in selling, general and administrative expenses on the consolidated statements of income and other comprehensive income. Customer lists are amortized over a period of 5-15 years depending on the intangible, developed technology 3-5 years, and trade names over 25 years.
Results of Operations
The period to period comparisons of our results of operations have been prepared using the historical periods included in our audited consolidated financial statements. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this document.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
Revenue increased by $2.6, or 1.3%, to $206.0 for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $203.4 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was driven by the Integrated Solutions segment, increasing $2.5 or 2.1%. The increase in Integrated Solutions revenue was driven primarily by increased volume from both new and existing customers.
Cost of services exclusive of depreciation and amortization
Cost of services increased by $0.5 or 0.5%, to $102.1 for year ended December 31, 2020 from $101.6 for the year ended December 31, 2019. In addition, these expenses decreased as a percentage of revenue by 0.4% driven by lower revenue share expense as a percentage of revenue offset by higher third-party processing costs.
Selling, general & administrative
Selling, general, & administrative expenses decreased by $6.9, or 9.9%, to $63.0 for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $69.9 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is primarily due to lower transaction related expenses of $2.3, in addition to $2.0 lower restructuring costs, $2.2 lower employee compensation expense and $1.5 in lower travel related expenses compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was offset by a $1.0 increase in technology related costs, specifically hosting, and a $0.9 increase in business combination costs.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization increased by $2.2, or 9.8%, to $24.6 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $22.4 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is primarily attributable to capitalized internally developed software being placed in service along with increased acquisitions of customer lists in 2020.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased by $2.5, or 12.4%, to $17.6 for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $20.1 for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to lower LIBOR based interest rates on the Revolver and Term Loan credit facilities.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income was $1.2 for the year ended December 31, 2020 and other expense was $(0.8) for the year ended December 31, 2019. The change period over period is primarily attributable to a $1.2 gain on the value of the tax receivable agreement liability in 2020 and to the write-off of liabilities related to contingent consideration from the acquisition of First Billing Services in 2019.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
For discussion of the comparison of our operating results for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, please read section entitled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” included in our Current Report on Form S-1 filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on November 10, 2020 and is incorporated herein by reference.
Key performance indicators and non-GAAP Financial Measures
Our management uses a variety of financial and operating metrics to evaluate our business, analyze our performance, and make strategic decisions. We believe these metrics and non-GAAP financial measures provide useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results in the same manner as management. However, these measures are not financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP and should not be considered as substitutes for financial measures that have been calculated in accordance with GAAP. We primarily review the following key performance indicators and non-GAAP measures when assessing our performance:
Revenue
We analyze our revenues by comparing actual revenues to our internal projections for a given period and to prior periods to assess our performance. We believe that revenues are a meaningful indicator of the demand and pricing
for our services. Key drivers to change in revenues are primarily by the dollar volume, basis point spread earned, and number of transactions processed in a given period.
Payment Volume
Payment volume is defined as the total dollar amount of all payments processed by our customers through our services. Volumes for the years ended December 31 are shown in the table below:
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure that represents earnings before interest and other expense, income taxes, depreciation, and amortization, or EBITDA and further adjustments to EBITDA to exclude certain non-cash items and other non-recurring items that we believes are not indicative of ongoing operations to come to Adjusted EBITDA.
We disclose EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, and Adjusted Net Income in this document because these non-GAAP measures are key measures used by us to evaluate our business, measure our operating performance and make strategic decisions. We believe EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, and Adjusted Net Income are useful for investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operations results in the same manner as us. However, EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, and Adjusted Net Income are not financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP and should not be considered as a substitute for net income, income before income taxes, or any other operating performance measure calculated in accordance with GAAP. Using these non-GAAP financial measures to analyze our business would have material limitations because the calculations are based on the subjective determination of management regarding the nature and classification of events and circumstances that investors may find significant. In addition, although other companies in our industry may report measures titled EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income or similar measures, such non-GAAP financial measures may be calculated differently from how we calculate non-GAAP financial measures, which reduces their overall usefulness as comparative measures. Because of these limitations, you should consider EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, and Adjusted Net Income alongside other financial performance measures, including net income and our other financial results presented in accordance with GAAP. The following table presents a reconciliation of net income to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for each of the periods indicated:
Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
(a)Represents professional service fees related to mergers and acquisitions such as legal fees, consulting fees, accounting advisory fees, and other costs.
(b)Represents non-cash charges associated with stock-based compensation expense, which has been, and will continue to be for the foreseeable future, a significant recurring expense in our business and an important part of our compensation strategy
(c)Costs associated with restructuring plans designed to streamline operations and reduce costs including costs associated with the relocation of headquarters from Reston, VA to Atlanta, GA and certain staff restructuring charges, including severance.
(d)Represents costs incurred to retire certain tools, applications and services that are no longer in use.
(e)Represents advisory fees that we will not be required to pay going forward. See notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this document for more information about these related party transactions.
(f)Expenses related to carving out the entity from former corporate owner Sage PLC including rebranding, technology implementation, consulting and transitional service agreement expenses.
(g)Represents business combination costs.
(h)Represents non-operational gains or losses, non-standard project expense, non-operational legal expense and other.
Adjusted Net Income
Adjusted Net Income is a non-GAAP financial measure that represents net income prior to amortization and further adjustments to exclude certain non-cash items and other non-recurring items that management believes are not indicative of ongoing operations to come to Adjusted Net Income.
Adjusted Net Income for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
(a)Represents professional service fees related to mergers and acquisitions such as legal fees, consulting fees, accounting advisory fees, and other costs.
(b)Represents non-cash charges associated with stock-based compensation expense, which has been, and will continue to be for the foreseeable future, a significant recurring expense in our business and an important part of our compensation strategy.
(c)Costs associated with restructuring plans designed to streamline operations and reduce costs including costs associated with the relocation of headquarters from Reston, VA to Atlanta, GA and certain staff restructuring charges, including severance.
(d)Represents costs incurred to retire certain tools, applications and services that are no longer in use.
(e)Represents advisory fees that we will not be required to pay going forward. See notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this document for more information about these related party transactions.
(f)Expenses related to carving out the entity from former Corporate owner Sage PLC including rebranding, technology implementation, consulting and transitional service agreement expenses.
(g)Represents business combination costs.
(h)Represents non-operational gains or losses, non-standard project expense, non-operational legal expense and other.
Segments
We provide our services through two reportable segments 1) Integrated Solutions and 2) Payment Services. The Company’s reportable segments are the same as the operating segments.
More information about our two reportable segments:
•Integrated Solutions - Our Integrated Solutions segment represents the delivery of our credit and debit card payment solutions, and to a lesser extent, ACH processing solutions to customers via integrations with software partners across our strategic vertical markets. Our Integrated Solutions partners include vertical focused front-end Customer Relationship Management software providers as well as back-end Enterprise Resource Planning and accounting solutions.
•Payment Services - Our Payment Services segment represents the delivery of card payment processing solutions to our customers through resellers, as well as ACH, check, and gift card processing. Card payment processing solutions in this segment do not originate via a software integration but still utilize Paya’s core technology infrastructure. ACH, check, and gift card processing may or may not be integrated with third-party software.
All segment revenue is from external customers.
The following table shows our segment income statement data and selected performance measures for the periods indicated:
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
(1)Segment gross profit is revenue less cost of services excluding depreciation and amortization
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Integrated Solutions
Revenue for the Integrated Solutions segment was $122.3 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $119.8 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $2.5 was due to an increase in payment volume.
Gross profit for the Integrated Solutions segment was $65.3 resulting in a gross profit margin of 53.4% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $62.7 with a gross profit margin of 52.3% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $2.6, or 1.1% improvement in segment gross profit margin, was due to revenue growth and a decrease in revenue share due to a mix shift towards lower revenue share partners, partially offset by higher transaction related processing costs.
Payment Services
Revenue for the Payment Services segment was $83.7 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $83.6 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Gross profit for the Payment Services segment was $38.7 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $39.1 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease of $0.4, or 0.6% decline in segment gross profit margin was due to lower card revenue and an increase in revenue share due to a mix shift to higher revenue share partners, partially offset by higher ACH revenue.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018
(1)Segment gross profit is revenue less cost of services excluding depreciation and amortization
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
For discussion of the comparison of our operating results for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, please read section entitled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” included in our Current Report on Form S-1 filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on November 10, 2020 and is incorporated herein by reference.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
We have historically sourced our liquidity requirements primarily with cash flow from operations and, when needed, with borrowings under our Credit Facilities. We have historically sourced our acquisitions with cash flow from operations, and when needed, with capital infusions from Ultra and borrowings under our Credit Facilities. As of December 31, 2020, we had $23.6 of cash and cash equivalents on hand and borrowing capacity of $25.0 from our revolving Credit Facility.
The following tables present a summary of cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the following comparative periods.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities decreased $2.6 to $21.3 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $23.9 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in operating cash in 2020 was partially driven by payments for professional services in preparation for the business combination and additional payments in the fourth quarter for additional costs as a public company.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities increased $25.0 to $33.1 in the year ended December 31, 2020 from $8.1 in the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to cash paid for the purchase of The Payment Group of $19.9 net of cash received of $2.3. We used $6.6 for capital expenditures and capitalization of internal use software along with $6.6 for the purchase of customer lists in the year ended December 31, 2020. In the year ended December 31, 2019 we used $5.2 for capital expenditures and capitalization of internal use software and $2.5 for customer lists.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities increased $13.5 to a provided by of $9.5 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to cash used by financing activities of $4.0 in the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily due to capital contributions from Ultra of $12.2 in addition to $3.1 received from the Business Combination to fund transaction related costs, offset by $2.9 paid for debt issuance costs related to the Credit Agreement amendment in July 2020.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
For discussion of the comparison of our operating results for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, please read section entitled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” included in our Current Report on Form S-1 filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on November 10, 2020 and is incorporated herein by reference.
Indebtedness
On August 1, 2017, Paya, Inc., as borrower, and certain affiliates thereof entered into a credit agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) under which Paya, Inc. obtained a $150.5 term loan facility (the “Term Loan”) and a $25.0 revolving credit facility (the “Revolver”).
In December 2018, Paya, Inc. amended the Credit Agreement, and Ultra III, a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company, thereby assumed all of Paya, Inc.’s rights and obligations as “Borrower” under the Credit Agreement and related documents. Additionally, as part of the amendment, the Company incurred incremental debt, increasing the Term Loan by $85.0.
The Company makes quarterly amortization payments on the Term Loan. As of December 31, 2020, $228.7 remains outstanding under the Term Loan.
The Company’s senior secured first lien net leverage ratio, calculated pursuant to the definitions in the Credit Agreement, was 3.86x on December 31, 2020. The maximum ratio permitted by the financial covenant in the Credit Agreement is 7.25x for December 31, 2020.
On July 24, 2020, the Company amended the Credit Agreement to, among other things, extend the maturity of the Revolver to July 24, 2025 and the maturity of the Term Loan to August 1, 2027.
Contractual Obligations
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into various contractual obligations for varying terms and amounts. The following table sets forth our contractual obligations and commitments for the periods indicated as of December 31, 2020:
(1)Reflects contractual principal payments. The Term Loan was amended on July 24, 2020, which extended the maturity from August 1, 2024 to August 1, 2027.
(2)Reflects minimum interest payable under the Term Loan. In July 2018, the interest rate was reduced to LIBOR (with a floor of 1.00%) plus a margin of 5.25% and remained unchanged at December 31, 2020. Due to historical fluctuations in the LIBOR rate, we have assumed a LIBOR rate of 1.00% for purposes of calculating interest payable on the Term Loan. Payments herein are subject to change as payments for variable rate debt have been estimated.
(3)We lease certain property and equipment for various periods under non-cancelable operating leases.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
During the periods presented, we did not engage in any off-balance sheet financing activities other than those reflected in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this 10-K.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our historical financial condition and results of operations for the periods described is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. For a discussion of the significant accounting policies and estimates that we use in the preparation of our audited consolidated financial statements, refer to Note 1 of the notes to our audited consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 within this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The preparation of these historical financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates, assumptions and judgments in certain circumstances that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and contingencies as of the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting periods. We evaluate our assumptions and estimates on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates may change as new events occur or additional information is obtained, and we may periodically be faced with uncertainties, the outcomes of which are not within its control and may not be known for a prolonged period of time. Because the use of estimates is inherent in the financial reporting process, actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Additionally, the full impact of COVID-19 is unknown and cannot be reasonably estimated.
The following critical accounting discussion pertains to accounting policies we believe are most critical to the portrayal of our historical financial condition and results of operations and that require significant, difficult, subjective or complex judgments.
Revenue Recognition
Application of the accounting principles in U.S. GAAP related to the measurement and recognition of revenue requires us to make judgments and estimates. Complex arrangements with nonstandard terms and conditions may require significant contract interpretation to determine the appropriate accounting. Specifically, the determination of whether we are a principal to a transaction, or an agent, can require considerable judgment. We have concluded that we are the agent in providing merchants access to credit card networks as we are performing this service on behalf of the principal, the card companies. In addition, we are not primarily responsible for fulfilling this promise to the customer, do not bear risk or take possession of funds to be paid to issuing banks for interchange fees, and do not have discretion in setting the price for interchange fees charged by the card companies. For all other aspects of our services provided to merchants, we determined we are the principal as we control the service being provided before transfer to the customer. Additionally, our payment processing services consist of variable consideration under a stand-ready service of distinct days of service that are substantially the same with the same pattern of transfer to the customer. The variable consideration is as a result of the number or volume of transactions to be processed.
We determined to use each day as a time-based measure of progress toward satisfaction of the single performance obligation of each contract. We determined this method most accurately depicts the pattern by which services are transferred to the merchant, as performance depends on the extent of transactions processed for that merchant on a given day. Likewise, consideration to which we expect to be entitled is determined according to our efforts to provide service each day. Changes in judgments with respect to these assumptions and estimates could impact the amount of revenue recognized.
Business Combinations
Upon acquisition of a company, we determine if the transaction is a business combination, which is accounted for using the acquisition method of accounting. Under the acquisition method, once control is obtained of a business, the assets acquired, and liabilities assumed, including amounts attributed to noncontrolling interests, are recorded at fair value. We use our best estimates and assumptions to assign fair value to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date. One of the most significant estimates relates to the determination of the fair value of these assets and liabilities. The determination of the fair values is based on estimates and judgments made by management. Our estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions we believe to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. Measurement period adjustments are reflected at the time identified, up through the conclusion of the measurement period, which is the time at which all information for determination of the values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed is received and is not to exceed one year from the acquisition date. We may record adjustments to the fair value of these tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill.
Additionally, uncertain tax positions and tax-related valuation allowances are initially recorded in connection with a business combination as of the acquisition date. We continue to collect information and reevaluate these estimates and assumptions periodically and record any adjustments to preliminary estimates to goodwill, provided we are within the measurement period. If outside of the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to the consolidated statement of income and other comprehensive income.
Income Taxes
Under ASC 740, “Income Taxes,” deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences attributable to net operating losses, tax credits, and temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, which will result in taxable or deductible amounts in the future. Our income tax expense/benefit, deferred tax assets and tax receivable liability reflect management’s best assessment of estimated current and future taxes. Significant judgments and estimates are required in determining the consolidated income tax expense/benefits, deferred tax assets and tax receivable agreement liability. In evaluating our ability to recover our deferred tax assets, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including projected future taxable income and results of recent operations. Estimating future taxable income is inherently uncertain, requires judgment and is consistent with estimates we are using to manage our business. If we determine in the future that we will not be able to fully utilize all or part of the
deferred tax assets, we would record a valuation allowance through earnings in the period the determination was made.
Principles of Consolidation
Refer to Note 1 of the notes to our audited consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 within this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of principles of consolidation.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
Refer to Note 1 of the notes to our audited consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 within this Annual Report on Form 10-K for our assessment of recently issued and adopted accounting standards.