Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations reviews the operating results of Paychex, Inc. and its wholly owned subsidiaries (“Paychex,” the “Company,” “we,” “our,” or “us”) for our fiscal year ended May 31, 2021 (“fiscal 2021” or the “fiscal year”), as compared to our fiscal year ended May 31, 2020 (“fiscal 2020”), and our financial condition as of May 31, 2021. A detailed review of our fiscal 2020 performance compared to our fiscal year ended May 31, 2019 performance and our financial condition as of May 31, 2020 is set forth in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K (“Form 10-K”) for fiscal 2020. This review should be read in conjunction with the accompanying consolidated financial statements and the related Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K and the “Risk Factors” discussed in Item 1A of this Form 10-K. Forward-looking statements in this review are qualified by the cautionary statement under the heading “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” contained at the beginning of Part I of this Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a leading human resource (“HR”) software and services company, offering HR, payroll, benefits, and insurance services for small- to medium-sized businesses. Within our human capital management (“HCM”) solutions, we offer a comprehensive portfolio of services and products that allow our clients to meet their diverse HR and payroll needs.
We support our small-business clients, reducing the complexity and risk of running their own payroll, while ensuring greater accuracy with up-to-date tax rates and regulatory information. Clients may choose to have our service team handle everything for them, or process payroll themselves utilizing our proprietary, robust software-as-a-service (“SaaS”) Paychex Flex® platform and our SurePayroll® SaaS-based products. Our medium-sized clients generally have more complex payroll and employee benefit needs, though with the environment of increasing regulations, we believe the need for HR outsourcing services has been moving down-market. Any of our clients on Paychex Flex can opt for the integrated suite of HCM solutions, which allows clients to choose the services and software that will meet the needs of their business.
Our portfolio of HCM and employee benefit-related services is disaggregated into two categories, (1) Management Solutions and (2) Professional Employer Organization (“PEO”) and Insurance Solutions, as discussed in Part 1, Item 1 of this Form 10-K.
Our mission is to be the leading provider of HR, payroll, benefits, and insurance solutions by being an essential partner to small- and medium-sized businesses across the United States (“U.S.”) and parts of Europe. We believe that success in this mission will lead to strong, long-term financial performance. Our strategy focuses on providing industry-leading, integrated technology; increasing client satisfaction; expanding our leadership in HR; growing our client base; and engaging in strategic acquisitions.
We continue to focus on driving growth in the number of clients, revenue per client, total revenue, and profits, while providing industry-leading service and technology solutions to our clients and their employees. We maintain industry-leading margins by managing our personnel costs and expenses while continuing to invest in our business, particularly in sales and marketing and leading-edge technology. We believe these investments are critical to our success. Looking to the future, we believe that investing in our products, people, and service capabilities will position us to capitalize on opportunities for long-term growth.
A key component of our service delivery strategy is to be a proactive partner with our clients and to develop and release integrated solutions within Paychex Flex to meet their current and future needs. Our ongoing investments in our platforms have prepared us well for the demands of the current business and regulatory environments, allowing us to adapt while maintaining strong service delivery, resulting in high levels of client satisfaction and retention.
Fiscal 2021 Business Highlights
Highlights compared to fiscal 2020 are as follows:
(1)Adjusted net income and adjusted diluted earnings per share are not U.S. generally accepted accounting principle (“GAAP”) measures. Refer to the “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” section of this Item 7 for a discussion of non-GAAP measures and a reconciliation to the U.S. GAAP measures of net income and diluted earnings per share.
(2)Dividends paid to stockholders represented approximately 83% of net income for fiscal 2021 compared to approximately 81% of net income for fiscal 2020.
(3)Percentage changes are calculated based on unrounded numbers.
For further analysis of our results of operations for fiscal years 2021 and 2020, and our financial position as of May 31, 2021, refer to the tables and analysis in the “Results of Operations” and “Liquidity and Capital Resources” sections of this Item 7.
Business Outlook
Our payroll and PEO client base was greater than 710,000 and 680,000 clients as of May 31, 2021 and May 31, 2020, respectively. Client retention was at record levels of approximately 85% of the beginning client base for fiscal 2021, compared to over 83% for fiscal 2020.
While our HR product offerings provide services to employers and employees beyond payroll, they effectively leverage payroll processing data. These services are included as part of the integrated HCM solution within Paychex Flex or provided through the PEO platform. The following table illustrates the growth in selected HR product offerings:
(1)Percentage changes are calculated based on unrounded numbers.
We continue to make investments in technology a priority as companies look to leverage technology solutions to maintain operations, stay connected to employees, and increase productivity. In fiscal 2021, we enhanced our solutions to support businesses as they navigate the federal stimulus programs and engage in digital transformation. We have continued to evolve our products to help business leaders find, hire, and retain employees quickly and effectively with an eye on driving engagement and managing labor costs. Our fiscal 2021 technology and solution developments provide a unique combination of data, technology, and service designed to meet the evolving needs of employers and employees, and include:
Portfolio of Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) tools, which include the ability for employers to easily navigate the complexities of the PPP and Employee Retention Tax Credit (“ERTC”). This portfolio contains resources to help small businesses navigate complex regulations and evaluate business decisions during this challenging time as well as tools for PPP loan applications, including access to small business loan providers, and signature-ready PPP loan forgiveness applications. We have continued to update these tools in near real-time throughout the COVID-19 pandemic in response to changes in regulations.
Employee health and safety offerings, including a COVID-19 leave tracking tool to identify employee-submitted issues, a COVID-19 screening tool to give employers a way to initiate employee COVID-19 screenings and track test results within a single platform, and health attestation solutions which enable employers to customize and
digitally distribute a health attestation form to employees daily, securely store responses in real-time, and view advanced analytics for individuals or the entire workforce.
Digital communication solutions, including Paychex Flex HR Connect and HR Conversations, which helps strengthen connections and keep workers engaged no matter their work location. Paychex Flex HR Connect provides the ability to digitally submit questions, requests, and incidents directly to HR through an easy-to-use workflow. HR Conversations enables managers, employees, and HR staff to initiate communications with employees and enhancements to performance assessments allow for 360-degree feedback digitally within the tool.
Pooled Employer Plan, which provides business owners with a plan option that relieves the compliance and administration burdens of a traditional 401(k) plan, giving their employees access to a retirement plan benefit and allowing them to prepare for their future.
Clover® Integration, which streamlines payroll and time and attendance management for business owners using the popular Clover platform from Fiserv. With Paychex Flex available in the Clover App Market, business owners can more efficiently manage the essential tasks of payroll, staffing, time tracking, and scheduling all within a single application to help save time, increase accuracy, and reduce cost.
Paychex Flex Labor Cost Hub, which gives customers and CPAs a holistic, real-time view of total payroll labor job costing and labor distribution in one place, enabling them to see how much they are spending on a significant operational expense - their workforce.
Enhanced Onboarding Self-Service experience, which simplifies the user experience for entering and reviewing new-hire information and includes the ability to invite employees to complete onboarding and documentation digitally.
Enhancements to data analytics and Live Reports throughout the Platform. For example, the Diversity and Equal Pay Live Report builds upon a recently released Equal Employment Opportunity-1 compliance solution and gives administrators the ability to analyze their pay and diversity data via a simple, customizable report. With improved access to this critical data, businesses are better positioned to uncover opportunities to create a more diverse and equitable workforce, while also meeting compliance requirements.
PEO Protection Plus Package reduces risks for business owners by offering insurance coverage related to cyberattacks and employee lawsuits. By offering both Cyber Liability and Employment Practices Liability Insurance coverage as part of our PEO solution, and by leveraging the group plan model of our PEO, the coverage is significantly more affordable to businesses.
We continue to strengthen our position in the industry by serving as a source of education and information to clients, businesses of all sizes, and other interested parties. We provide free webinars, white papers, and other information on our website to aid existing and prospective clients with the impact of regulatory changes. The Paychex Insurance Agency, Inc. website, www.paychex.com/group-health-insurance, helps small-business owners navigate the area of insurance coverage. Both this website and www.paychex.com/worx have sections dedicated to the topic of health care reform.
COVID-19 Update
As the global COVID-19 pandemic has continued to evolve, our priority has been, and continues to be, the health and safety of our employees. A portion of our workforce that initially transitioned to work remotely has voluntarily returned to the office. As vaccination levels continue to increase and masking and social distancing guidelines further relax, we look forward to welcoming more of our employees back to their office locations. We currently anticipate a general return to the office in September 2021, with a greater level of flexibility in response to the feedback our employees have shared with us.
As our clients continue to manage through the COVID-19 pandemic, we remain committed to helping them adapt and thrive, not only through the uncertainties of the COVID-19 pandemic, but the transition to the future business environment. We have brought a multifaceted response to the pandemic and delivered resources and services to help our clients respond and adapt. The COVID-19 Help Center on our website continues to provide support throughout every stage of the pandemic. Since the Help Center’s launch in March 2020, it has been viewed by over a half million visitors. On June 5, 2020, the PPP Flexibility Act was signed into law, relaxing the original requirements for how businesses could use PPP loans and continue to qualify for forgiveness. Within days of the bill passing, we introduced a PPP Loan Forgiveness Estimator and Forgiveness Report in our cloud-based HR suite, Paychex Flex, to simplify the application process for customers and provide them the accurate information needed to satisfy the new forgiveness requirements. As of May 31, 2021, Paychex customers have secured $65 billion in PPP relief funds and $2.5 billion in combined employee retention tax credits and paid leave credits. As the global economy continues
to evolve, whether due to legislative changes, the pandemic, or other factors, we are committed to supporting our clients to help them navigate these challenges. Our blend of technology and service provides valuable tools and resources to assist our clients and their employees during this critical time and beyond.
The effects of the COVID-19 pandemic impacted our results and year-over-year comparisons, however, our client base continued to grow with sales performance and client retention that was at record levels. Our strong balance sheet and operational flexibility have allowed us to successfully manage through the ongoing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic to date while protecting our cash flow and liquidity. In addition, during the first half of this fiscal year, we substantially completed cost-saving initiatives, including an acceleration of our long-term strategy to reduce our geographic footprint and headcount optimization. We ended this year with strong momentum having navigated through a fiscal year of unprecedented challenge and the uncertain environment of the COVID-19 pandemic. We are well-positioned with a broad portfolio of innovative technology and products along with our unparalleled expertise to meet the continuing needs of businesses and help them succeed and thrive as they begin to bring employees back to work and adjust to the changes of how, where, and when work gets done.
We continue to evaluate the nature and extent of changes to the market and economic conditions related to the COVID-19 pandemic and will assess the potential impact on our business and financial position. Despite improving macroeconomic conditions and the emergence of vaccines, surges in COVID-19 cases, including variants of the strain, such as those recently experienced in Europe and the U.S., may cause people to self-quarantine or governments to shut down nonessential businesses again. We expect that the pandemic will continue to have an effect on our results, although the magnitude, duration, and full effects of the pandemic on our future results of operations or cash flows are not possible to predict at this time.
For further information on the risks posed to our business from the COVID-19 pandemic, refer to Item 1A of this Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
Summary of Results of Operations for Fiscal Years:
(1)Percentage changes are calculated based on unrounded numbers.
n/m - not meaningful
The changes in revenue as compared to the prior year period were primarily driven by the following factors:
Management Solutions revenue: $3.0 billion for fiscal 2021, reflecting an increase of 2%:
oPayroll client base growth of approximately 4%, due to solid sales performance and record client retention, and
‎
oIncreased penetration of our suite of solutions, including HR Solutions, Retirement Services, and Time and Attendance, and growth in ancillary products and services due to higher transaction volumes, offset by
oDecline in check volumes experienced during the first three quarters of our fiscal year from an overall reduction in the number of clients processing payrolls due to lower employment levels during the pandemic.
PEO and Insurance Solutions revenue: $974.1 million for fiscal 2021, reflecting a decrease of 2%:
oDecrease in the number of worksite employees at our clients in the first three quarters, offset by growth in the fourth quarter, and
oLower workers’ compensation premiums driven by reduced wages and softening of market rates, offset by
oIncrease in the number of health and benefit clients.
Interest on funds held for clients: $59.3 million for fiscal 2021, reflecting a decrease of 32%:
oLower average interest rates, due to historically low federal funds rates, and
oLower realized gains, which primarily resulted from our decision to strategically reposition our client fund portfolio at the end of fiscal 2020 to enhance liquidity in response to the economic uncertainties caused by COVID-19.
oAverage investment balances were consistent.
We invest in highly liquid, investment-grade fixed income securities and do not utilize derivative instruments to manage interest rate risk. As of May 31, 2021, we had no exposure to high-risk or non-liquid investments. Details regarding our combined funds held for clients and corporate cash equivalents and investment portfolios are as follows:
(1)The net unrealized gain on our investment portfolios was approximately $77.4 million as of July 14, 2021.
(2)The Federal Funds rate was in the range of 0.00% to 0.25% as of both May 31, 2021 and May 31, 2020.
(3)These items exclude the impact of variable rate demand notes (“VRDNs”), as they are tied to short-term interest rates.
Refer to the “Market Risk Factors” section contained in