ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF
OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition and operating results should be read in conjunction with our risk factors, consolidated financial statements and related notes. This discussion includes forward-looking statements based on management's current expectations, estimates and projections and involves risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ significantly from those currently expressed. A detailed discussion of risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results and events to differ materially from such forward-looking statements is outlined under "Forward-Looking Statements" and "Item 1A. Risk Factors" in this Form 10-K. All table amounts are presented in thousands of dollars.
Throughout this discussion, we may refer to revenue growth on a constant currency basis. Constant currency measures exclude the impact of changes in currency exchange rates from the prior period under comparison. We believe that excluding the impacts of currency exchange rates provides investors a better understanding of the underlying revenue performance. Constant currency change is calculated by converting the current period non-U.S. dollar denominated revenue using the prior year’s exchange rate. Where constant currency measures are not provided, the actual change and constant currency change are the same.
Management measures segment profitability and performance using segment earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT). Segment EBIT is calculated by deducting from segment revenue the related costs and expenses attributable to the segment. Segment EBIT excludes interest, taxes, general corporate expenses, restructuring charges, asset impairment charges, goodwill impairment charges and other items not allocated to a business segment. Management believes that it provides investors a useful measure of operating performance and underlying trends of the business. Segment EBIT may not be indicative of our overall consolidated performance and therefore, should be read in conjunction with our consolidated results of operations.
Overview
Financial Results Summary - Twelve Months Ended December 31:
Revenue increased 11% in 2020 compared to 2019, driven by a 28% increase in business services revenue, primarily due to significantly higher volumes in our Global Ecommerce segment. This growth more than offset declines in all other revenue line items driven in part from the continuing impacts of COVID-19. Within our business segments, Global Ecommerce revenue grew 41% due to increased domestic parcel delivery and cross-border volumes, Presort Services revenue declined 2% due to lower First Class Mail and Marketing Mail volumes and SendTech Solutions revenue declined 7%, primarily due to lower equipment sales and supplies revenue. Global Ecommerce EBIT decreased 18% and Presort Services EBIT decreased 21% from the prior year primarily driven by higher labor and transportation costs caused by increased demand and competition for these resources and increased costs and reduced productivity due to COVID-19. SendTech Solutions EBIT declined 10% primarily due to lower revenue and higher credit loss provisions. Prior year segment EBIT was adversely impacted by $19 million related to a ransomware attack and current year segment EBIT includes $13 million of insurance proceeds related to this attack. Refer to Results of Operations section for further information.
Impacts of COVID-19
The global spread of COVID-19 and the efforts to contain it are adversely affecting global economies, impacting demand for a broad variety of goods and services and creating disruptions and shortages in supply chains. We implemented measures in our facilities to protect the health and safety of our employees and contractors, including staggering shifts and breaks to enhance social distancing, providing personal protection equipment, conducting temperature checks and sanitizing equipment and facilities multiple times a day. Employees that have the ability to work remotely are doing so and corporate and local management continue to assess conditions to determine when, and how, these employees should return to their office locations.
COVID-19 has impacted our financial results in different ways in each of our businesses. Global Ecommerce has seen a significant increase in volumes due to the demand for ecommerce solutions in the current environment. However, this increase in volumes has resulted in higher postal costs driven by capacity constraints and higher labor and transportation costs as many companies are competing for these resources. At the start of the pandemic, Presort Services experienced a significant decline in both First Class and Marketing Mail. However, while volumes for the full year 2020 were down from the prior year, we did see quarter over quarter improvement throughout the year. Presort Services was also impacted by higher labor costs. As a result of the health and safety measures implemented in all our Commerce Services facilities, we also incurred additional costs and reduced productivity.
In SendTech Solutions, the global shut-down of businesses and increase in the number of clients working remotely at the onset of COVID-19 had a significantly adverse impact on demand for and usage of our mailing equipment and supplies, and our ability to perform on-site service and installations. We saw improving trends in equipment sales and supplies revenues quarter over quarter throughout 2020. As businesses continue to operate remotely, we are also seeing improvement in our cloud-enabled shipping and mailing solutions.
Outlook
We continue to position ourselves for long-term success as a global technology company focused on shipping, mailing and related financial services. We are investing in market opportunities and new solutions and services across all our businesses, optimizing our operations and implementing cost savings initiatives to drive long-term value. Our portfolio is shifting to higher growth markets and we expect margins to improve as we build scale and realize the full benefits of our investments and optimizations.
Within Global Ecommerce, we expect the accelerated market growth of ecommerce brought on by COVID-19 to continue and anticipate revenue growth in 2021. We expect margin and profit improvements in 2021 from pricing initiatives and operational improvements within our facilities and network designed to drive efficiencies and increased productivity. Within Presort Services, we expect the improving volume trends in the second half of 2020 to continue throughout 2021 through organic volume growth and acquisitions. Margins are expected to improve in 2021 from productivity initiatives, increased automation and facilities consolidation and optimization. Within SendTech Solutions, we expect recurring revenue streams to continue to decline, but growth in our cloud-
enabled shipping solutions and sales of our multi-purpose devices to partially offset these declines. On a consolidated basis, we expect modest revenue growth in 2021 compared to 2020.
The COVID-19 pandemic is expected to continue to impact our business, operations and financial performance. Given the unpredictability of the severity, magnitude and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic, including various governments’ responses to the pandemic, its effect on the global economy, and the efficacy and availability of a vaccine, the ultimate impact of the pandemic on our business, operations and financial performance remains uncertain. Accordingly, there are many factors not within our control that could affect the pandemic's ultimate impact on our business and current outlook for 2021. However, we believe we are well positioned to manage through the current conditions and will continue to take proactive steps to manage our cash flows and liquidity.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
REVENUE AND SEGMENT EBIT
Global Ecommerce
Global Ecommerce includes the revenue and related expenses from domestic parcel services, cross-border solutions and digital delivery services.
Global Ecommerce revenue increased 41% in 2020 due to significantly higher volumes primarily attributable to a market shift to ecommerce solutions brought on by COVID-19. Domestic parcel delivery volumes contributed revenue growth of 36% and increased cross-border volumes contributed revenue growth of 5%.
Gross margin decreased to 8.5% from 14.1% in the prior year due primarily to increased postal, transportation and labor costs resulting from capacity restraints and increased competition for transportation and labor resources due to the accelerated and sudden market growth in ecommerce solutions, investments to support this growth and incremental COVID-19 related costs.
Segment EBIT in 2020 was a loss of $83 million compared to a loss of $70 million in 2019 primarily due to the decline in gross margin, which reduced EBIT by $30 million, partially offset by lower operating expenses of $5 million. Prior year segment EBIT was adversely impacted by $6 million as a result of a ransomware attack and current year segment EBIT benefited from $6 million in net insurance proceeds received related to this attack.
Presort Services
Presort Services includes revenue and related expenses from sortation services to qualify large volumes of First Class Mail, Marketing Mail, Marketing Mail Flats and Bound Printed Matter for postal worksharing discounts.
Presort Services revenue decreased 2% in 2020 compared to 2019 due to lower volumes of First Class Mail and Marketing Mail, driven primarily by COVID-19. Incremental volumes from acquisitions during the year contributed revenue growth of 3%.
Gross margin declined to 22.8% from 25.8% due to higher labor costs and incremental costs associated with COVID-19. Segment EBIT declined 21% in 2020. Prior year segment EBIT was adversely impacted by $4 million as a result of a ransomware attack and current year segment EBIT benefited from $4 million of insurance proceeds received related to this attack.
SendTech Solutions
SendTech Solutions includes the revenue and related expenses from physical and digital mailing and shipping technology solutions, financing, services, supplies and other applications to help simplify and save on the sending, tracking and receiving of letters, parcels and flats.
SendTech Solutions revenue decreased 7% in 2020 compared to 2019. Supplies and equipment sales decreased 15% and 11%, respectively, as the effects of COVID-19 hindered our ability to perform on-site sales calls and installations and reduced usage and demand for supplies. Rentals and support services revenue decreased 8% and 7% at constant currency, respectively, primarily driven by a declining meter population and reduced service calls from COVID-19. Financing revenue decreased 7%, primarily driven by a declining lease portfolio and was partially offset by $10 million of gains from the sale of investment securities. Business services revenue increased $21 million, or 75% at constant currency, primarily due to an increased use of our shipping products.
Gross margin in 2020 was 63.2% compared to 64.7% in 2019. The slight decrease in gross margin was primarily due to the decline in revenue as well as the mix of equipment sales due in part to delays in scheduling and performing on-site installations of our higher end products.
We allocate a portion of our total cost of borrowing to financing interest expense. In computing financing interest expense, we assume an 8:1 debt to equity leverage ratio and apply our overall effective interest rate to the average outstanding finance receivables.
Segment EBIT decreased 10% in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to the decline in revenue and higher credit loss provision of $10 million due to the current economic recessionary conditions and outlook caused by COVID-19, partially offset by lower expenses of $47 million from cost savings initiatives, including lower professional fees of $14 million, lower marketing expenses of $11 million, lower research and development costs of $9 million and lower travel expenses of $4 million. Prior year segment EBIT was adversely impacted by $8 million as a result of a ransomware attack and current year segment EBIT benefited from $3 million of insurance proceeds received related to this attack.
UNALLOCATED CORPORATE EXPENSES
The majority of our SG&A expense is recorded directly or allocated to our reportable segments. Those expenses not recorded directly or allocated to our reportable segments are reported as unallocated corporate expenses. Unallocated corporate expenses primarily represents corporate administrative functions such as finance, marketing, human resources, legal, information technology and innovation.
The decline in unallocated corporate expenses of $11 million in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily driven by lower employee-related expenses of $15 million, lower professional fees of $6 million and insurance proceeds of $4 million received in connection with a ransomware attack partially offset by an increase in marketing expenses of $8 million.
CONSOLIDATED EXPENSES
Selling, general and administrative (SG&A)
SG&A expense of $963 million in 2020 decreased 4%, or $41 million, compared to 2019, primarily due to lower professional and consulting fees of $19 million, lower employee-related expenses of $12 million and lower travel related expenses of $11 million partially offset by higher credit loss provision of $14 million.
Research and development (R&D)
R&D expense decreased 25%, or $13 million in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to lower project spending and cost savings initiatives.
Restructuring charges and asset impairments
Restructuring charges and asset impairments for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $21 million. See Note 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Goodwill impairment
We recorded a non-cash, pre-tax goodwill impairment charge of $198 million associated with our Global Ecommerce reporting unit in the first quarter of 2020. See Note 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Other components of net pension and postretirement (income) cost
Other components of net pension and postretirement income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $2 million. The amount of other components of net pension and postretirement (income) cost recognized each year will vary based on actuarial assumptions and actual results of our pension plans. See Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Other expense, net
Other expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 includes a $37 million loss on the early extinguishment of debt, partially offset by $17 million of insurance proceeds and a $12 million gain on the sale of an equity investment.
INCOME TAXES AND DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS
Income taxes
The effective tax rate for 2020 includes a $12 million charge for the surrender of company owned life insurance policies, a $5 million benefit for the correction of tax balances in certain domestic and international tax jurisdictions, a $3 million benefit due to regulations enacted into law, a $2 million benefit for the carryback of net operating losses resulting from the CARES Act and a benefit of $2 million on the $198 million goodwill impairment charge as the majority of this charge is nondeductible. See Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Income from discontinued operations, net of tax
Discontinued operations includes the Software Solutions business sold in December 2019, with the exception of the software business in Australia, which closed in January 2020, and the Production Mail business sold in July 2018. Income from discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily includes the net gain on the sale of the Australia software business. See Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
At December 31, 2020 we had cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments of $940 million, which includes $202 million held at our foreign subsidiaries used to support the liquidity needs of those subsidiaries. Our ability to maintain adequate liquidity for our operations is dependent upon a number of factors, including our revenue and earnings, our clients ability to pay their balances on a timely basis, the length and severity of COVID-19 and its impact on macroeconomic conditions and our ability to take further cost savings and cash conservation measures if necessary. At this time, we believe that existing cash and investments, cash generated from operations and borrowing capacity under our $500 million revolving credit facility will be sufficient to fund our cash needs for the next 12 months.
Cash Flow Summary
The change in cash and cash equivalents is as follows:
Operating activities
Cash provided by operating activities of $302 million in 2020 increased $34 million compared to 2019. Cash flows from continuing operations increased $81 million over the prior year to $340 million primarily driven by the timing of working capital. This was partially offset by a decrease in cash flows from discontinued operations of $47 million primarily due to the settlement of taxes related to the gain on the sale of our Software Solutions business in 2020.
Investing activities
Cash of $76 million was used in investing activities in 2020 compared to cash provided by investing activities of $458 million in 2019. Cash flow from investing activities in 2019 includes $670 million from discontinued operations, primarily from proceeds of the sale of the Software Solutions business. Cash used in investing activities of continuing operations was $73 million compared to $213 million in 2019. The improvement was due to lower capital expenditures of $32 million due to the prioritization and delay of certain investments in light of COVID-19 and $58 million in proceeds from the surrender of company-owned life insurance policies ($46 million) and the sale of an equity investment ($12 million).
Financing activities
Cash used in financing activities was $235 million in 2020 compared to $670 million in 2019. The improvement in cash flow was primarily due to lower net debt repayments of $351 million and lower stock repurchases of $105 million, partially offset by $28 million of higher premium payments and fees associated with the early extinguishment of debt.
Debt and Capitalization
In February 2020, we secured a five-year $850 million term loan maturing January 2025 (the 2025 Term Loan). The 2025 Term Loan bears interest at LIBOR plus 5.5% and resets monthly. We have interest rate swap agreements with an aggregate notional amount of $500 million to mitigate the interest rate risk associated with $500 million of our variable-rate term loans. Under the terms of the swap agreements, we pay fixed-rate interest of 0.4443% and receive variable-rate interest based on one-month LIBOR. The variable interest rate under the term loans and the swaps reset monthly.
In March 2020, we purchased under a tender offer $428 million of the October 2021 notes, $250 million of the May 2022 notes, $125 million of the April 2023 notes and $125 million of the March 2024 notes. A $37 million loss was incurred on the early redemption of debt.
During 2020, we repaid $52 million of principal related to our term loans in accordance with the terms of these loans. In 2021, $63 million of our term loans is scheduled to mature.
We have a $500 million secured revolving credit facility that expires in November 2024 (the Credit Facility). The Credit Facility requires that we maintain a Consolidated Adjusted Total Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Facility agreement) and a Consolidated Adjusted Interest Coverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Facility agreement), and comply with certain other nonfinancial covenants. Compliance with covenants is determined at the end of each fiscal quarter. In the event of noncompliance with any of the covenants, borrowings under the Credit Facility, the 2024 Term Loan and the 2025 Term Loan (collectively, the Facilities) may be accelerated (subject to grace periods, as appropriate). For more information on our financial covenants refer to our exhibits. At December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all covenants. In April 2020, we borrowed $100 million under the Credit Faciltiy and repaid this amount in September 2020. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, there were no outstanding borrowings under the Credit Facility.
Borrowings under the Facilities are secured by substantially all company assets and the assets of certain of our domestic subsidiaries, subject to customary exclusions and limitations set forth in the Credit Facility agreement and other executed loan documents. The Credit Facility agreement contains representations and warranties and affirmative and negative covenants that are usual and customary, including negative covenants that, among other things, limit our ability to incur additional debt, incur or permit liens on assets, make investments and acquisitions, consolidate or merge with any other company, engage in asset sales and make dividends and distributions.
Interest rates on certain notes are subject to adjustment based on changes in our credit ratings. As a result of credit rating downgrades in November 2019 and May 2020, the interest rates on the October 2021 notes and April 2023 notes increased 0.25% in the fourth quarter of 2020. On February 10, 2021, Standard and Poor's downgraded our credit rating and the credit ratings of our secured and unsecured debt. As a result, the interest rates on the May 2022 notes and April 2023 notes will increase 0.25% after their next interest payment date. Further, on February 17, 2021, we announced that on February 22, 2021, we will redeem the October 2021 notes.
Interest rates on secured borrowings under the Facilities are determined based on LIBOR, which is expected to be phased out after 2021. At this time, no consensus exists as to what rate or rates will become accepted alternatives to LIBOR. Our credit documents include language to address the transition from LIBOR to an alternative rate; however, there are still many uncertainties about this transition and no assurances can be given that the transition to an alternate rate will not increase our cost of debt.
We have a total of $2.1 billion of debt maturing within the next five years. We fully expect to be able to fund these maturities with cash or by refinancing through the U.S. capital markets. However, our ability to access the U.S. capital markets is dependent upon our credit ratings and is subject to capital market volatility. Given our current credit rating, we may experience reduced flexibility and higher costs when we access the U.S. capital markets.
Each quarter, our Board of Directors considers our recent and projected earnings and other capital needs and priorities in deciding whether to approve a dividend. There are no material restrictions on our ability to declare dividends. We expect to continue to pay a quarterly dividend; however, no assurances can be given.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our known contractual obligations at December 31, 2020 and the effect that such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flow in future periods (in millions):
(1)Assumes interest rates in effect at December 31, 2020 and that all debt is held to maturity.
(2)Includes unrecorded agreements to purchase goods and services that are enforceable and legally binding upon us and that specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the transaction. Purchase obligations exclude agreements that are cancelable without penalty.
(3)Represents the contributions we anticipate making to our pension plans during 2021. This amount is subject to change as we assess our funding alternatives throughout the year.
(4)Our retiree health benefit plans are unfunded plans and cash contributions are made to cover medical claims. The amounts reported in the above table represent our estimate of future payments.
The amount and period of future payments related to our income tax uncertainties cannot be reliably estimated and are not included in the above table. See Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further details.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December, 31, 2020, we had approximately $37 million outstanding in letters of credit guarantees with financial institutions that are primarily issued as security for insurance, leases, customs and other performance obligations. In general, we would only be liable for the amount of these guarantees in the event of default in the performance of our obligations, the probability of which we believe is remote.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of our financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions about certain items that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and accompanying disclosures, including the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. The accounting policies below have been identified by management as those policies that are most critical to our financial statements due to the estimates and assumptions required. Management believes that the estimates and assumptions used are reasonable and appropriate based on the information available at the time the financial statements were prepared; however, actual results could differ from those estimates and assumptions. See Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a summary of our accounting policies.
Revenue recognition
We derive revenue from multiple sources including the sale and lease of equipment, equipment rentals, financing, support services and business services. Certain transactions are consummated at the same time and can therefore generate revenue from multiple sources. The most common form of these arrangements involve a sale or noncancelable lease of equipment, meter services and an equipment maintenance agreement. We are required to determine whether each product and service within the contract should be treated as a separate performance obligation (unit of accounting) for revenue recognition purposes. We recognize revenue for performance obligations when control is transferred to the customer. Transfer of control may occur at a point in time or over time, depending on the nature of the contract and the performance obligation.
Revenue is allocated among performance obligations based on relative standalone selling prices (SSP), which are a range of selling prices that we would sell the good or service to a customer on a separate basis. SSP are established for each performance obligation at the inception of the contract and can be observable prices or estimated. Revenue is allocated to the meter service and equipment maintenance agreement elements using their respective observable selling prices charged in standalone and renewal transactions. For sale and lease transactions, the SSP of the equipment is based on a range of observable selling prices in standalone transactions. We recognize revenue on non-lease transactions when control of the equipment transfers to the customer, which is upon delivery for customer installable models and upon installation or customer acceptance for other models. We recognize revenue on equipment for lease transactions upon shipment for customer installable models and upon installation or customer acceptance for other models.
Impairment review
Goodwill is tested annually for impairment at the reporting unit level during the fourth quarter or sooner if circumstances indicate an impairment may exist. The impairment test for goodwill determines the fair value of each reporting unit and compares it to the reporting unit's carrying value, including goodwill. If the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, an impairment loss is recognized for the difference, not to exceed the carrying amount of goodwill.
Testing goodwill for impairment requires us to identify our reporting units and assign assets and liabilities, including goodwill, to each reporting unit. The fair value of a reporting unit is based on one or a combination of techniques, which include a discounted cash flow model, multiples of competitors, and/or multiples from sales of like businesses. To determine fair value using a discounted cash flow model, management's cash flow projections include significant judgements and assumptions relating to revenue growth rates, projected operating income and discount rate. Changes in any of these estimates or assumptions could materially affect the determination of fair value and the associated goodwill impairment assessment for each reporting unit. Potential events and circumstances, such as the loss of a significant client, inability to acquire new clients, downward pressures on pricing or rising interest rates could materially impact the fair value determination of a reporting unit and potentially result in a non-cash impairment charge in future periods.
During the first quarter of 2020, the Global Ecommerce reporting unit experienced weaker than expected performance, due in part to the deteriorating macroeconomic conditions and uncertainty brought on by the COVID-19 pandemic, causing us to evaluate the Global Ecommerce goodwill for impairment. We determined that the estimated fair value of the Global Ecommerce reporting unit was less than its carrying value and recorded a non-cash, pre-tax goodwill impairment charge of $198 million. During the fourth quarter of 2020, we performed our annual goodwill impairment test to assess the recoverability of the carrying value of goodwill. As a result of the annual test, we determined that the fair value of all reporting units exceeded their carrying values and no additional impairment charges were recorded.
Long-lived and finite-lived intangible assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be fully recoverable. The estimated future undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the assets is compared to the carrying value. If the sum of the undiscounted cash flows is less than the asset's carrying value, an impairment charge is recorded for an amount by which the carrying value exceeds its fair value. The fair value of the impaired asset is determined using probability weighted expected cash flow estimates, quoted market prices when available and appraisals, as appropriate. We derive the cash flow estimates from our long-term business plans and historical experience. Changes in
the estimates and assumptions incorporated in our impairment assessment could materially affect the determination of fair value and the associated impairment charge.
Allowances for credit losses and doubtful accounts
Finance receivables are comprised of sales-type leases, secured loans and unsecured revolving loans. We provide an allowance for probable credit losses based on historical loss experience, the nature of our portfolios, adverse situations that may affect a client's ability to pay, current conditions, reasonable and supportable forecasts and current economic outlook.
Total allowance for credit losses as a percentage of finance receivables was 3% at December 31, 2020 and 2% at December 31, 2019. Holding all other assumptions constant, a 0.25% change in the allowance rate at December 31, 2020 would have reduced pre-tax income by $3 million.
Trade accounts receivable are generally due within 30 days after the invoice date. Accounts deemed uncollectible are written off against the allowance after all collection efforts have been exhausted and management deems the account to be uncollectible. We believe that our accounts receivable credit risk is low because of the geographic and industry diversification of our clients and small account balances for most of our clients.
The allowance for doubtful accounts as a percentage of trade accounts receivables was 5% at both December 31, 2020 and 2019. Holding all other assumptions constant, a 0.25% change in the allowance rate at December 31, 2020 would have reduced pre-tax income by $1 million.
Income taxes and valuation allowance
We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Our annual tax rate is based on income, statutory tax rates, tax reserve changes and tax planning opportunities available to us in the various jurisdictions in which we operate. Significant judgment is required in determining the annual tax rate and in evaluating our tax positions. We regularly assess the likelihood of tax adjustments in each of the tax jurisdictions in which we have operations and account for the related financial statement implications. We have established tax reserves that we believe are appropriate given the possibility of tax adjustments. Determining the appropriate level of tax reserves requires judgment regarding the uncertain application of tax laws. Reserves are adjusted when information becomes available or when an event occurs indicating a change in the reserve is appropriate. Changes in tax reserves could have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations.
Significant judgment is also required in determining the amount of deferred tax assets that will ultimately be realized and corresponding deferred tax asset valuation allowance. When estimating the necessary valuation allowance, we consider all available evidence for each jurisdiction including historical operating results, estimates of future taxable income and the feasibility of ongoing tax planning strategies. If new information becomes available that would alter our estimate of the amount of deferred tax assets that will ultimately be realized, we adjust the valuation allowance through income tax expense. Changes in the deferred tax asset valuation allowance could have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations.
Pension benefits
The calculation of net periodic pension expense and determination of net pension obligations are dependent on assumptions and estimates relating to, among other things, the discount rate (interest rate used to discount the future estimated liability) and the expected rate of return on plan assets. These assumptions are evaluated and updated annually.
The discount rate for our largest plan, the U.S. Qualified Pension Plan (the U.S. Plan) and our largest foreign plan, the U.K. Qualified Pension Plan (the U.K. Plan) used in the determination of net periodic pension expense for 2020 was 3.35% and 1.90%, respectively. For 2021, the discount rate used in the determination of net periodic pension expense for the U.S. Plan and the U.K. Plan will be 2.55% and 1.30%, respectively. A 0.25% change in the discount rate would not materially impact annual pension expense for the U.S. Plan or the U.K. Plan. A 0.25% change in the discount rate would impact the projected benefit obligation of the U.S. Plan and U.K. Plan by $51 million and $31 million, respectively.
The expected rate of return on plan assets used in the determination of net periodic pension expense for 2020 was 6.25% for the U.S. Plan and 5.75% for the U.K. Plan. For 2021, the expected rate of return on plan assets used in the determination of net periodic pension expense for the U.S. Plan will be 5.60% and the U.K. Plan will be 4.75%. A 0.25% change in the expected rate of return on plan assets would impact annual pension expense for the U.S. Plan by $3 million and the U.K. Plan by $1 million.
Actual pension plan results that differ from our assumptions and estimates are accumulated and amortized primarily over the life expectancy of plan participants and affect future pension expense. Net pension expense is also based on a market-related valuation of plan assets where differences between the actual and expected return on plan assets are recognized over a five-year period. Plan benefits for participants in a majority of our U.S. and foreign pension plans are frozen.
Residual value of leased assets
Equipment residual values are determined at the inception of the lease using estimates of the equipment's fair value at the end of the lease term. Residual value estimates impact the determination of whether a lease is classified as an operating lease or a sales-type lease. Fair value estimates of equipment at the end of the lease term are based on historical renewal experience, used equipment markets, competition and technological changes.
We evaluate residual values on an annual basis or sooner if circumstances warrant. Declines in estimated residual values considered "other-than-temporary" are recognized immediately. Increases in estimated future residual values are not recognized until the equipment is remarketed. If the actual residual value of leased assets were 10% lower than management's current estimates and considered "other-than-temporary", pre-tax income would be $5 million lower.
Legal and Regulatory Matters
See Regulatory Matters in Item 1, Other Tax Matters in Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for regulatory matters regarding our tax returns and Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding our legal proceedings.
Foreign Currency Exchange
The functional currency for most of our foreign operations is the local currency. Changes in the value of the U.S. dollar relative to the currencies of countries in which we operate impact our reported assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses. Exchange rate fluctuations can also impact the settlement of intercompany receivables and payables between our subsidiaries in different countries. During 2020, 12% of our consolidated revenue was from operations outside the United States and the translation of foreign currencies to the U.S. dollar did not have a material impact on revenues or operating results for the year ended December 31, 2020.