Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the notes to those financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements, which are based on our assumptions about the future of our business. Our actual results will likely differ materially from those contained in the forward-looking statements. Please read “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” included at the beginning of this annual report for additional information.
Overview
We exist for the primary purpose of advancing the commercial development of our proprietary polyamine analogue in solid tumors with an initial focus on pancreatic cancer.
We have exclusively licensed the worldwide rights to this compound, which has been designated as SBP-101, from the University of Florida Research Foundation, Inc. (“UFRF”).
In August 2015, the Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) accepted our Investigational New Drug (“IND”) application for our SBP-101 product candidate.
We have completed an initial clinical trial of SBP-101 in patients with previously treated locally advanced or metastatic pancreatic cancer. This was a Phase 1, first-in-human, dose-escalation, safety study. From January 2016 through September 2017, we enrolled twenty-nine patients into six cohorts, or groups, in the dose-escalation phase of the Phase 1 trial. No drug-related bone marrow toxicity or peripheral neuropathy was observed at any dose level. In addition to being evaluated for safety, 23 of the 29 patients were evaluable for preliminary signals of efficacy prior to or at the eight-week conclusion of their first cycle of treatment using the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (“RECIST”), the currently accepted standard for evaluating change in the size of tumors. A summary of both the safety and preliminary signals of efficacy for this completed clinical trial is contained earlier in this document under Clinical Development - Pancreatic Cancer, Phase 1 Clinical Trial Design and Completion (SBP-101 Monotherapy).
In 2018 we began enrolling patients in our second clinical trial, a Phase 1a/1b study of the safety, efficacy and pharmacokinetics of SBP-101 administered in combination with two standard-of-care chemotherapy agents, gemcitabine and nab-paclitaxel. A total of 25 subjects were enrolled in 4 cohorts to evaluate the dosage level and schedule. Preliminary results were presented in a poster at the American Society of Clinical Oncology - GI conference (“ASCO-GI”) in January 2020. The poster reflected safety and efficacy results, as of a December 31, 2019 cutoff, from evaluable patients in cohorts 2 and 3 (N=13) which showed manageable toxicity, an objective response rate of 62% and a disease control rate of 85%, with several patients still ongoing at the reporting cutoff. An additional 25 subjects were enrolled in the expansion phase of the trial. After completion of enrollment in December 2020 in the expansion phase, some serious adverse events related to vision were reported. We have held administration of our drug and continued all other trial activities as we work with FDA to understand the significance of the serious adverse events and inform future studies, including potentially implementing a visual screening program. We expect interim results from the completed trial to be available in mid-2021. Further details regarding the study design, safety and interim signals of efficacy are contained earlier in this document under Clinical Development - Pancreatic Cancer, Phase 1a/1b Clinical Trial Design and Interim Results (First Line Combination Therapy).
Additional clinical trials will be required for FDA or other country approvals if the results of the front-line clinical trial of our SBP-101 product candidate justify continued development. The cost and timing of additional clinical trials is highly dependent on the nature and size of the trials.
Financial Overview
We have incurred losses of $46.0 million since our inception in 2011. For 2020, we incurred a net loss of $4.8 million. We also incurred negative cash flows from operating activities of $3.9 million for this period. We expect to incur substantial losses, which will continue to generate negative net cash flows from operating activities, as we continue to pursue research and development activities and commercialize our SBP-101 product candidate.
Our $6.6 million increase in cash compared to December 31, 2019 was primarily due to $11.2 aggregate proceeds from equity offerings completed during 2020, offset in part by cash used in operations and repayment of debt.
In August 2020, we received a research and development tax incentive payment from the government of Australia related to the research activities of our Australian subsidiary during 2019. The incentive payment received was approximately $372,000.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $9.0 million, working capital of $8.4 million and stockholders’ equity of $8.4 million. This is expected to be sufficient to sustain operations through the first quarter of 2022.
We will need additional funds to continue our operations and execute our business plan past December 31, 2021, including, completing required future trials and pursuing regulatory approvals in the United States, the European Union and other international markets. We historically have financed our operations principally from the sale of equity securities and debt. While we have been successful in the past in obtaining the necessary capital to support our operations and we are likely to seek additional financing through similar means, there is no assurance that we will be able to obtain additional financing under commercially reasonable terms and conditions, or at all. This risk would increase if our clinical data were not positive or if economic or market conditions deteriorate.
If we are unable to obtain additional financing when needed, we would need to scale back our operations taking actions which may include, among other things, reducing use of outside professional service providers, reducing staff or staff compensation, significantly modify or delay the development of our SBP-101 product candidate, license to third parties the rights to commercialize our SBP-101 product candidate for pancreatic cancer or other applications that we would otherwise seek to pursue, or cease operations.
Key Components of Our Results of Operations
General and Administrative Expenses
Our selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries, benefits and other costs, including stock-based compensation, for our executive and administrative personnel; legal and other professional fees; travel, insurance and other corporate costs.
Research and Development Expenses
Since our inception, we have focused our activities on the development of SBP-101, our initial product candidate, for the treatment of pancreatic cancer. We expense both internal and external research and development costs as incurred. Research and development costs include expenses incurred in the conduct of our human clinical trials, for third-party service providers performing various testing and accumulating data related to our preclinical studies; sponsored research agreements; developing and scaling the manufacturing process necessary to produce sufficient amounts of the SBP-101 compound for use in our pre-clinical studies and human clinical trials; consulting resources with specialized expertise related to execution of our development plan for our SBP-101 product candidate; personnel costs, including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation; and costs to license and maintain our licensed intellectual property. During 2020 and 2019, research and development expenditures were focused primarily on costs related to the execution our current Phase 1a /1b front line clinical trial.
We cannot determine with certainty the timing of initiation, the duration or the completion costs of current or future preclinical studies and clinical trials of our product candidates. At this time, due to the inherently unpredictable nature of preclinical and clinical development, we are unable to estimate with any certainty the costs we will incur and the timelines we will require in the continued development of our initial product candidate for pancreatic cancer and our other potential pipeline programs. Clinical and preclinical development timelines, the probability of success and development costs can differ materially from expectations. Our future research and development expenses will depend on the preclinical and clinical success of each product candidate that we develop, as well as ongoing assessments of the commercial potential of such product candidates. In addition, we cannot forecast whether our current or future product candidates may be subject to future collaborations, when such arrangements will be secured, if at all, and to what degree such arrangements would affect our development plans and capital requirements.
Completion of clinical trials may take several years or more, and the length of time generally varies according to the type, complexity, novelty and intended use of a product candidate. The cost of clinical trials may vary significantly over the life of a project as a result of differences arising during clinical development, including, among others:
●
per patient trial costs;
●
the number of trials required for approval;
●
the number of sites included in the trials;
●
the length of time required to enroll suitable patients;
●
the number of doses that patients receive;
●
the number of patients that participate in the trials;
●
the drop-out or discontinuation rates of patients;
●
the duration of patient follow-up;
●
potential additional safety monitoring or other studies requested by regulatory agencies;
●
the number and complexity of analyses and tests performed during the trial;
●
the phase of development of the product candidate; and
●
the efficacy and safety profile of the product candidate.
Our expenses related to clinical trials are based on estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with multiple clinical trial sites and for contract research organizations, (“CRO”), which administer clinical trials on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation and vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. Generally, these agreements set forth the scope of work to be performed at a fixed fee or unit price. Payments under the contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of patients and the completion of clinical trial milestones. Expenses related to clinical trials generally are accrued based on contracted amounts and the achievement of milestones, such as number of patients enrolled. If timelines or contracts are modified based upon changes to the clinical trial design or scope of work to be performed, we modify our estimates of accrued expenses accordingly.
We expense costs associated with obtaining licenses for patented technologies when it is determined there is no alternative future use of the intellectual property subject to the license.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) consists of interest income, cash and non-cash interest expense and transaction gains and losses resulting from transactions denominated in other than our functional currency.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate these estimates and judgments, including those described below. We base our estimates on our historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates and assumptions form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results and experiences may differ materially from these estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements starting on page, we believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical to aid you in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results and affect the more significant judgments and estimates that we use in the preparation of our financial statements.
Stock-based Compensation
In accounting for share-based incentive awards we measure and recognize the cost of employee and non-employee services received in exchange for awards of equity instruments based on the grant date fair value of those awards. Calculating share-based compensation expense requires the input of highly subjective assumptions, which represent our best estimates and involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. Compensation cost is recognized ratably using the straight-line attribution method over the vesting period, which is considered to be the requisite service period.
The fair values of share-based awards are estimated at the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The determination of the fair value of share-based awards is affected by our stock price, as well as assumptions regarding a number of complex and subjective variables. Risk free interest rates are based upon U.S. Treasury rates appropriate for the expected term of each award. Expected volatility rates are based primarily on the volatility rates of a set of guideline companies, which consist of public and recently public biotechnology companies. The assumed dividend yield is zero, as we do not expect to declare any dividends in the foreseeable future. The expected term of options granted is determined using the “simplified” method. Under this approach, the expected term is presumed to be the mid-point between the average vesting date and the end of the contractual term.
We grant options to employees and non-employees, including our directors. Grants made to new employees are awarded on a case by case basis. Option grants to employees generally vest annually over three years from the date of grant. Options granted to our non-employee directors generally vest over one-year from the date of grant. Options granted to other non-employees generally vest over three years. Options issued to employees and non-employees generally have a maximum term of ten years.
Option grants to non-employees have been made in conjunction with their service as advisors to us. Certain of these advisors have also purchased shares of stock in our private placement offerings, but none beneficially own 5% or more of our outstanding common stock.
Research and Development Costs
We charge research and development costs, including clinical trial costs, to expense when incurred. Our human clinical trials are, and will be, performed at clinical trial sites and are administered jointly by us with assistance from CROs. Costs of setting up clinical trial sites are accrued upon execution of the study agreement. Expenses related to the performance of clinical trials generally are accrued based on contracted amounts and the achievement of agreed upon milestones, such as patient enrollment, patient follow-up, etc. We monitor levels of performance under each significant contract, including the extent of patient enrollment and other activities through communications with the clinical trial sites and CROs, and adjust the estimates, if required, on a quarterly basis so that clinical expenses reflect the actual effort expended at each clinical trial site and by each CRO.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Results of Operations (in thousands) for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
General and administrative (“G&A”) and research and development (“R&D”) expenses include non-cash stock-based compensation expense as a result of our issuance of stock options. The terms and vesting schedules for stock-based awards vary by type of grant and the employment status of the grantee. The awards granted through December 31, 2020 vest based upon time-based and performance conditions. We expect to record additional non-cash compensation expense in the future, which may be significant. The following table summarizes the stock-based compensation expense in our Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
General and administrative expense
G&A expenses increased 64.7% to $3.2 million in 2020, up from $2.0 million in 2019. The increase in G&A expenses is primarily the result of costs associated with increased headcount, including salary and non-cash stock compensation, as well as additional compensation, increased legal expenses and higher D&O insurance costs.
Research and product development expense
Our R&D expenses increased 6.6% to $2.5 million in 2020, up from $2.3 million in 2019. The increase in R&D expenses resulted primarily from an increase in spending on our clinical study. As we expand our clinical studies it is expected that R&D will continue to increase.
Other income (expense), net
Other income, net, was $0.7 million for 2020 and was composed primarily of foreign currency transaction gain. During 2020 the Company received a loan through the Paycheck Protection Program totaling approximately $103,000. The proceeds of this loan were used to assist with the payment of salaries. The loan was forgiven on December 30, 2020 and the gain on the debt forgiveness is reflected as other income.
Other expense, net, for 2019 was $2.3 million and was primarily the amortization of the debt discount on the 2018 Notes, which converted on June 30, 2019.
Income tax benefit
Income tax benefit decreased to $295,000 in 2020, down from $415,000 in 2019. Our income tax benefit is derived primarily from refundable tax incentives associated with our R&D activities conducted in Australia. The current year decrease reflects a decrease in the costs estimated to be eligible for the Australian R&D tax incentive.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table summarizes our liquidity and capital resources as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 and for each of the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, and is intended to supplement the more detailed discussion that follows (in thousands):
Working Capital
Our total cash resources were $9.0 million as of December 31, 2020, compared to $2.4 million as of December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, we had $1.4 million in current liabilities and working capital of $8.4 million. As of December 31, 2019, we had $1.8 million in current liabilities and working capital of $1.3 million. Working capital is calculated as current assets less current liabilities.
On October 4, 2020, the Company paid in full an unsecured non-interest-bearing promissory note for approximately $742,000.
Cash Flows
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $3.9 million during 2020, compared to $2.7 million during 2019. The net cash used in each of these periods primarily reflects the net loss for these periods and is partially offset by the effects of changes in operating assets and liabilities. In 2019, the net loss was offset by a non-cash charge of $2.0 million related to the amortization of the discount on convertible notes payable.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $10.4 million for 2020 which represents the net proceeds of $9.3 million from the underwritten public offering completed in September 2020 and the sales of common stock and warrants in private placements to accredited investors completed in May and June 2020 for net proceeds of $1.7 million. These proceeds were partially offset by the payment in full of approximately $742,000 of an unsecured promissory note. During 2019, net cash provided by financing activities was $3.8 million which resulted from net proceeds received in the sale of common stock and warrants and the sale of convertible promissory notes.
Capital Requirements
As we continue to pursue our operations and execute our business plan, including the completion of clinical development plan our initial product candidate, SBP-101, in pancreatic cancer, and pursuing regulatory approvals in the United States, the European Union and other international markets, we expect to continue to incur substantial and increasing losses, which will continue to generate negative net cash flows from operating activities.
Our future capital uses and requirements depend on numerous current and future factors. These factors include, but are not limited to, the following:
●
the progress of clinical trials required to support our applications for regulatory approvals, including our Phase 1a /1b clinical trial, a human clinical trial in Australia and the United States and a planned Phase 2 trial to be initiated in 2021;
●
our ability to demonstrate the safety and effectiveness of our SBP-101 product candidate;
●
our ability to obtain regulatory approval of our SBP-101 product candidate in the United States, the European Union or other international markets;
●
the cost and delays in product development that may result from changes in regulatory oversight applicable to our SBP-101 product candidate;
●
the market acceptance and level of future sales of our SBP-101 product candidate;
●
the rate of progress in establishing reimbursement arrangements with third-party payors;
●
the effect of competing technological and market developments; and
●
the costs involved in filing and prosecuting patent applications and enforcing or defending patent claims.
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any existing credit facilities under which we could borrow funds. We historically have financed our operations principally from the sale of equity securities and debt. While we have been successful in the past in obtaining the necessary capital to support our operations and we are likely to seek additional financing through similar means, there is no assurance that we will be able to obtain additional financing under commercially reasonable terms and conditions, or at all.
Indebtedness
We had no indebtedness as of December 31, 2020.
Exercise of Warrants for Cash during 2021
Between February 5 and March 23, 2021, the company issued 223,938 shares of common stock as the result of the exercise of outstanding registered warrants. The warrants were exercised at $4.54 per share. Total cash received was approximately $1.0 million. As of March 23, 2021, 2,306,516 of these registered warrants remain outstanding.
Issuances of Common Stock and Warrants during 2020
On September 1, 2020, the Company closed an underwritten public offering of 2,545,454 shares of its common stock and warrants to purchase an aggregate of up to the same number of additional shares of common stock. The gross proceeds from the offering was approximately $10.5 million. The net proceeds, after deducting the underwriters discount and other offering costs was approximately $9.3 million, of this approximately $80,000 was received from officers and directors of the Company. The warrants are exercisable for a period of five years from the date of issuance at an initial exercise price of $4.54. As of December 31, 2020, 2,530,454 of these warrants remain outstanding.
During May and June 2020, the Company issued an aggregate of 437,000 shares of common stock and warrants to purchase an aggregate of up to the same number of additional shares of common stock pursuant to securities purchase agreements. The net proceeds were approximately $1.7 million of this approximately $90,000 was received from officers and directors of the Company. The warrants are exercisable for a period of five years from the date of issuance at an initial exercise price of $6.00.
Future Capital Requirements
We require additional funds to continue our operations and execute our business plan, including completion of for required future trials and pursuing regulatory approvals in the United States, the European Union and other international markets. We historically have financed our operations principally from the sale of equity securities and debt. While we have been successful in the past in obtaining the necessary capital to support our operations and we are likely to seek additional financing through similar means, there is no assurance that we will be able to obtain additional financing under commercially reasonable terms and conditions, or at all. We believe that our existing cash, will be sufficient to fund our operating expenses through the first quarter of 2022.
If we are unable to obtain additional financing when needed, we would need to scale back our operations taking actions which may include, among other things, reducing use of outside professional service providers, reducing staff or staff compensation, significantly modify or delay the development of our SBP-101 product candidate, license to third parties the rights to commercialize our SBP-101 product candidate for pancreatic cancer or other applications that we would otherwise seek to pursue, or cease operations.
To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the interests of our current stockholders would be diluted, and the terms may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our current stockholders. If we issue preferred stock, it could affect the rights of our stockholders or reduce the value of our common stock. In particular, specific rights granted to future holders of preferred stock may include voting rights, preferences as to dividends and liquidation, conversion and redemption rights, sinking fund provisions, and restrictions on our ability to merge with or sell our assets to a third party. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. Any of these events could adversely affect our ability to achieve our regulatory approvals and commercialization goals and harm our business.
Our future success is dependent upon our ability to obtain additional financing, the success of our current Phase 1a/1b clinical trial and required future trials, our ability to obtain marketing approval for our SBP-101 product candidate in the United States, the European Union and other international markets. If we are unable to obtain additional financing when needed, if our Phase 1 clinical trial is not successful, if we do not receive regulatory approval required future trials or if once these studies are concluded, we do not receive marketing approval for our SBP-101 product candidate, we would not be able to continue as a going concern and would be forced to cease operations. The financial statements included in this report have been prepared assuming that we will continue as a going concern and do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability or classification of assets or the amounts of liabilities that might result from the outcome of these uncertainties.
License Agreement
Pursuant to our exclusive license agreement with UFRF, which was last amended on October 4, 2019, we are required to pay royalties ranging from 2.5% to 5% of net sales of licensed products developed from the licensed technology for the shorter of: ten (10) years from the first commercial sale of a licensed product or the period of market exclusivity on a country-by-country basis. The latest amendment eliminated all future milestone payments. The Company remains committed to pay an annual license maintenance fee of $10,000.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8 below for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.