ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with “Selected Financial Data” in Item 6 and the Company’s consolidated financial statements and the related notes to those statements included in Item 8. The discussion contains forward-looking statements involving risks, uncertainties and assumptions that could cause Potbelly results to differ materially from expectations. The Company’s actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including those described in “Risk Factors” in Item 1A and elsewhere in this report.
Overview
Potbelly Corporation is a neighborhood sandwich concept that has been a much-needed lunch-break escape for more than 40 years. Potbelly owns and operates Potbelly Sandwich Shop concepts in the United States. The Company also has domestic franchise operations of Potbelly Sandwich Shop concepts. Potbelly’s chief operating decision maker is our Chief Executive Officer. Based on how our Chief Executive Officer reviews financial performance and allocates resources on a recurring basis, the Company has one operating segment and one reportable segment.
Our shop model is designed to generate, and has generated, strong cash flow, attractive shop-level financial results and high returns on investment. We operate our shops successfully in a wide range of geographic markets, population densities and real estate settings. We aim to generate average shop-level profit margins, a non-GAAP measure, that range from the high teens to above 20%. Our ability to achieve such margins and returns depends on a number of factors, including consumer behaviors, the economy, labor and commodity costs. For example, we face increasing labor and commodity costs, which we have partially offset by increasing menu prices. Although there is no guarantee that we will be able to achieve these returns, we believe our attractive shop economics support our ability to profitably grow our brand in new and existing markets.
The table below sets forth a rollforward of company-operated and franchise-operated activities:
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business
On January 30, 2020, the WHO announced a global health emergency because of COVID-19 and the risks to the international community as the virus spreads globally. On March 11, 2020, the WHO classified the COVID-19 outbreak as a pandemic, based on the rapid increase in exposure globally. The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly impacted economic conditions in the United States where all our shops are located. In response to the pandemic, many states and jurisdictions in which we operate issued stay-at-home orders, mandated total or partial closures of our shops and took other measures aimed at slowing the spread of the coronavirus. While most of our company-owned shops remain open in accordance with guidance from local authorities, these measures resulted in us closing the vast majority our dining rooms and shifting to off-premise operations only, and we experienced a sudden and drastic decrease in revenues. Nearly all of our shops have reopened their dining rooms with restrictions, such as social distancing and limited capacities, to ensure the health and safety of our guests and employees. We continue to follow guidance from local authorities in determining the appropriate restrictions to put in place for each shop, including the suspension or reduction of in-shop dining if required due to changes in the pandemic response in each jurisdiction.
The COVID-19 pandemic has adversely affected, and will continue to adversely affect, our operations and financial results for the foreseeable future. There are many uncertainties regarding the current COVID-19 pandemic, and we are closely monitoring the impact of the pandemic on all aspects of our business, including how it will impact its customers, employees, suppliers, vendors,
business partners, and distribution channels. We are unable to predict the impact that COVID-19 will have on our financial position and operating results due to numerous uncertainties, however, we are continually assessing the evolving impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and intend to make adjustments to our responses accordingly.
As the COVID-19 pandemic emerged, the Company’s first priority was and continues to be ensuring the health and safety of our employees as we serve our customers and communities. We have provided masks, gloves, and other personal protective equipment to our shop employees and implemented daily temperature checks and screening before each shift. We continue to adhere to our stringent food safety and quality assurance programs. We have implemented strict sanitation protocols for our shops including disinfecting high-touch areas and providing tamper-evident stickers on all pickup and delivery orders. We are monitoring recommendations from the Centers for Disease Control and will make necessary adjustments to align with emerging best practices and regulations. We have been in regular contact with our supply chain partners and we have not experienced, nor do we foresee, material disruptions in our supply chain. As of December 27, 2020, 18 of the Company’s shops remain temporarily closed. We have implemented a strategy to reduce costs and preserve cash. Please see the “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section below for additional details.
Revenue - Through the first ten weeks of 2020, we saw comparable same-store-sales increase 2.5% and the Company was on pace to record the first positive quarterly comparable same-store-sales since 2016. Due to the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, comparable same-store sales reached a low point with a decrease of 67.7% at the end of March. We reported a decrease in comparable same-store sales of 10.1% for the quarter ended March 29, 2020 compared to the prior year. Same-store sales steadily improved from the second quarter through the end of the fiscal year. The Company reported decreases in same-store sales of 41.5%, 21.0%, and 19.7% in the second, third, and fourth quarters, respectively. As our shops were subject to restrictions on dine-in capacity, our shops have increased off-premise operations, continuing to provide delivery, in-shop pick-up, drive-thru, or curbside pick-up services. We continue to follow guidance from local authorities in determining the appropriate restrictions to put in place for each shop. The majority of our shops have reopened their dining rooms with restrictions, such as social distancing and limited capacities, to ensure the health and safety of our guests and employees and comply with government regulations. Customers can place off-premise orders through Potbelly.com and the Potbelly app, or through DoorDash, Grubhub, Postmates and Uber Eats marketplaces nationwide. We continue to offer the Potbelly Pantry program, which allows customers to purchase Potbelly products in bulk as a response to changing customer needs during the pandemic. We also introduced Family Meal Deals which allow customers to purchase a combination of sandwiches, salads, sides, shakes, and other menu items for a family or group at a reduced price.
Operating Costs - We have implemented measures to reduce operating costs and general and administrative expenses in response to the negative impact the pandemic has had on our business. We continually adjust shop-level labor and purchases of inventory to align with current levels of demand. At the onset of the pandemic, we reduced advertising and marketing expenditures, enacted a hiring freeze, and restricted business travel. As of the beginning of the second quarter of 2020, we temporarily reduced salaries for all corporate employees, suspended merit increases, promotions, bonuses, and certain benefits, furloughed approximately one-third of our corporate employees, and the Board of Directors elected to temporarily defer its compensation. During the third quarter of 2020, the Company eliminated the temporary reduction of salaries for corporate employees and the deferral of Board of Director compensation for the Board of Directors. We continue to be thoughtful and judicious regarding our operating expenses during the uncertainty of the pandemic. Additionally, the Company implemented a corporate restructuring plan during the fourth quarter of 2020 that will reduce annual general and administrative expenses by $3.5 million to $4.0 million. The plan consists of corporate expense optimization, consolidation of shop support services, and other expense and staff reductions. Refer to the discussion of 2020 operating results for further discussion of this restructuring plan.
Additionally, we suspended the payment of rent on the majority of our leases and entered discussions with our landlords regarding the restructuring of those leases in light of various contractual and legal defenses. As of December 27, 2020, we have amended 321 lease agreements for our shops, which include rent abatements, rent deferrals, and/or modified lease terms to reduce ongoing rent, and we have completed early terminations of leases for 28 of our shops.
Shop Development - We halted capital investment in new company-owned shops, except for shops that are substantially complete, as well as all non-essential capital expenditures. The Company does not have plans to begin construction on any company-owned shops until the impact of the pandemic is behind us.
We will continue to actively monitor the evolving situation and may take further actions that alter our business operations as may be required by federal, state or local authorities or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers, franchisees, stakeholders and communities.
Fiscal Year
Operating results are reported on a 52-week fiscal year calendar, with a 53-week year occurring every fifth or sixth year. Our fiscal year ends on the last Sunday of each calendar year. Fiscal years 2020, 2019 and 2018 were a 52-week year. The first three quarters of our fiscal year consist of 13 weeks and our fourth quarter consists of 13 weeks for 52-week fiscal years and 14 weeks for 53-week fiscal years.
Key Performance Indicators
In assessing the performance of the Company’s business, Potbelly considers a variety of performance and financial measures. The key measures for determining how the business is performing are comparable store sales, shop-level profit margins and adjusted EBITDA.
Company-Operated Comparable Store Sales
Comparable store sales reflect the change in year-over-year sales for the comparable company-operated store base. Potbelly defines the comparable store base to include those shops open for 15 months or longer. As of the fiscal years ended December 27, 2020, December 29, 2019 and December 30, 2018, there were 378, 423 and 416 shops, respectively, in Potbelly’s comparable company-operated store base. Comparable store sales growth can be generated by an increase in number of transactions and/or by increases in the average check amount resulting from a shift in menu mix and/or increase in price. This measure highlights performance of existing shops as the impact of new shop openings is excluded. For purposes of the comparable store sales calculation, a transaction is defined as an entree, which includes sandwiches, salads and bowls of soup or mac and cheese.
Number of Company-Operated Shop Openings
The number of company-operated shop openings reflects the number of shops opened during a particular reporting period. Before Potbelly opens new shops, the Company incurs pre-opening costs, which are defined below. Often, new shops open with an initial start-up period of higher than normal sales volumes, which subsequently decrease to stabilized levels. While sales volumes are generally higher during the initial opening period, new shops typically experience normal inefficiencies in the form of higher cost of sales, labor and other direct operating expenses and as a result, shop-level profit margins are generally lower during the start-up period of operation. The average start-up period is 10 to 13 weeks. The number and timing of shop openings has had, and is expected to continue to have, an impact on the Company’s results of operations.
Shop-Level Profit (Loss) Margin
Shop-level profit (loss) margin is defined as net company-operated sandwich shop sales less company-operated sandwich shop operating expenses, including cost of goods sold, labor and related expenses, other operating expenses and occupancy expenses, as a percentage of net company-operated sandwich shop sales. Shop-level profit (loss) margin is not required by, or presented in accordance with GAAP. Potbelly believes shop-level profit (loss) margin is important in evaluating shop-level productivity, efficiency and performance.
Adjusted EBITDA
Potbelly defines adjusted EBITDA as net income before depreciation and amortization, interest expense and provision for income taxes, adjusted for the impact of the following items that the Company does not consider representative of ongoing operating performance: stock-based compensation expense, impairment and shop closure expenses, gain or loss on disposal of property and equipment, pre-opening expenses and CEO transition costs as well as other one-time, non-recurring charges. Potbelly believes that adjusted EBITDA is a more appropriate measure of operating performance, as it provides a clearer picture of operating results by eliminating expenses that are not reflective of underlying business performance.
Key Financial Definitions
Revenues
Potbelly generates revenue from net company-operated sandwich shop sales and franchise operations. Net company-operated shop sales consist of food and beverage sales, net of promotional allowances and employee meals. Company-operated shop sales are influenced by new shop openings, shop closures and comparable store sales. Franchise royalties and fees consist of an initial franchise fee, a franchise development agreement fee and royalty income from the franchisee.
Cost of Goods Sold, Excluding Depreciation
Cost of goods sold consists primarily of food, beverage, and packaging costs. The components of cost of goods sold are variable in nature, change with sales volume, are influenced by menu mix and are subject to increases or decreases based on fluctuations in commodity costs.
Labor and Related Expenses
Labor and related expenses include all shop-level management and hourly labor costs, including salaries, wages, benefits and performance incentives, labor taxes and other indirect labor costs.
Occupancy Expenses
Occupancy expenses include fixed and variable portions of rent, common area maintenance and real estate taxes.
Other Operating Expenses
Other operating expenses include all other shop-level operating costs, the major components of which are credit card fees, operating supplies, utilities, repair and maintenance costs, shop-level marketing costs and musician expense.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses is comprised of expenses associated with corporate and administrative functions that support the development and operations of shops, including compensation and benefits, travel expenses, stock-based compensation costs, legal and professional fees, advertising costs, costs related to abandoned new shop development sites and other related corporate costs.
Depreciation Expense
Depreciation expense includes the depreciation of fixed assets and capitalized leasehold improvements.
Pre-Opening Costs
Pre-opening costs consist of costs incurred prior to opening a new shop and are made up primarily of travel, employee payroll and training costs incurred prior to the shop opening, as well as occupancy costs incurred from when we take site possession to shop opening. Shop pre-opening costs are expensed as incurred.
Impairment, Loss on Disposal of Property and Equipment and Shop Closures
Potbelly reviews long-lived assets, such as property and equipment, intangibles and lease right-of-use assets, for impairment when events or circumstances indicate the carrying value of the assets may not be recoverable and records an impairment charge when appropriate. The impairment loss recognized is the excess of the carrying value of the asset over its fair value. Typically, the fair value of the asset is determined by estimating discounted future cash flows associated with the asset. The fair value of right-of-use assets is estimated using market comparative information for similar properties. Loss on disposal of property and equipment represents the net book value of property and equipment less proceeds received, if applicable, on assets abandoned or sold. These losses are related to normal disposals in the ordinary course of business, along with disposals related to shop closures and selected shop remodeling activities. Shop closures includes lease termination payments and the derecognition of the associated right-of-use assets and lease liabilities, as well as any other costs directly incurred in the closure of the shop.
Restructuring Costs
Restructuring costs consists of one-time employee termination benefits and other charges accrued under the Company’s approved restructuring plans.
Interest Expense
Interest expense primarily consists of interest and fees associated with our credit facility, including the amortization of debt issuance costs and other miscellaneous interest charges.
Non-controlling Interests
Non-controlling interests represent non-controlling partners’ share of the assets, liabilities and operations related to seven joint venture investments. Potbelly has ownership interests ranging from 51-80% in these consolidated joint ventures.
Results of Operations
Fiscal Year 2020 (52 Weeks) Compared to Fiscal Year 2019 (52 Weeks)
The following table presents information comparing the components of net income for the periods indicated (dollars in thousands):
*
Amount is less than 0.1%
Revenues
Revenues decreased by $118.4 million, or 28.9%, to $291.3 million for the fiscal year 2020, from $409.7 million for the fiscal year 2019. This decrease was primarily driven by the COVID-19 pandemic and related government restrictions imposed by federal, state and local governments. This resulted in a decrease of $93.9 million, or 24.7%, in sales from company-operated comparable store shops and a decrease in sales of $12.9 million from shops that have closed permanently and $13.2 million from shops that have closed temporarily. These decreases were partially offset by increases in sales from recently opened shops that were not yet in our company-operated comparable store sales population during 2019. The decrease in company-operated comparable store sales resulted from a decrease in traffic partially offset by an increase in average check and certain menu price increases.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold decreased by $26.2 million, or 24.2%, to $82.2 million for the fiscal year 2020, compared to $108.3 million for the fiscal year 2019, primarily driven by a decrease in shop revenue. As a percentage of sandwich shop sales, cost of goods sold increased to 28.4% for the fiscal year 2020, from 26.6% for the fiscal year 2019, primarily driven by a shift in product mix due to an increase in off-premise sales and inflation in certain products, partially offset by certain menu price increases.
Labor and Related Expenses
Labor and related expenses decreased by $23.2 million, or 18.0%, to $105.2 million for the fiscal year 2020, from $128.4 million for the fiscal year 2019, primarily due to labor management amid a decrease in shop revenue and a decrease in expense from closed shops, partially offset by wage inflation. As a percentage of sandwich shop sales, labor and related expenses increased to 36.4% for the fiscal year 2020, from 31.6% for fiscal year 2019, primarily driven by sales deleverage in certain labor related costs not directly variable with sales.
Occupancy Expenses
Occupancy expenses decreased by $2.1 million, or 3.6%, to $56.9 million for the fiscal year 2020, from $59.0 million for the fiscal year 2019, primarily due to a decrease in expense from shops that have closed. As a percentage of sandwich shop sales, occupancy expenses increased to 19.7% for the fiscal year 2020, from 14.5% for the fiscal year 2019, primarily due to sales deleverage and inflation in certain occupancy related costs, including lease renewals, real estate taxes and common area maintenance.
Other Operating Expenses
Other operating expenses decreased by $1.1 million, or 2.2%, to $49.1 million for the fiscal year 2020, from $50.2 million for the fiscal year 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to a decrease in certain items variable with sales, partially offset by higher expenses related to third-party delivery partnerships driven by increased sales in that channel. As a percentage of sandwich shop sales, other operating expenses increased to 17.0% for fiscal year 2020, from 12.3% for fiscal year 2019, primarily driven by sales deleverage in operating expense items such as utilities and other expenses not directly variable with sales.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses decreased by $9.8 million, or 21.9%, to $35.0 million for the fiscal year 2020, from $44.8 million for the fiscal year 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by a decrease in nonrecurring professional services fees and a decrease in payroll costs as a result of furloughs and reductions of approximately one-third of corporate employees in 2020. As a percentage of revenues, general and administrative expenses increased to 12.0% for the fiscal year 2020, from 10.9% for the fiscal year 2019, primarily driven by a decrease in shop revenue, partially offset by reductions in nonrecurring professional services fees and payroll costs noted above.
Depreciation Expense
Depreciation expense decreased by $2.3 million, or 10.3%, to $19.8 million for the fiscal year 2020, from $22.1 million for the fiscal year 2019, primarily due to a lower depreciable base related to a decrease in the number of company-operated shops and impairment charges taken in prior periods. These decreases were partially offset by existing shop capital investments in technology such as the mobile application, which increase the depreciable based. As a percentage of revenues, depreciation increased to 6.8% for the fiscal year 2020, from 5.4% for the fiscal year 2019.
Pre-Opening Costs
Pre-opening costs increased by $0.2 million, to $0.2 million for the fiscal year 2020, from $35 thousand for the fiscal year 2019.
Impairment, Loss on Disposal of Property and Equipment and Shop Closures
Impairment, loss on disposal of property and equipment increased to $12.3 million for fiscal year 2020, compared to $6.0 million for fiscal year 2019, primarily due to impairment charges resulting from the expected impact of COVID-19 on future cash flows. After performing periodic review of our shops during each fiscal quarter of 2020, it was determined that indicators of impairment were present for certain shops. We recorded impairment charges of $10.3 million for the excess of the carrying amount recorded on the balance sheet over the shops’ estimated fair value. We perform impairment analyses whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable and exceeds the fair value, which involves significant judgement by management including estimates of future cash flows and future revenue growth rates, among other assumptions. Based on our current projections, no impairment beyond what has already been recorded has been identified.
The COVID-19 outbreak has had a significant impact on the global economy, including declining sales at our shops and the overall challenging environment for the restaurant industry. Given the high degree of uncertainty as to whether, when or the manner in which the conditions surrounding the pandemic will change, including the timing of any lifting of restrictions on restaurant operating hours, dine-in limitations or other restrictions that largely limited restaurants to take-out and delivery sales, customer engagement with our brand, the short- and long-term impact on consumer discretionary spending and overall global economic conditions, it is possible that material non-cash impairments could be identified in tangible assets in the future. However, the likelihood or the amount of an additional impairment charge cannot be reasonably estimated at this time.
We terminated the leases for 28 company-owned shops during the fiscal year 2020, for which the shops have been or will be permanently closed. These terminations resulted in $2.8 million of lease termination payments which were offset by a net gain of $2.3 million from derecognizing the associated right-of-use assets and lease liabilities, for net lease exit expenses of $0.5 million.
Restructuring Costs
Restructuring costs of $1.7 million were incurred in fiscal year 2020, compared to no restructuring costs for the fiscal year 2019. On November 3, 2020, as part of our COVID-related cost reduction efforts and to better align our general and administrative expenses with future strategy, we made the determination to reorganize and restructure our corporate team. We expect that this restructuring plan will result in annual general and administrative expense savings of $3.5 to $4.0 million. This was accomplished through corporate expense optimization, consolidating our shop support services, and through other expense and staff reductions. As a result, we reduced corporate employment levels by approximately 35 employees in the fourth quarter of 2020. The restructuring charges recognized in the fourth quarter of 2020 consist primarily of one-time termination benefits to employees. We expect that these payments will be made throughout 2021. We substantially completed our planned restructuring actions during 2020, but we will continue to evaluate our cost structure and seek opportunities for further efficiencies and cost savings as part of our ongoing strategy. As such, we may incur additional restructuring related charges or adjustments to previously recorded charges in the future, however, we are unable to estimate the amount of charges at this time.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $1.1 million for the fiscal year 2020 and $0.2 million for the fiscal year 2019, primarily driven by an increase in outstanding borrowings on our Revolving Credit Facility partially offset by interest income on tax refunds received.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense changed by $20.7 million to a benefit of $6.5 million for the fiscal year 2020, from an expense of $14.2 million for the fiscal year 2019. The Company recognized an income tax benefit of $6.7 million in 2020 primarily due to a discrete tax benefit recorded for the carryback of NOLs and a refund of prior alternative minimum tax (“AMT”) credits allowed under the CARES Act, which resulted in a tax refund. The Company recognized a non-cash charge to income tax expense of $14.5 million in 2019 to record a full valuation allowance against its net deferred tax assets.
Results of Operations
Fiscal Year 2019 (52 Weeks) Compared to Fiscal Year 2018 (52 Weeks)
The following table presents information comparing the components of net income for the periods indicated (dollars in thousands):
*
Amount is less than 0.1%
Revenues
Revenues decreased by $12.9 million, or 3.1%, to $409.7 million for the fiscal year 2019, from $422.6 million for the fiscal year 2018. This decrease was driven by a $12.3 million, or 3.0%, decrease in sales from company-operated comparable store shops and a decrease in sales of $6.6 million from shops that have closed. These decreases were partially offset by increases in sales from recently opened shops that were not yet in our company-operated comparable store sales population during 2019. The decrease in company-operated comparable store sales resulted from a decrease in traffic partially offset by an increase in average check and certain menu price increases.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold decreased by $2.8 million, or 2.5%, to $108.3 million for the fiscal year 2019, compared to $111.1 million for the fiscal year 2018, primarily due to a decrease in sales volume. As a percentage of sandwich shop sales, cost of goods sold increased to 26.6% for the fiscal year 2019, from 26.5% for the fiscal year 2018, primarily driven by product inflation partially offset by certain menu price increases.
Labor and Related Expenses
Labor and related expenses increased by $0.4 million, or 0.3%, to $128.4 million for the fiscal year 2019, from $128.0 million for the fiscal year 2018, primarily due to inflationary wage increases in certain states, which were partially offset by a decrease in expense from shops that have closed. As a percentage of sandwich shop sales, labor and related expenses increased to 31.6% for the fiscal year 2019, from 30.5% for fiscal year 2018, primarily driven by inflationary wage increases and sales deleverage.
Occupancy Expenses
Occupancy expenses decreased by $0.8 million, or 1.4%, to $59.0 million for the fiscal year 2019, from $59.8 million for the fiscal year 2018, primarily due to a decrease in expense from shops that have closed. As a percentage of sandwich shop sales, occupancy expenses increased to 14.5% for the fiscal year 2019, from 14.3% for the fiscal year 2018, primarily due to sales deleverage partially offset by certain menu price increases.
Other Operating Expenses
Other operating expenses decreased by $0.2 million, or 0.4%, to $50.2 million for the fiscal year 2019, from $50.4 million for the fiscal year 2018. The decrease was primarily attributable to a decrease in music and certain items variable with sales, partially offset by higher expenses related to third-party delivery partnerships driven by increased sales in that channel. As a percentage of sandwich shop sales, other operating expenses increased to 12.3% for fiscal year 2019, from 12.0% for fiscal year 2018, primarily driven by sales deleverage in operating expense items such as utilities and other expenses not directly variable with sales and an increase in expenses related to third-party delivery partnerships.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses remained flat at $44.8 million for fiscal years 2019 and 2018. As a percentage of revenues, general and administrative expenses increased to 10.9% for the fiscal year 2019, from 10.6% for the fiscal year 2018. These increases were driven primarily by non-recurring professional service fees, partially offset by a decrease in business transformation costs, stock-based compensation expense and performance-based incentive expenses.
Depreciation Expense
Depreciation expense decreased by $1.0 million, or 4.5%, to $22.1 million for the fiscal year 2019, from $23.1 million for the fiscal year 2018, primarily due to a lower depreciable base related to closed shops and lower existing shop capital investments. As a percentage of revenues, depreciation decreased to 5.4% for the fiscal year 2019, from 5.5% for the fiscal year 2018, driven by a lower depreciable base related to impaired and closed shops.
Pre-Opening Costs
Pre-opening costs decreased by $0.4 million, or 92.6%, to $35 thousand for the fiscal year 2019, from $0.5 million for the fiscal year 2018. The decrease was due to fewer shops opened during fiscal year 2019 compared to fiscal year 2018.
Impairment, Loss on Disposal of Property and Equipment and Shop Closures
Impairment, loss on disposal of property and equipment decreased to $6.0 million for fiscal year 2019, compared to $15.6 million for fiscal year 2018. After performing a periodic review of the Company’s shops during each fiscal quarter of 2019, it was determined that indicators of impairment were present for certain shops as a result of continued underperformance. The Company performed impairment analyses related to these shops and recorded impairment charges for the excess of the carrying amount recorded on the balance sheet over the fair value of the assets of $2.9 million in 2019, compared to impairment charges of $13.6 million in 2018. The Company performs impairment analyses on a quarterly basis which involves significant judgment by management including estimates of future cash flows and future growth rates, among other assumptions. Based on the Company’s current projections, no impairment, beyond what has already been recorded, has been identified. However, given the current challenges facing the industry and our business, future evaluations could result in additional impairment charges.
The Company terminated the leases for 11 company-owned shops during the fiscal year 2019, for which the shops have been permanently closed. These terminations resulted in $3.1 million of lease termination payments which were offset by a net gain of $1.2 million from derecognizing the associated right-of-use assets and lease liabilities, for net lease exit expenses of $1.9 million.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $0.2 million for the fiscal year 2019 and $0.1 million for the fiscal year 2018.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense increased by $16.4 million to $14.2 million for the fiscal year 2019, from a benefit of $2.2 million for the fiscal year 2018. The change was primarily attributable to the valuation allowance on deferred tax assets recorded by the Company during the first quarter of 2019, as a result of the changes in projected taxable income for 2019.
During its assessment for the first quarter of 2019, the Company estimated it would be in a three-year cumulative loss position as of December 29, 2019. Therefore, the Company determined based on the available evidence that a full valuation allowance against its net deferred tax assets was required. As a result of this valuation allowance, the Company did not provide for an income tax benefit on the pre-tax loss recorded for the year ended December 29, 2019. This accounting treatment has no effect on the Company’s ability to utilize deferred tax assets to reduce future cash tax payments. The Company continues to assess the likelihood of the realization of its deferred tax assets and the valuation allowance will be adjusted accordingly.
Quarterly Results and Seasonality
The following table sets forth certain unaudited financial and operating data in each fiscal quarter during the fiscal year 2020 and 2019. The quarterly information includes all normal recurring adjustments that Potbelly considers necessary for the fair presentation of the information shown. This information should be read in conjunction with the Company’s consolidated financial statements and the related notes to those statements included Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Historically, customer spending patterns for company-operated shops are lowest in the first quarter of the year. Potbelly quarterly results have been and will continue to be affected by the timing of new shop openings and their associated pre-opening costs. As a result of these and other factors, Company financial results for any quarter may not be indicative of the results that may be achieved for a full fiscal year.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
Historically, Potbelly’s ongoing primary sources of liquidity and capital resources are cash provided from operating activities, existing cash and cash equivalents, and the Company’s credit facility. Potbelly’s primary requirements for liquidity and capital are working capital to support shop operations and general corporate needs, capital projects, maintenance, repurchases of Company common stock, and lease obligations. Potbelly’s requirement for working capital is not significant since the Company’s customers pay for their food and beverage purchases in cash or payment cards (credit or debit) at the time of sale. Thus, Potbelly is able to sell certain inventory items before the Company needs to pay its suppliers for such items. Company shops do not require significant inventories or receivables.
The COVID-19 pandemic’s impact on our operations and revenues has significantly affected our ability to generate cash from operations. To preserve financial flexibility, the Company borrowed $39.8 million under its Revolving Credit Facility in March 2020. As of December 27, 2020 the Company had a cash balance of $11.1 million compared to a balance of $18.8 million at December 29, 2019. The decrease in the cash balance is primarily due to cash used, partially offset by net borrowings under its Revolving Credit Facility and proceeds from the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”). Total liquidity (cash plus amounts available on the Revolving Credit Facility) was $44.6 million as of December 27, 2020, compared to $50.8 million as of September 27, 2020, $45.8 million as of June 28, 2020 and March 29, 2020 and $58.6 million as of December 29, 2019.
Due to the dramatic impact of the pandemic on operations and sales, the Company suspended the payment of rent on the majority of our leases throughout 2020. The Company has largely completed discussions with its landlords regarding the restructuring of those leases in light of various contractual and legal defenses. The Company held ongoing conversations with landlords in various markets and were successful in negotiating commercially reasonable lease concessions given the current environment. As of December 27, 2020 we had amended 321 lease agreements for our shops, which include rent abatements, rent deferrals, and/or modified lease terms to reduce ongoing rent, and we have completed early terminations of leases for 28 of our shops.
The Company received $6.7 million of income tax refunds in 2020 due to the provisions of the CARES Act regarding the carryback of NOLs and the refund of prior AMT. Additionally, the Company elected to defer the payments of the employer portion of social security taxes from 2020 in to 2021 and 2022 as allowed by the CARES Act. During fiscal year 2020, $4.4 million of payroll tax expenses were deferred and are accrued within other long-term liabilities.
On February 9, 2021, the Company entered into a securities purchase agreement (the “Securities Purchase Agreement”) with accredited Purchasers (the “Purchasers”), pursuant to which the Company agreed to issue and sell to the Purchasers in a private placement an aggregate of (i) 3,249,668 shares (the “Shares”) of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.01 per share (the “Common Stock”) and (ii) warrants (the “Warrants”) to purchase an aggregate of 1,299,861 shares of common stock, for an aggregate purchase price of $15.9 million (the “Offering”). The Warrants will be exercisable at an exercise price of $5.45 per share at any time on or after August 13, 2021 and will and expire five years from the date of issuance. The Warrants will be exercisable by net exercise. The Offering closed on February 12, 2021. The Company received aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $15.9 million, before deducting placement agent fees and offering expenses of approximately $1 million, and excluding the exercise of any warrants.
We believe that the proceeds from the Offering, cash from our operations and borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility will be provide liquidity for the next twelve months.
Cash Flows
The following table presents summary cash flow information for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $11.6 million for the fiscal year 2020, compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $18.2 million for the fiscal year 2019. The $29.8 million change is primarily driven by an increase in loss from operations for the reasons discussed above.
Net cash provided by operating activities decreased to $18.2 million for the fiscal year 2019, from $31.0 million for the fiscal year 2018. The $12.8 million decrease is primarily driven by an increase in loss from operations.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities decreased to $10.9 million for the fiscal year 2020, from $14.4 million for the fiscal year 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a reduction of capital expenditures related to no new shop construction. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, capital expenditures have been limited to essential maintenance and safety.
Net cash used in investing activities decreased to $14.4 million for the fiscal year 2019, from $21.4 million for the fiscal year 2018. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in construction costs for new shops as well as a decrease in capital expenditures related to IT projects.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $14.8 million for the fiscal year 2020, compared to net cash used in financing activities of $4.8 million for the fiscal year 2019. The $19.6 million change was primarily driven by net borrowings under the Credit Facility of $6.3 million and net borrowings under the PPP of $10.0 million.
Net cash used in financing activities decreased to $4.8 million for the fiscal year 2019, from $15.3 million for the fiscal year 2018. The decrease was primarily driven by an $18.7 million decrease in repurchases of treasury stock offset by an $8.1 million decrease in proceeds from the exercise of stock options during the fiscal year 2019 compared the fiscal year 2018.
Stock Repurchase Program
On May 8, 2018, the Company announced that its Board of Directors authorized a stock repurchase program for up to $65.0 million of its outstanding common stock. The program permits the Company, from time to time, to purchase shares in the open market (including in pre-arranged stock trading plans in accordance with the guidelines specified in Rule 10b5-1 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended) or in privately negotiated transactions. The number of common shares actually repurchased, and the timing and price of repurchases, will depend upon market conditions, Securities and Exchange Commission requirements and other factors. Purchases may be started or stopped at any time without prior notice depending on market conditions and other factors. For the 52 weeks ended December 27, 2020, the Company did not repurchase any shares of its commons stock. In light of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company did not have plans to repurchase any common stock under its stock repurchase program at this time. During fiscal year 2019, the Company repurchased 648 thousand shares of common stock for approximately $4.2 million under the stock repurchase program, including cost and commission, in open market transactions. As of December 27, 2020, the remaining dollar value of authorization under the share repurchase program was $37.9 million, which includes commission.
Revolving Credit Facility
On August 7, 2019, the Company entered into a second amended and restated Revolving Credit Facility agreement (the "Credit Agreement") with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. (“JPMorgan”) that expires in July 2022. The Credit Agreement amends and restates that certain amended and restated Revolving Credit Facility agreement, dated as of December 9, 2015, and amended on May 3, 2019 (collectively, the "Prior Credit Agreement") with JPMorgan. The Credit Agreement provides, among other things, for a Revolving Credit Facility in a maximum principal amount $40 million (the “Revolving Credit Facility”), with possible future increases of up to $20 million under an expansion feature. Borrowings under the credit facility generally bear interest at the Company’s option at either (i) a eurocurrency rate determined by reference to the applicable LIBOR rate plus a margin ranging from 1.25% to 1.75% or (ii) a prime rate as announced by JP Morgan plus a margin ranging from 0.00% to 0.50%. The applicable margin is determined based upon the Company’s consolidated total leverage ratio. On the last day of each calendar quarter, the Company is required to pay a commitment fee of 0.20% per annum in respect of any unused commitments under the credit facility. So long as certain total leverage ratios, EBITDA thresholds and minimum liquidity requirements are met and no default or event of default has occurred or would result, there is no limit on the “restricted payments” (primarily distributions and equity repurchases) that the Company may make, provided that proceeds of the loans under the Credit Agreement may not be used for purposes of making restricted payments.
On March 17, 2020, the Company fully borrowed the available capacity of $39.8 million under the Credit Agreement as a precautionary measure in order to increase its cash position and preserve financial flexibility in light of current uncertainty in the
global markets resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. In accordance with the terms of the Credit Agreement, the proceeds from these borrowings may in the future be used for working capital, general corporate or other permitted purposes.
The Credit Agreement was subsequently amended as of May 15, 2020 (the “Credit Agreement Amendment”) to, among other things (i) change the maturity date from July 31, 2022 to March 31, 2022; (ii) eliminate the $20.0 million expansion feature; (iii) amend the interest rate to the Company’s option at either (a) a eurocurrency rate determined by reference to the applicable LIBOR rate with a 1.00% floor plus a margin of 5.00% or (b) a prime rate as announced by JP Morgan plus 4.00%; (iv) amend the commitment fee to 1.00% per annum in respect of any unused commitments under the credit facility; (v) implement additional restrictions on restricted payments, acquisitions and other indebtedness; and (vi) implement additional financial covenants. Per the terms of the Credit Agreement Amendment, the Company repaid $15.0 million of its outstanding borrowing at the signing of the Credit Agreement Amendment, and may re-borrow this $15.0 million when its cash balance held by JP Morgan declines below $28.0 million. Lastly, the Company was required to pay a fee of 1% of the outstanding loan balance after the signing of the Credit Agreement Amendment.
On July 17, 2020, the Company entered into Amendment No. 2 (the “Second Amendment”) to the Credit Agreement to, among other things: (i) revise its financial covenants; (ii) decrease the aggregate amount of loan commitment available under the Credit Agreement from $40.0 million to $30.0 million after March 31, 2021 and (iii) decrease the interest rate to the Company’s option at either (a) a eurocurrency rate determined by reference to the applicable LIBOR rate with a 1.00% floor plus a margin of 4.75% or (b) a prime rate as announced by JP Morgan plus 2.25%. Per the terms of the Second Amendment, the Company repaid $14.5 million of its outstanding borrowing at the signing of the Second Amendment, and may reborrow the entire amount available under the credit facility when its cash balance held by JP Morgan declines below $10.0 million in total.
The Second Amendment includes financial covenants that require the Company to (i) maintain periodic minimum liquidity levels through February 28, 2022 ranging from $15.0 million to $30.0 million and (ii) maintain monthly minimum adjusted EBITDA thresholds for specified computation periods through February 28, 2022 ranging from ($18.0) million to $8.3 million.
On August 19, 2020, the Company entered into Amendment No. 3 to the Credit Agreement to permit the Company to (i) incur indebtedness in the form of a loan agreement with Harvest Small Business Finance, LLC in the aggregate amount of $10.0 million pursuant to the PPP under the CARES Act and (ii) revise financial covenants for the impact of the PPP proceeds. As of December 27, 2020, the Company had $6.3 million outstanding under the Credit Agreement. There were no borrowings outstanding as of December 29, 2019.
On November 4, 2020, the Company entered into Amendment No. 4, to the Credit Agreement. The Amendment (i) reduced the periodic minimum liquidity level requirement for the Company through February 28, 2022 from a range of $25.0 million to $37.5 million to a range of $23.0 million to $37.5 million and (ii) adjusted the benchmark replacement rate.
On February 26, 2021, the Company entered into Amendment No. 5 to the Credit Agreement. The Amendment (i) extends the maturity date from March 31, 2022 to January 31, 2023, (ii) decreases the revolving credit commitment from $40 million to $25 million, (iii) increases the interest rate by 50 basis points with respect to any CBFR Loan, (iv) increases the interest rate by 25 basis points with respect to any Eurodollar Loan, (v) amends the definition of EBITDA to exclude non-cash charges/gains in connection with certain equity interests of the Company, (vi) includes certain borrowing conditions relating to the Company’s Consolidated Cash Balance, (vii) permits the Company to repurchase/redeem its equity interests under certain conditions and (viii) revises the minimum monthly EBITDA and Liquidity thresholds the Company must maintain. The Company is currently in compliance with all debt covenants.
Paycheck Protection Program Loan
On August 10, 2020, Potbelly Sandwich Works, LLC (“PSW”), an indirect subsidiary of the Company, entered into a loan agreement with Harvest Small Business Finance, LLC in the aggregate amount of $10.0 million (the “Loan”), pursuant to the PPP under the CARES Act. The Loan was necessary to support the ongoing operations of the Company due to the economic uncertainty resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and lack of access to alternative sources of liquidity.
The Loan is scheduled to mature five years from the date on which PSW applies for loan forgiveness under the CARES Act, bears interest at a rate of 1% per annum and is subject to the terms and conditions applicable to loans administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration under the CARES Act. The PPP provides that the use of the Loan amount shall be limited to certain qualifying expenses and may be partially or wholly forgiven in accordance with the requirements set forth in the CARES Act. The Company has used all of the PPP proceeds toward qualifying expenses and intends to pursue forgiveness of the Loan amount, but it is not able to determine the likelihood or the amount of forgiveness that will be obtained.
The Company has recorded the amount of the Loan as long-term debt in its consolidated balance sheet as of December 27, 2020 and related interest has been recorded to interest expense on its consolidated statement of operations for the year ended December 27, 2020.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 27, 2020, the Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, synthetic leases, investments in special purpose entities or undisclosed borrowings or debt that would be required to be disclosed pursuant to Item 303 of Regulation S-K under the Exchange Act.
Contractual Obligations
The following table presents contractual obligations and commercial commitments as of December 27, 2020 (in thousands):
(a)
Includes base lease terms and certain optional renewal periods that are included in the lease term. Certain of these options are subject to escalation based on various market-based factors.
Impact of Inflation
Potbelly’s profitability is dependent, among other things, on the Company’s ability to anticipate and react to changes in the costs of key operating resources, including food and beverages, labor, energy and other services. Substantial increases in costs and expenses could impact the Company’s operating results to the extent such increases cannot be passed along to the customers. Apart from the commodity effects discussed above, in general, Potbelly has been able to substantially offset shop and operating cost increases resulting from inflation by altering the menu items, increasing menu prices, making productivity improvements or other adjustments. However, certain areas of costs, notably labor and utilities, can be significantly volatile or subject to significant changes due to changes in laws or regulations, such as the minimum wage laws. There can be no assurance that Potbelly will generate increases in comparable store sales in amounts sufficient to offset inflationary or other cost pressures.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Potbelly’s discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations are based on Potbelly’s consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Critical accounting policies are those that management believes are both most important to the portrayal of Potbelly’s financial condition and operating results, and require management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make
estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. The Company bases its estimates on historical experience and other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Judgments and uncertainties affecting the application of those policies may result in materially different amounts being reported under different conditions or using different assumptions. Potbelly’s significant accounting policies can be found in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8. Potbelly considers the following policies to be the most critical in understanding the judgments that are involved in preparing the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
The Company assesses potential impairments to its long-lived assets, which includes property and equipment and right-of-use assets for operating leases, whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Assets are grouped at the individual shop-level for purposes of the impairment assessment because a shop represents the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities. Recoverability of an asset group is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset group to its forecasted shop cash flows expected to be generated by the asset group. If the carrying amount of the asset group exceeds its forecasted shop cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized as the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset group exceeds the fair value of the asset group. The fair value of the shop assets is determined using the income approach. Key inputs to this approach include forecasted shop cash flows, discount rate, and estimated market rent, which are all classified as Level 3 inputs. Level 3 inputs are derived from valuation techniques in which one or more significant inputs or significant value drivers are unobservable. The Company used a weighted average cost of capital to discount the future cash flows. A 100 basis point change in any of these key inputs would not have a material impact on the calculation of an impairment charge.
After performing periodic reviews of Company shops during each quarter of 2020, 2019 and 2018, it was determined that indicators of impairment were present for certain shops as a result of continued underperformance and impact from the COVID-19 outbreak, which has had a significant impact on the global economy, including declining sales at our shops and the overall challenging environment for the restaurant industry. The Company performed an impairment analysis for these shops and recorded impairment charges of $10.3 million, $2.6 million and $13.4 million for the fiscal years 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, which is included in impairment, loss on disposal of property and equipment and shop closures in the consolidated statements of operations. Based on the Company’s analysis, no impairment, beyond what has already been recorded, has been identified.
Given the high degree of uncertainty as to whether, when or the manner in which the conditions surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic will change, including the timing of any lifting of restrictions on restaurant operating hours, dine-in limitations or other restrictions that largely limited restaurants to take-out and delivery sales, customer engagement with our brand, the short- and long-term impact on consumer discretionary spending and overall global economic conditions, it is possible that material non-cash impairments could be identified in long-lived tangible assets in the future. However, the likelihood or the amount of an additional impairment charge cannot be reasonably estimated at this time.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are accounted for under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are attributable to differences between amounts recorded in our financial statements and our income tax returns. Deferred tax assets, net of any valuation allowances, represent the future tax return consequences of those differences and for operating loss and tax credit carryforwards, which will be deductible when the assets are recovered. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance if it is deemed more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. In assessing the realizability of deferred tax assets, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, tax planning strategies, and results of recent operations. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during the periods in which those temporary differences become deductible.
During its assessment for the first quarter of 2019, the Company determined based on the available evidence that a full valuation allowance against its net deferred tax assets was required. As a result of this valuation allowance, the Company did not provide for an income tax benefit on the pre-tax loss recorded for the years ended December 27, 2020 or December 29, 2019. This accounting treatment has no effect on the Company’s ability to utilize deferred tax assets to reduce future cash tax payments. The Company will continue to assess the likelihood of the realization of its deferred tax assets and the valuation allowance will be adjusted accordingly.