ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion of our results of operations and financial condition should be read in conjunction with Part I, including matters set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and our Consolidated Financial Statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a compliance and technology transfer services consulting firm with headquarters in Puerto Rico, servicing the Puerto Rico, United States, Europe and Brazil markets. The compliance consulting service sector in those markets consists of local compliance and validation consulting firms, United States dedicated validation and compliance consulting firms and large publicly traded and private domestic and foreign engineering and consulting firms. We provide a broad range of compliance related consulting services. We market our services to pharmaceutical, chemical, biotechnology, medical devices, cosmetics and food industries, and allied products companies in Puerto Rico, the United States, Europe and Brazil. Our consulting team includes experienced engineering and life science professionals, former quality assurance managers and directors, and professionals with bachelors, masters and doctorate degrees in health sciences and engineering.
We actively operate in Puerto Rico, the United States, Europe and Brazil and pursue to further expand these markets by strengthening our business development infrastructure and by constantly realigning our business strategies as new opportunities and challenges arise.
We market our services with an active presence in industry trade shows, professional conventions, industry publications and company provided seminars to the industry. Our senior management is also actively involved in the marketing process, especially in marketing to major accounts. Our senior management and staff also concentrate on developing new business opportunities and focus on the larger customer accounts (by number of consultants or dollar volume) and responding to prospective customers’ requests for proposals.
We consider our core business to be Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) and international agencies regulatory compliance consulting related services.
The Company holds a tax grant issued by the Puerto Rico Industrial Development Company (“PRIDCO”), which provides relief on various Puerto Rico taxes, including income tax, with certain limitations, for most of the activities carried on within Puerto Rico, including those that are for services to parties located outside of Puerto Rico.
The following table sets forth information as to our revenue for the years ended October 31, 2020 and 2019, by geographic regions (dollars in thousands).
For the year ended October 31, 2020, the Company’s revenues were $21.6 million, an increase of $2.1 million when compared to the same period last year. The increase is attributable to an increase in projects in Puerto Rico, US, European and Latin American markets of approximately $1,417,000, $95,000, $514,000 and $31,000, respectively. When compared to the same period last year, gross margin had a marginal net decrease of 0.8 percentage points. Selling, general and administrative expenses were approximately $4,441,000, which is comparable to selling, general and administrative expenses reported by the Company last year. These factors resulted in a net income of approximately $2,051,000 for the year ended October 31, 2020, which is comparable to net income reported by the Company last year.
While we have not identified any material adverse effect on our reported results for the year ended October 31, 2020, resulting from the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic, we continue to actively monitor the pandemic and any potential future impact it may have on our business and results of operations. The extent to which our operations will be impacted by the pandemic will depend largely on unknown developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, including new information which may emerge concerning our customers, the severity of the pandemic and actions by government authorities to contain the outbreak or treat its impact, among other things.
The coronavirus pandemic, the Puerto Rico government financial crisis, the Tax Reform, other tax reforms on the markets where we do business, bio-pharmaceutical industry consolidations, trends on managing contract resources, and Puerto Rico Act 154-2010, all pose current and future challenges which may adversely affect our future performance. We believe that our future profitability and liquidity will be dependent on the effect the local and global economy, including any impacts of the coronavirus pandemic, changes in tax laws, worldwide life science manufacturing industry consolidations, operational constraints imposed by our customers due to the coronavirus pandemic and resources management trends will have on our operations, and our ability to seek service opportunities and adapt to industry trends.
As of January 1, 2021, we no longer hold a certification as a “minority-controlled company” as defined by the National Minority Development Council and Growth Initiative. We do not believe our business and operating results will be materially impacted due to the Company no longer holding such certification.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our statements of operations for the year ended October 31, 2020 and 2019 (dollars in thousands, and as a percentage of revenues):
Revenues. Revenues for the year ended October 31, 2020 were $21.6 million, an increase of $2.1 million when compared to the last year. The increase is attributable to an increase in projects in Puerto Rico, US, European and Latin American markets of approximately $1,417,000, $95,000, $514,000 and $31,000, respectively.
Cost of Services; gross profit. Cost of services were $14.9 million, an increase of $1.6 million when compared to last year. The overall gross profit for the year ended October 31, 2020 reflected a gross profit decrease of 0.8 percentage points, when compared to last year. The variance in gross profit is mainly attributable to current fiscal year’s less favorable consulting projects in the Puerto Rico consulting market.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended in October 31, 2020 were approximately $4.4 million, which is comparable to selling, general and administrative expenses reported by the Company last year.
Other Income, net. For the year ended on October 31, 2020 other income was approximately $64,000, a net decline of approximately $462,000 when compared to last year. The decrease is mainly attributable to proceeds received from the 2017 Puerto Rico hurricanes insurance claim for business interruption losses and additional expenses incurred of approximately $200,000 collected during April 2019. Additionally, when compared to last year, the Company experienced (i) a decline in interest income of approximately $225,000, as a result of lower interest rates, and (ii) a decline in the disposition of fixed assets of approximately $47,000, partially offset by other miscellaneous income and expenses.
Net Income. Net income for the year ended October 31, 2020 was approximately $2,051,000, which is comparable to net income reported by the Company last year. The increase in gross profit, attributable to the increase in revenues, was offset by the decline in other income when compared to last year.
For the year ended October 31, 2020, net income per common share for both basic and diluted was $0.089, a decline of $0.001 per share when compared to last year.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity is a measure of our ability to meet potential cash requirements, including planned capital expenditures. As of October 31, 2020, the Company had approximately $24.8 million in working capital.
On June 13, 2014, the Board of Directors of the Company authorized the Company to repurchase up to two million shares of its common stock (the "Company Stock Repurchase Program"). During the year ended October 31, 2020, the Company purchased an aggregate of 2,300 shares of its common stock within the repurchase program. During April 2020, the Company suspended purchases under the Repurchase Program to conserve cash due to the economic uncertainty caused by the coronavirus pandemic. We may resume repurchases in the future, however we can provide no assurance when we will resume the Repurchase Program.
Our primary cash needs consist of the payment of compensation to our consulting team, overhead expenses, and statutory taxes. Additionally, we may use cash for the repurchase of our common stock under the Company Stock Repurchase Program, capital expenditures and business development expenses. Management believes that based on the current level of working capital, operations and cash flows from operations, and the collectability of high quality customer receivables are sufficient to fund anticipated expenses and satisfy other possible long-term contractual commitments.
To the extent that we pursue possible opportunities to expand our operations, either by acquisition or by the establishment of operations in a new market, we will incur additional overhead, and there may be a delay between the period we commence operations and our generation of net cash flow from operations.
While uncertainties relating to the current local and global economic condition, competition, the industries and geographical regions served by us and other regulatory matters exist within the consulting services industry, as described above, management is not aware of any other trends or events likely to have a material adverse effect on liquidity or its financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We were not involved in any significant off-balance sheet arrangements during the fiscal year ended October 31, 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) in the United States. We believe the following are the critical accounting policies that impact the consolidated financial statements, some of which are based on management’s best estimates available at the time of preparation. Actual experience may differ from these estimates.
Consolidation - The accompanying consolidated financial statements include the accounts of all of our wholly owned subsidiaries. All intercompany transactions and balances have been eliminated in consolidation.
Segments - The Company operates in three reportable business segments: (i) Puerto Rico technical compliance consulting, (ii) United States technical compliance consulting, and (iii) Europe technical compliance consulting. Accordingly, the accompanying consolidated financial statements are presented to show these three reportable segments.
Use of Estimates - The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments - Accounting standards have established a fair value hierarchy that requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value. A financial instrument’s categorization within the fair value hierarchy is based upon the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value measurement. Accounting standards have established three levels of inputs that may be used to measure fair value:
Level 1:
Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets and liabilities.
Level 2:
Observable inputs other than Level 1 prices such as quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities, quoted prices in markets with insufficient volume or infrequent transactions (less active markets), or model-derived valuations in which all significant inputs are observable or can be derived principally from or corroborated by observable market data for substantially the full term of the assets or liabilities.
Level 3:
Prices or valuation techniques that require inputs that are both significant to the fair value measurement and unobservable (supported by little or no market activity).
The carrying value of the Company's financial instruments (excluding marketable securities and obligations under capital leases), cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, accounts payable and accrued liabilities, are considered reasonable estimates of fair value due to their liquidity or short-term nature. Management believes, based on current rates, that the fair value of its obligations under finance leases approximates the carrying amount.
Revenue Recognition - In May 2014, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued a new accounting standard that amends the guidance for the recognition of revenue from contracts with customers to transfer goods and services. The FASB subsequently issued additional, clarifying standards to address issues arising from implementation of the new revenue recognition standard. The new revenue recognition standard and clarifying standards require an entity to recognize revenue when control of promised goods or services is transferred to the customer at an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. We adopted this new standard as of November 1, 2018, by applying the modified-retrospective method to those contracts that were not completed as of that date. The results for reporting periods beginning after November 1, 2018, are presented in accordance with the new standard, although comparative information has not been restated and continues to be reported under the accounting standards and policies in effect for those periods. The adoption of this new standard had an immaterial impact on our reported total revenues and operating income as compared to what reported amounts would have been under the prior standard.
The Company records revenue under Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. We evaluate our revenue contracts with customers based on the five-step model under ASC 606: (i) Identify the contract with the customer; (ii) Identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) Determine the transaction price; (iv) Allocate the transaction price to separate performance obligations; and (v) Recognize revenue when (or as) each performance obligation is satisfied.
Revenue is primarily derived from: (1) time and material contracts (representing approximately 99% of total revenues), which are typically based on the number of hours worked at contractually agreed upon rates. These service contracts relate to work which have no alternative use and for which the Company has an enforceable right to payment for the work completed to date. As a result, revenue is recognized over time when or as the Company transfers control of the promised products or services (known as performance obligations) to its customers. (2) short-term fixed-fee contracts or "not to exceed" contracts (representing approximately 1% of total revenues), which revenue is recognized similarly, except that certain milestones also have to be reached before revenue is recognized. If the Company determines that a contract will result in a loss, the Company recognizes the estimated loss in the period in which such determination is made.
Cash Equivalents - For purposes of the consolidated statements of cash flows, cash equivalents include investments in a money market obligations trust that is registered under the U.S. Investment Company Act of 1940 and liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less.
Accounts Receivable - Accounts receivable are recorded at their estimated realizable value. Accounts are deemed past due when payment has not been received within the stated time period. Our policy is to review individual past due amounts periodically and write off amounts for which all collection efforts are deemed to have been exhausted. Due to the nature of our customers, bad debts are mainly accounted for using the direct write-off method whereby an expense is recognized only when a specific account is determined to be uncollectible. The effect of using this method approximates that of the allowance method.
Income Taxes - We follow an asset and liability approach method of accounting for income taxes. This method measures deferred income taxes by applying enacted statutory rates in effect at the balance sheet date to the differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts on the financial statements. The resulting deferred tax assets or liabilities are adjusted to reflect changes in tax laws as they occur. A valuation allowance is provided when it is more likely than not that a deferred tax asset will not be realized.
The Company follows guidance from the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) related to Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes, which includes a two-step approach to recognizing, de-recognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions. As of October 31, 2020, the Company had no significant uncertain tax positions that would be reduced as a result of a lapse of the applicable statute of limitations.
Property and Equipment - Owned property and equipment are stated at cost. Vehicles under finance leases are stated at the lower of fair market value or net present value of the minimum lease payments at the inception of the leases.
Depreciation of owned assets are provided for, when placed in service, in amounts sufficient to relate the cost of depreciable assets to operations over their estimated service lives, using straight-line basis. Assets under finance leases are amortized over the lease term. While expenditures for repairs and maintenance are expensed when incurred.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets - The Company evaluates for impairment its long-lived assets to be held and used, and long-lived assets to be disposed of, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Based on management estimates, no impairment of the long-lived assets was present as of October 31, 2020 and 2019.
Stock-based Compensation - Stock-based compensation expense is recognized in the consolidated financial statements based on the fair value of the awards granted. Stock-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized as expense over the requisite service period, which generally represents the vesting period, and includes an estimate of awards that will be forfeited. We calculate the fair value of stock options using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model at grant date, while for restricted stock units the fair market value of the units is determined by Company’s share market value at grant date. Excess tax benefits related to stock-based compensation are reflected as cash flows from financing activities rather than cash flows from operating activities. We have not recognized such cash flow from financing activities since there has been no tax benefit related to the stock-based compensation.
Earnings Per Share of Common Stock - Basic earnings per share of common stock is calculated by dividing net income by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding. Diluted earnings per share includes the dilution of common stock equivalents.
The diluted weighted average shares of common stock outstanding were calculated using the treasury stock method for the respective periods.
Foreign Operations - The functional currency of our foreign subsidiaries are their respective local currencies. The assets and liabilities of our foreign subsidiary are translated into U.S. dollars at exchange rates in effect at the balance sheet date. Income and expense items are translated at the average exchange rates prevailing during the period. The cumulative translation effect for subsidiaries using a functional currency other than the U.S. dollar is included as a cumulative translation adjustment in stockholders’ equity and as a component of comprehensive income.
Our intercompany accounts are typically denominated in the functional currency of the foreign subsidiary. Gains and losses resulting from the remeasurement of intercompany receivables that we consider to be of a long-term investment nature are recorded as a cumulative translation adjustment in stockholders’ equity and as a component of comprehensive income, while gains and losses resulting from the remeasurement of intercompany receivables from those international subsidiaries for which we anticipate settlement in the foreseeable future are recorded in the consolidated statements of operations.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842) (“ASU 2016-02”). ASU 2016-02 is intended to increase transparency and comparability of accounting for lease transactions. For all leases with terms greater than twelve months, the new guidance will require lessees to recognize right-of-use assets and corresponding lease liabilities on the balance sheet and to disclose qualitative and quantitative information about lease transactions. The new standard maintains a distinction between finance leases and operating leases. As a result, the effect of leases in the statement of operations and statement of cash flows is largely unchanged. In July 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-11, Leases - Targeted Improvements, to allow a company to elect an optional modified retrospective transition method that applies the new lease requirements through a cumulative-effect adjustment in the period of adoption.
Effective November 1, 2019, the Company adopted the new lease accounting standard using the modified retrospective transition option of applying the new standard at the adoption date. We categorize leases at their inception as either operating or finance leases. The Company leases include an operational lease for office space and a finance lease agreement for a vehicle. The adoption of the new standard resulted in the operating lease being included in operating lease right-of-use assets, current operating lease liabilities, and long-term operating lease liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets, but did not have an impact on the Company’s beginning balance of retained earnings, consolidated statement of operations or statement of cash flows. Finance leases are included in net property and equipment, current installments of long-term debt, and long-term debt in our consolidated balance sheets. The most significant impact was the recognition of right-of-use assets and lease liabilities on account of the Company’s operating leases.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Recent accounting pronouncements pending adoption not discussed above, are either not applicable, or will not have or are not expected to have a material impact on us.
Forward-Looking Statements
Our business, financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and prospects, and the prevailing market price and performance of our common stock, may be adversely affected by a number of factors, including the matters discussed below. Certain statements and information set forth in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as well as other written or oral statements made from time to time by us or by our authorized executive officers on our behalf, constitute “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Federal Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These statements include all statements other than those made solely with respect to historical fact and identified by words such as “believes”, “anticipates”, “expects”, “intends” and similar expressions, but such words are not the exclusive means of identifying such statements. We intend for our forward-looking statements to be covered by the safe harbor provisions for forward-looking statements contained in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, and we set forth this statement and these risk factors in order to comply with such safe harbor provisions. You should note that our forward-looking statements speak only as of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K or when made and we undertake no duty or obligation to update or revise our forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by law. Although we believe that the expectations, plans, intentions and projections reflected in our forward-looking statements are reasonable, such statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause our actual results, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. The risks, uncertainties and other factors that our stockholders and prospective investors should consider are discussed in Item 1A Risk Factors above.