Item 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meanings of the federal securities laws. These statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results and events to differ materially from those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. For a detailed discussion of these risks and uncertainties, see the “Risk Factors” section in Item 1A of Part I of this Form 10-K. We caution the reader not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which reflect management’s analysis only as of the date of this Form 10-K. We undertake no obligation to update forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances occurring after the date of this Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company with a focus on the development and commercialization of innovative products to enhance cancer care. We in-license from Pfizer the global development and commercialization rights to PB272 (neratinib (oral)), PB272 (neratinib (intravenous)) and PB357. Neratinib is a potent irreversible TKI that blocks signal transduction through the epidermal growth factor receptors, HER1, HER2 and HER4. Currently, we are primarily focused on the development and commercialization of the oral version of neratinib, and our most advanced drug candidates are directed at the treatment of HER2-positive breast cancer and HER2 mutated cancers. We believe neratinib has clinical application in the treatment of several other cancers as well, including other tumor types that over-express or have a mutation in HER2, such as breast cancer, cervical cancer, lung cancer or other solid tumors.
Prior to 2017, our efforts and resources were focused primarily on acquiring and developing our pharmaceutical technologies, raising capital and recruiting personnel. In 2017, the FDA approved NERLYNX, formally known as PB272 (neratinib(oral)), for the extended adjuvant treatment of adult patients with early stage HER2-overexpressed/amplified breast cancer following trastuzumab-based therapy. In 2018, the EC granted marketing authorization for NERLYNX in the European Union for the extended adjuvant treatment of adult patients with early state hormone receptor positive HER-2-overexpressed/amplified breast cancer and who are less than one year from the completion of prior adjuvant trastuzumab-based therapy.
We have entered into exclusive sub-license agreements with various parties to pursue regulatory approval, if necessary, and commercialize NERLYNX, if approved, in various specified regions outside of the United States, including Europe (excluding Russia and Ukraine), Australia, Canada, China, Southeast Asia, South Korea, and various countries and territories in Central and South America. We plan to continue to pursue commercialization of NERLYNX in other countries outside the United States, if approved.
Our expenses to date have been related to hiring staff, commencing company-sponsored clinical trials and the build out of our corporate infrastructure and, since 2017, the commercial launch of NERLYNX. Accordingly, our success depends not only on the safety and efficacy of our product candidates, but also on our ability to finance product development. To date, our major sources of working capital have been proceeds from product and license revenue, public offerings of our common stock, proceeds from our credit facility and sales of our common stock in private placements.
Impact of COVID-19
Our priorities during the COVID-19 pandemic are protecting the health and safety of our employees while continuing our mission to develop and commercialize innovative products to enhance cancer care. Substantially all geographic regions in which our U.S. sales force operates have imposed, and those regions or other regions in which our sales force operates may in the future impose, “shelter-in-place” orders, quarantines or similar orders or restrictions to control the spread of COVID-19. These types of restrictions may deter or prevent cancer patients from traveling to see their doctors and result in a decline in revenue for NERLYNX, our only commercial product. Additionally, our commercial team and sales force have limited travel and personal interactions with physicians and customers, including visits to healthcare provider offices due to limitations that have been imposed at certain hospitals and medical facilities, and are currently conducting a large percentage of promotional activities virtually. These types of restrictions have adversely impacted our ability to engage with our customers and have adversely impacted sales of NERLYNX, our only commercial product, and they may continue to do so. The respective commercial teams of certain of the companies to which we sub-license the commercial rights to NERLYNX, and on which we rely for our international sales, have chosen or have been forced to take similar action, and other sub-licensees of NERLYNX may choose or be forced to take similar action. Furthermore, the COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in dramatic increases in unemployment rates, which may result in a substantial number of people becoming uninsured or underinsured. Any of these developments may have an adverse effect on our revenue. We have observed disruptions in patient enrollments in the United States and in our SUMMIT basket trial. If the COVID-19 pandemic continues to spread in the geographies in which we are conducting clinical trials, we may experience additional disruptions in those clinical trials, which could have a material adverse impact on our clinical trial plans and timelines.
Our ability to continue to operate without any significant negative impacts will in part depend on the length and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic and our ability to protect our employees and our supply chain. We continue to follow and monitor recommended actions of government and health authorities to protect our employees worldwide. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we and our key third-party suppliers and manufacturers were able to broadly maintain operations. We rely exclusively on third-party manufacturers to manufacture NERLYNX.
We intend to satisfy our near-term liquidity requirements through a combination of our existing cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities as of December 31, 2020 and proceeds that will become available to us through product sales, royalties and sub-license milestone payments. However, this intention is based on assumptions that may prove to be wrong. Changes may occur that would consume our available capital faster than anticipated, including the length and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic and measures taken to control the spread of COVID-19, as well as changes in and progress of our development activities, the impact of commercialization efforts, acquisitions of additional drug candidates and changes in regulation. Some of these developments have had and may continue to have an adverse effect on our revenue and thus could have an adverse effect on our ability to satisfy the minimum revenue covenants in our loan and security agreement.
Summary of Income and Expenses
Product revenue, net
Product revenue, net consists of revenue from sales of NERLYNX. We sell NERLYNX to a limited number of specialty pharmacies and specialty distributors in the United States. We record revenue at the net sales price, which includes an estimate for variable consideration for which reserves are established. Variable consideration consists of trade discounts and allowances, product returns, provider chargebacks and discounts, government rebates and other incentives.
License revenue
License revenue consists of consideration earned for performance obligations satisfied pursuant to our sub-license agreements.
Royalty revenue
Royalty revenue consists of consideration earned related to product sales made by our sub-licensees in their respective territories pursuant to our license agreements.
Cost of sales
Cost of sales consists of third-party manufacturing costs, freight, and indirect overhead costs associated with sales of NERLYNX. Cost of product sales also includes period costs related to royalty charges payable to Pfizer, the amortization of milestone payments under our license agreement with Pfizer, certain inventory manufacturing services, inventory adjustment charges, unabsorbed manufacturing and overhead costs, and manufacturing variances.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative, or SG&A, expenses, consist primarily of salaries and payroll-related costs, stock-based compensation expense, professional fees, business insurance, rent, general legal activities, credit loss expense and other corporate expenses. We expense SG&A expenses as they are incurred.
Research and development expenses
Research and development, or R&D, expenses include costs associated with services provided by consultants who conduct clinical services on our behalf, contract organizations for manufacturing of clinical materials and clinical trials. During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, our R&D expenses consisted primarily of clinical research organization, or CRO, fees; fees paid to consultants; salaries and related personnel costs; and stock-based compensation. We expense our R&D expenses as they are incurred. Internal R&D expenses primarily consist of payroll-related costs and also include equipment costs, travel expenses and supplies.
Results of Operations
The following summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. For discussion related to the results of operations and changes in financial condition for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, please refer to Item 7 of Part II, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report for the Year Ended December 31, 2019, which was filed with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission on February 28, 2020.
Total revenue
Total revenue was approximately $225.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $272.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Product revenue, net
Product revenue, net was approximately $196.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $211.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in product revenue, net was attributable to a volume decrease of approximately 21% in bottles of NERLYNX sold and an increase in variable consideration from approximately 14% of gross product revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 to approximately 16% of gross product revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, partially offset by an increase in gross selling price that occurred in the first quarter of 2020 and again in the third quarter of 2020. The increase in variable consideration is primarily due to an increase in government rebates.
License revenue
License revenue was approximately $22.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $60.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in license revenue was primarily due to a decrease in upfront payments that we recognized as revenue as consideration allocated to the sub-license of our intellectual property and satisfaction of performance-based milestones related to sub-license agreements in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Royalty revenue
Royalty revenue was approximately $5.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $0.4 million for the year-ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due to increased product sales by our sub-licensees as they increased commercialization of NERLYNX in additional territories.
Cost of sales
Cost of sales was approximately $39.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $36.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in cost of sales was primarily attributable to increased royalty expense due to Pfizer related to the increase in royalty revenue and an increase in the amortization of the intangible asset related to the milestone payments under our license agreement with Pfizer, which was partially offset by decreased royalty expenses due to Pfizer related to the decrease in product revenue, net.
Selling, general and administrative expenses:
Total SG&A expenses decreased approximately 16.3% to $118.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $141.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is primarily attributable to the following:
•
a decrease in stock-based compensation expense of approximately $10.1 million, primarily due to a decrease of approximately $6.9 million for stock options and restricted stock units that have fully vested, a decrease of approximately $5.1 million from stock awards forfeited and a decrease of approximately $2.7 million from stock award modifications partially offset by an increase of approximately $4.8 million from new grants and other immaterial fluctuations;
•
a decrease in professional fees of approximately $6.1 million, consisting primarily of decreases of approximately $6.6 million in legal fees in connection with various lawsuits and approximately $0.9 million for professional fees primarily related to decreased consultancy efforts related to marketing and commercialization support, partially offset by an increase of approximately $1.0 million in insurance premiums and $0.4 million in audit and board of directors fees;
•
a decrease in travel and meeting related costs of approximately $6.3 million related to travel restrictions and cancellations of on-site events due to the COVID-19 pandemic;
•
a loss of approximately $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 in connection with our decision to sublease the right to use a portion of our leased office space recorded as an operating asset in accordance with ASC 842, with no impairment loss in 2020;
•
a decrease in other, facilities and equipment costs for $0.4 million;
•
a decrease in payroll and related costs of $0.1 million;
which were partially offset by:
•
a credit loss expense of $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 for an amount owed from a sub-license partner relating to license revenue recognized during the third quarter of 2019, compared to no credit loss expense for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Research and development expenses:
Total R&D expenses decreased approximately 26.5% to $97.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $132.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is primarily attributable to the following:
•
a decrease in stock-based compensation expense of approximately $10.6 million, primarily due to a decrease of approximately $8.3 million for stock options and restricted stock units that have fully vested and a decrease of approximately $4.5 million from stock awards forfeited, partially offset by an increase of approximately $2.0 million from new grants and other immaterial fluctuations;
•
a decrease in internal R&D expense of approximately $0.9 million, primarily due to a decrease in payroll and payroll-related expenses as a result of reduction in headcount;
•
a decrease in clinical trial expenses of approximately $20.1 million, primarily due to the close out of certain clinical trials and a reduction in enrollments and patients for open studies; and
•
a decrease in consultant and contractors of approximately $3.6 million, primarily due to the close out of certain clinical trials.
Other income and expenses:
Interest income
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized approximately $0.5 million in interest income compared to approximately $2.8 million of interest income for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in interest income reflects less cash invested in money market accounts and high-yield savings accounts in 2020 compared to 2019.
Interest expense
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized approximately $14.0 million in interest expense compared to $15.0 million of interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in interest expense was primarily the result of having less borrowings outstanding in 2020 than in 2019. The decrease was partially offset by an increase in interest expense for the milestone payments being paid to Pfizer in installments.
Legal verdict expense
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized approximately $16.2 million in legal verdict expense, which primarily represents an increase to our prior estimate of potential amounts that may be owed to class action participants as a result of the Hsu v. Puma Biotechnology, Inc., et al. claims process. For the period ended September 30, 2020, we changed our estimate of the legal verdict expense and the associated legal expense accrual for the Hsu lawsuit. Our previous estimate was based on data and assumptions that were available at the time. We obtained additional data, previously unavailable, from the claims report and amended claims report filed with the Court. On September 8, 2020, the claims administrator submitted its final claims report to the Court and, on October 9, 2020, the claims administrator submitted its supplemental claims report. Our estimate of the legal verdict expense and the associated legal expense accrual for the Hsu lawsuit remained unchanged for the quarter ended December 31, 2020. The claims report asserts $50.5 million in damages, which is larger than the amount previously estimated. We intend to challenge these claims and estimate that the damages could range from $24.8 million to $51.4 million. As a result, we increased our estimate of the legal accrual on a prospective basis beginning in the third quarter of 2020 to $24.8 million, resulting in an additional $15.7 million legal verdict expense in 2020. The total amount of aggregate class-wide damages still remains uncertain and will be ascertained only after an extensive claims challenge process and the exhaustion of any appeals. Additionally, we incurred approximately $0.1 million in legal verdict expense related to class action administrator services and pre-judgment interest for the Hsu lawsuit and approximately $0.4 million in post-judgment interest for the Eshelman lawsuit. Our estimate of the legal verdict expense and the associated legal expense accrual for the Hsu lawsuit remained unchanged for the quarter ended December 31, 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized approximately $16.4 million in legal verdict expense related to the Eshelman v. Puma Biotechnology, Inc., et al. verdict. The legal verdict expense of $16.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was the result of our initial estimate of the total damages payable in the matter of $22.4 million, net of $6.0 million in insurance reimbursements.
Loss on debt extinguishment
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized approximately $8.1 million in loss on debt extinguishment related to the one-time fees paid in connection with our debt refinancing during the second quarter of 2019.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures:
In addition to our operating results, as calculated in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP, we use certain non-GAAP financial measures when planning, monitoring, and evaluating our operational performance. The following table presents our net loss and net loss per share, as calculated in accordance with GAAP, as adjusted to remove the impact of stock-based compensation. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, stock-based compensation represented approximately 61.0% and 75.8% of our net loss, respectively. Our management believes that these non-GAAP financial measures are useful to enhance understanding of our financial performance, are more indicative of our operational performance and facilitate a better comparison among fiscal periods. These non-GAAP financial measures are not, and should not be viewed as, substitutes for GAAP reporting measures.
Reconciliation of GAAP Net Loss to Non-GAAP Adjusted Net Loss and GAAP Net Loss Per Share to Non-GAAP Adjusted Net Loss Per Share
(in thousands except share and per share data)
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table summarizes our liquidity and capital resources as of and for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 and is intended to supplement the more detailed discussion that follows:
Operating Activities
We recorded net losses of approximately $60.0 million and $75.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We reported positive cash flows from operating activities of approximately $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and reported positive cash flows from operating activities of $22.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 included a net loss of $60.0 million, adjusted for non-cash items of approximately $36.6 million for stock-based compensation expense, approximately $10.0 million for depreciation and amortization, and $1.0 million for a provision for credit loss expense. Further changes in cash flows from operations included an increase in accrued expenses of approximately $19.3 million, a decrease in accounts receivable, net of approximately $2.4 million, and a decrease in prepaid expenses and other of approximately $2.3 million. These changes were offset by a decrease in accounts payable of approximately $7.1 million, an increase in other current assets of approximately $3.1 million, and an increase in inventory, net of approximately $0.3 million, and other immaterial fluctuations.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019, included a net loss of $75.6 million adjusted for non-cash items of approximately $57.3 million for stock-based compensation expense and approximately $8.1 million for depreciation and amortization, approximately $8.0 million for debt extinguishment fees and a loss of approximately $1.2 million for the impairment of an operating lease asset. Further changes in cash flows from operations included an increase in accrued expenses of approximately $22.6 million, an increase in post-marketing commitment liability of approximately $9.0 million, a decrease in other current assets of approximately $1.5 million and a decrease in prepaid expenses and other of approximately $0.6 million. These changes were offset by an increase in accounts receivable, net of approximately $8.1 million, a decrease in accounts payable of approximately $1.5 million, an increase in inventory, net of approximately $0.5 million, and an increase in deferred rent of approximately $0.2 million.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by investing activities was approximately $23.4 million. This included the maturity of available-for-sale securities of approximately $73.3 million, partially offset by the purchase of available-for-sale securities of approximately $29.8 million and an increase in intangible assets relating to the milestone achieved under our license agreement with Pfizer of $20.0 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, cash provided by investing activities was approximately $5.2 million. This included the maturity of available-for-sale securities of approximately $104.6 million and the sale of available-for-sale securities of approximately $28.1 million, partially offset by the purchase of available-for-sale securities of approximately $127.2 million and the purchase of property and equipment of approximately $0.3 million.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash was not materially changed by financing activities. During April 2020, approximately $8.4 million was borrowed and fully repaid with no penalty or interest from Silicon Valley Bank, or SVB, under the Paycheck Protection Program, or PPP, of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in financing activities was approximately $67.1 million, which consisted of $80.0 million in debt repayments, approximately $7.8 million in debt extinguishment costs, and approximately $5.6 million in debt issuance costs, offset by $25.0 million in proceeds from long-term debt and approximately $1.3 million in net proceeds from the exercise of stock options.
Loan and Security Agreement
In October 2017, we entered into a loan and security agreement with Silicon Valley Bank, or SVB, as administrative agent, and the lenders party thereto from time to time, or the Original Lenders, including Oxford and SVB. Pursuant to the terms of the credit facility provided for by the loan and security agreement, or the Original Credit Facility, we borrowed $50 million. In May 2018, we entered into an amendment to the loan and security agreement, which provided for an amended credit facility, or the Amended Credit Facility. Under the Amended Credit Facility, the Original Lenders agreed to make term loans available to us in an aggregate amount of $155 million, consisting of (i) a term loan in an aggregate amount of $125 million, the proceeds of which, in part, were used to repay the $50 million we borrowed under the Original Credit Facility, and (ii) a term loan in an aggregate amount of $30 million that we drew in December 2018, which was available to us under the Amended Credit Facility as a result of achieving a specified minimum revenue milestone. We were in compliance with all applicable financial covenants during the entire term of the Amended Credit Facility.
On June 28, 2019, or the Effective Date, we entered into a new credit facility, or the New Credit Facility, with Oxford, as collateral agent, and the lenders party thereto from time to time, including Oxford, pursuant to which we repaid the $155.0 million outstanding under the Amended Credit Facility, as well as all applicable exit and prepayment fees owed to the Original Lenders under the Amended Credit Facility, using cash on hand and $100.0 million in new borrowings from the New Credit Facility. Under the New Credit Facility, we issued to Oxford new and/or replacement secured promissory notes in an aggregate principal amount for all such
promissory notes of $100.0 million evidencing the New Credit Facility. No additional capacity remains available to us under the New Credit Facility.
The New Credit Facility is secured by substantially all of our personal property other than our intellectual property. We also pledged 65% of the issued and outstanding capital stock of our subsidiaries, Puma Biotechnology Ltd. and Puma Biotechnology B.V. The New Credit Facility limits our ability to grant any interest in our intellectual property to certain permitted licenses and permitted encumbrances set forth in the agreement.
The term loans under the New Credit Facility bear interest at an annual rate equal to the greater of (i) 9.0% and (ii) the sum of (a) the “prime rate,” as reported in The Wall Street Journal on the last business day of the month that immediately precedes the month in which the interest will accrue, plus (b) 3.5%. We are required to make monthly interest-only payments on each term loan under the New Credit Facility commencing on the first calendar day of the calendar month following the funding date of such term loan, and continuing on the first calendar day of each calendar month thereafter through August 1, 2021, or the Amortization Date. Commencing on the Amortization Date, and continuing on the first calendar day of each calendar month thereafter, we will make consecutive equal monthly payments of principal, together with applicable interest, in arrears to each lender under the New Credit Facility, calculated pursuant to the New Credit Facility. All unpaid principal and accrued and unpaid interest with respect to each term loan under the New Credit Facility is due and payable in full on June 1, 2024, or the Maturity Date. Upon repayment of such term loans, we are also required to make a final payment to the new lenders equal to 7.5% of the aggregate principal amount of such term loans outstanding as of the Effective Date. The effective interest rate as of December 31, 2020 was 12.75%.
At our option, we may prepay the outstanding principal balance of any term loan in whole but not in part, subject to a prepayment fee of 3.0% of the amount prepaid if the prepayment occurs through and including the first anniversary of the funding date of such term loan, 2.0% of the amount prepaid if the prepayment occurs after the first anniversary of the funding date of such term loan through and including the second anniversary of the funding date of such term loan, and 1.0% of the amount prepaid if the prepayment occurs after the second anniversary of the funding date of such term loan and prior to the Maturity Date.
The New Credit Facility includes affirmative and negative covenants applicable to us, our current subsidiaries and any subsidiaries we create in the future. The affirmative covenants include, among others, covenants requiring us to maintain our legal existence and governmental approvals, deliver certain financial reports, maintain insurance coverage and satisfy certain requirements regarding deposit accounts. We must also achieve certain product revenue targets, measured as of the last day of each fiscal quarter on a trailing year to date basis. New minimum revenue levels will be established for each fiscal year by mutual agreement of us, Oxford, as collateral agent, and the lenders under the New Credit Facility. The negative covenants include, among others, restrictions on our transferring collateral, incurring additional indebtedness, engaging in mergers or acquisitions, paying dividends or making other distributions, making investments, creating liens, selling assets and suffering a change in control, in each case subject to certain exceptions.
The New Credit Facility also includes events of default, the occurrence and continuation of which could cause interest to be charged at the rate that is otherwise applicable plus 5.0% and would provide Oxford, as collateral agent, with the right to exercise remedies against us and the collateral securing the New Credit Facility, including foreclosure against the property securing the New Credit Facility, including our cash. These events of default include, among other things, our failure to pay principal or interest due under the New Credit Facility, a breach of certain covenants under the New Credit Facility, our insolvency, a material adverse change, the occurrence of any default under certain other indebtedness in an amount greater than $500,000 and one or more judgments against us in an amount greater than $500,000 individually or in the aggregate that remains unsatisfied, unvacated, or unstayed for a period of 10 days after its entry.
On February 27, 2020, we entered into an amendment of the New Credit Facility with Oxford to establish the minimum revenue thresholds for the trailing year to date periods ending March 31, June 30, September 30, and December 31, 2020 and the fiscal year 2021. On August 5, 2020, we entered into an amendment of the New Credit Facility with Oxford to amend the minimum revenue thresholds for the trailing year to date periods ending September 30 and December 31, 2020. On February 3, 2021, we entered into an amendment of the New Credit Facility with Oxford to establish the minimum revenue thresholds for the trailing year to date periods ending March 31, June 30, September 30, and December 31, 2021.
As of December 31, 2020, there was $100.0 million in principal amounts outstanding under the New Credit Facility, representing all of our debt outstanding as of that date, and we were in compliance with all applicable covenants under the New Credit Facility.
Current and Future Financing Needs
We did not receive or record any product revenues until the third quarter of 2017. We have spent, and expect to continue to spend, substantial amounts in connection with implementing our business strategy, including our planned product development efforts, our clinical trials, our R&D efforts and our commercialization efforts.
We may choose to begin new R&D efforts or we may choose to launch additional marketing efforts. These efforts may require funding in addition to the cash and cash equivalents totaling approximately $85.3 million and $8.1 million in marketable securities available at December 31, 2020. While our consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, we expect to continue incurring significant losses for the foreseeable future and will need to generate significant revenue to sustain operations and successfully commercialize neratinib. While we have been successful in raising financing in the past, there can be no assurance that we will be able to do so in the future. Our ability to obtain funding may be adversely impacted by uncertain market conditions, including the global COVID-19 pandemic, our success in commercializing neratinib, unfavorable decisions of regulatory authorities or adverse clinical trial results. The outcome of these matters cannot be predicted at this time. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities as of December 31, 2020 and proceeds that will become available to us through product sales and sub-license payments are sufficient to satisfy our operating cash and capital needs for at least one year after the filing of this Annual Report.
In addition, we have based our estimate of capital needs on assumptions that may prove to be wrong. Changes may occur that would consume our available capital faster than anticipated, including changes in and progress of our development activities, the impact of commercialization efforts, acquisitions of additional drug candidates and changes in regulation. Potential sources of financing include strategic relationships, public or private sales of equity or debt and other sources of funds. We may seek to access the public or private equity markets when conditions are favorable due to our long-term capital requirements. If we raise funds by selling additional shares of common stock or other securities convertible into common stock, the ownership interests of our existing stockholders will be diluted. If we are not able to obtain financing when needed, we may be unable to carry out our business plan. As a result, we may have to significantly limit our operations, and our business, financial condition and results of operations would be materially harmed. In such an event, we will be required to undertake a thorough review of our programs, and the opportunities presented by such programs, and allocate our resources in the manner most prudent.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any “off-balance sheet arrangements,” as defined by the SEC regulations.
Contractual Obligations
Contractual obligations represent future cash commitments and liabilities under agreements with third parties and exclude contingent liabilities for which we cannot reasonably predict future payment. Our contractual obligations result from leases for office space and office equipment and the principal and interest owed under our credit facility. We also have unrecognized tax benefits that, if recognized, would affect the effective tax rate at December 31, 2020. We do not have tax positions for which it is reasonably possible that the total amounts of unrecognized tax benefit will significantly increase or decrease within 12 months of the reporting date. Additionally, the expected timing of payment of the obligations presented below is estimated based on current information.
The following table represents our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020, aggregated by type (in thousands):
Although we do have obligations for CRO services, the table above excludes potential payments we may be required to make under our agreements with CROs because timing of payments and actual amounts paid under those agreements may be different depending on the timing of receipt of goods or services or changes to agreed-upon terms or amounts for some obligations, and those agreements are cancelable upon written notice by us and therefore, not long-term liabilities. The contracts also contain variable costs and milestones that are hard to predict as they are based on such things as patients enrolled and clinical trial sites, which can vary and therefore, are also not included in the table above. The contracts held by us as of December 31, 2020, are summarized as follows (in thousands):
In regard to our contractual obligations in relation to the Pfizer in-license agreement, as consideration for the license, we are required to make substantial payments upon the achievement of certain milestones totaling approximately $187.5 million if all such milestones are achieved. The remaining milestone amounts were not included in the table above as the timing of when or if these payments will be made is uncertain. In connection with the FDA approval of NERLYNX in July of 2017, we triggered a one-time milestone payment pursuant to the agreement. In June 2020, we entered into a letter agreement with Pfizer relating to the method of payment associated with a milestone payment under our license agreement with Pfizer (see Note 14-Commitments and Contingencies in the accompanying notes to the financial statements). Should we commercialize any more of the compounds licensed from Pfizer or any products containing any of these compounds, we will be obligated to pay to Pfizer annual royalties at a fixed rate in the low to mid-teens of net sales of all such products, subject to certain reductions and offsets in some circumstances. Our royalty obligation continues, on a product-by-product and country-by-country basis, until the later of (i) the last to expire licensed patent covering the applicable licensed product in such country, or (ii) the earlier of generic competition for such licensed product reaching a certain level in such country or expiration of a certain time period after first commercial sale of such licensed product in such country. In the event that we sublicense the rights granted to us under the license agreement with Pfizer to a third party, the same milestone and royalty payments are required. We can terminate the license agreement at will, or for safety concerns, in each case upon specified advance notice.
See Note 13-Income Taxes and Note 14-Commitments and Contingencies in the accompanying notes to the financial statements for a summary of our uncertain tax positions and contracts held by us as of December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, the amount of unrecognized tax benefit was $3.3 million, and is also not included in the table above as the timing of when or if these payments will be made is uncertain.
Critical Accounting Policies
The discussion and analysis of our consolidated financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in conformity with GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities reported in our consolidated financial statements. The estimation process requires assumptions to be made about future events and conditions and, as a result, is inherently subjective and uncertain. Actual results could differ materially from our estimates.
The SEC defines critical accounting policies as those that are, in management’s view, most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and most demanding of our judgment. We consider the following policies to be critical to an understanding of our consolidated financial statements and the uncertainties associated with the complex judgments made by us that could impact our results of operations, financial position, and cash flows.
Revenue Recognition
Under Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, Topic 606 - Revenue from Contracts with Customers, or ASC 606, we recognize revenue when a customer obtains control of the promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. We had no contracts with customers until the FDA approved NERLYNX on July 17, 2017. Subsequent to receiving FDA approval, we entered into a limited number of arrangements with specialty pharmacies and specialty distributors in the United States to distribute NERLYNX. These arrangements are our initial contracts with customers. We have determined that these sales channels with customers are similar.
Product Revenue, Net:
We sell NERLYNX to a limited number of specialty pharmacies and specialty distributors in the United States. These customers subsequently resell our products to patients and certain medical centers or hospitals. In addition to distribution agreements with these customers, we enter into arrangements with health care providers and payors that provide for government mandated and/or privately negotiated rebates, chargebacks and discounts with respect to the purchase of our products.
We recognize revenue on product sales when the specialty pharmacy or specialty distributor, as applicable, obtains control of our product, which occurs at a point in time (upon delivery). Product revenue is recorded net of applicable reserves for variable consideration.
Shipping and handling costs for product shipments occur prior to the customer obtaining control of the goods and are recorded in cost of sales.
Reserves for Variable Consideration:
Revenue from product sales are recorded at the net sales price (transaction price), which includes estimates of variable consideration for which reserves are established. Components of variable consideration include trade discounts and allowances, product returns, provider chargebacks and discounts, government rebates, payor rebates, and other incentives, such as voluntary patient assistance, and other allowances that are offered within contracts between us and our customers, payors, and other indirect customers relating to the sale of our products. These reserves, as detailed below, are based on the amounts earned, or to be claimed on the related sales, and are classified as reductions of accounts receivable or a current liability. These estimates take into consideration a range of possible outcomes which are probability-weighted in accordance with the expected value method in ASC 606 for relevant factors such as current contractual and statutory requirements, specific known market events and trends, industry data, and forecasted customer buying and payment patterns. Overall, these reserves reflect our best estimates of the amount of consideration to which it is entitled based on the terms of the respective underlying contracts.
The amount of variable consideration which is included in the transaction price may be constrained, and is included in the net sales price only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of the cumulative revenue recognized under the contract will not occur in a future period. Our analyses also contemplated application of the constraint in accordance with the guidance, under which it determined a significant reversal of revenue would not occur in a future period for the estimates detailed below as of December 31, 2020 and, therefore, the transaction price was not reduced further during the year ended December 31, 2020. Actual amounts of consideration ultimately received may differ from our estimates. If actual results in the future vary from our estimates, we will adjust these estimates, which would affect net product revenue and earnings in the period such variances become known.
Trade Discounts and Allowances:
We generally provide customers with discounts which include incentive fees that are explicitly stated in our contracts and are recorded as a reduction of revenue in the period the related product revenue is recognized. In addition, we compensate (through trade discounts and allowances) our customers for sales order management, data, and distribution services. However, we have determined such services received to date are not distinct from our sale of products to the customer and, therefore, these payments have been recorded as a reduction of revenue within the statement of operations.
Product Returns:
Consistent with industry practice, we offer the specialty pharmacies and specialty distributors limited product return rights for damaged and expiring products, provided it is within a specified period around the product expiration date as set forth in the applicable individual distribution agreement. We estimate the amount of our product sales that may be returned by our customers and record this estimate as a reduction of revenue in the period the related product revenue is recognized, as well as a reduction to accounts receivables, net on the consolidated balance sheets. We currently estimate product returns using our sales information,
including our visibility into the inventory remaining in the distribution channel. We have an insignificant amount of returns to date and believe that returns of our products will continue to be minimal.
Provider Chargebacks and Discounts:
Chargebacks for fees and discounts to providers represent the estimated obligations resulting from contractual commitments to sell products to qualified healthcare providers at prices lower than the list prices charged to customers who directly purchase the product from us. Customers charge us for the difference between what they pay for the product and the ultimate selling price to the qualified healthcare providers. These reserves are established in the same period that the related revenue is recognized, resulting in a reduction of product revenue and a reduction to accounts receivable, net on the consolidated balance sheets. Chargeback amounts are generally determined at the time of resale to the qualified healthcare provider by customers, and we generally issue credits for such amounts within a few weeks of the customer’s notification to us of the resale. Chargebacks consist of credits that we expect to issue for units that remain in the distribution channel at each reporting period end that we expect will be sold to qualified healthcare providers, and chargebacks that customers have claimed, but for which we have not yet issued a payment.
Government Rebates:
We are subject to discount obligations under state Medicaid programs and Medicare. These reserves are recorded in the same period the related revenue is recognized, resulting in a reduction of product revenue and the establishment of a current liability which is included in accrued expenses on the consolidated balance sheets. Our liability for these rebates consists of invoices received for claims from prior quarters that have not been paid or for which an invoice has not yet been received, estimates of claims for the current quarter, and estimated future claims that will be made for product that has been recognized as revenue, but which remains in the distribution channel at the end of each reporting period.
Payor Rebates:
We contract with certain private payor organizations, primarily insurance companies and pharmacy benefit managers, for the payment of rebates with respect to utilization of its products. We estimate these rebates and record such estimates in the same period the related revenue is recognized, resulting in a reduction of product revenue and the establishment of a current liability.
Other Incentives:
Other incentives which we offer include voluntary patient assistance programs, such as the co-pay assistance program, which are intended to provide financial assistance to qualified commercially-insured patients with prescription drug co-payments required by payors. The calculation of the accrual for co-pay assistance is based on an estimate of claims and the cost per claim that we expect to receive associated with product that has been recognized as revenue, but remains in the distribution channel at the end of each reporting period. The adjustments are recorded in the same period the related revenue is recognized, resulting in a reduction of product revenue and the establishment of a current liability which is included as a component of accrued expenses on the consolidated balance sheets.
License Revenue:
We recognize license revenue under certain of our sub-license agreements that are within the scope of ASC 606. The terms of these agreements may contain multiple performance obligations, which may include licenses and research and development activities. We evaluate these agreements under ASC 606 to determine the distinct performance obligations. Non-refundable, up-front fees that are not contingent on any future performance and require no consequential continuing involvement by us, are recognized as revenue when the license term commences and the licensed data, technology or product is delivered. We defer recognition of non-refundable upfront license fees if the performance obligations are not satisfied.
Prior to recognizing revenue, we make estimates of the transaction price, including variable consideration that is subject to a constraint. Amounts of variable consideration are included in the transaction price to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur and when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved. Variable consideration may include nonrefundable upfront license fees, payments for research and development activities, reimbursement of certain third-party costs, payments based upon the achievement of specified milestones, and royalty payments based on product sales derived from the collaboration.
If there are multiple distinct performance obligations, we allocate the transaction price to each distinct performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price. The standalone selling price is generally determined based on the prices charged to
customers or using expected cost-plus margin. Revenue is recognized by measuring the progress toward complete satisfaction of the performance obligations using an input measure.
Royalty Revenue:
For sub-license agreements that are within the scope of ASC 606, we recognize revenue when the related sales occur in accordance with the sales-based royalty exception under ASC 606-10-55-65. Royalty revenue consists of consideration earned related to international sales of NERLYNX made by our sub-licensees in their respective territories. We recognize royalty revenue when the performance obligations have been satisfied.
Legal Contingencies and Expense
For legal contingencies, we accrue a liability for an estimated loss if the potential loss from any claim or legal proceeding is considered probable and the amount can be reasonably estimated. Legal fees and expenses are expensed as incurred based on invoices or estimates provided by legal counsel. We periodically evaluate available information, both internal and external, relative to such contingencies and adjust the accrual as necessary. We determine whether a contingency should be disclosed by assessing whether a material loss is deemed reasonably possible. In determining whether a loss should be accrued, we evaluate, among other factors, the degree of probability of an unfavorable outcome and the ability to make a reasonable estimate of the amount of the loss (see Note 14-Commitments and Contingencies in the accompanying notes to the financial statements).
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments. ASU 2016-13 requires that credit losses be reported using an expected losses model rather than the incurred losses model that is currently used, and establishes additional disclosures related to credit risks. For trade accounts receivable, we recognize credit losses based on lifetime expected losses using the probability of default method. For available-for-sale debt securities with unrealized losses, this standard now requires allowances to be recorded instead of reducing the amortized cost of the investment. These amendments under ASU 2016-13 are effective for interim and annual fiscal periods beginning after December 15, 2019. We adopted ASU 2016-13, and the adoption did not have a material effect on our current financial position, results of operations or financial statement disclosures.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-13, Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820): Disclosure Framework-Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement. As of January 1, 2020, we adopted the amendments in ASU 2018-13, which modifies the disclosure requirements on fair value measurements. The removed and modified disclosures were adopted on a retrospective basis and the new disclosures were adopted on a prospective basis. The adoption of ASU 2018-13 did not have a material effect on our current financial position, results of operations or financial statement disclosures.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes, as part of its Simplification Initiative to reduce the cost and complexity in accounting for income taxes. The amendments in ASU 2019-12 remove certain exceptions related to the approach for intraperiod tax allocation, the methodology for calculating income taxes in an interim period and the recognition of deferred tax liabilities for outside basis differences. ASU 2019-12 also amends other aspects of the guidance to help simplify and promote consistent application of GAAP. The guidance is effective for interim and annual periods beginning after December 15, 2020, with early adoption permitted. We do not expect ASU 2019-12 to have a material effect on our current financial position, results of operations or financial statement disclosures.