ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
References to the “Company,” “Periphas Capital Partnering Corporation,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Periphas Capital Partnering Corporation. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on September 11, 2020 as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar partnering transaction with one or more businesses, which we refer to as a “Partnering Transaction.” We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
Our sponsor is PCPC Holdings, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (the “Sponsor”). The registration statement for our Initial Public Offering was declared effective on December 9, 2020. On December 14, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 14,400,000 CAPS™ (the “CAPS™”), at an offering price of $25.00 per CAPS™, generating gross proceeds of $360.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $4.0 million (net of reimbursement of offering costs of approximately $350,000 from the underwriters. The underwriters exercised the over-allotment option in full and on December 16, 2020 purchased an additional 2,160,000 additional CAPS™ at the public offering price (the “Over-Allotment CAPS™”), generating gross proceeds of approximately $54.0 million, and we incurred additional offering costs of approximately $540,000 in underwriting fees (the “Over-Allotment”).
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private placement of 224,000 private placement CAPS™ (the “Private Placement CAPS™”) at a price of $25.00 per CAPS™ to the Sponsor, generating proceeds of $5.6 million and simultaneously with the closing of the Over-Allotment on December 16, 2020, the Company consummated the second closing of the Private Placement, resulting in the purchase of an aggregate of an additional 21,600 Private Placement CAPS™ at a price of $25.00 per CAPS™ by the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds to the Company of $540,000 (the “Private Placements”).
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Private Placements, and the Over-Allotment, $414.0 million ($25.00 per CAPS™) of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and certain of the proceeds of the Private Placement was placed in a trust account (“Trust Account”) with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee and invested in United States “government securities,” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by the Company, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Partnering Transaction and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
If we are unable to complete a Partnering Transaction within 24 months or December 14, 2022, (or 27 months, or March 14, 2023, if we execute a letter of intent, agreement in principle or definitive agreement for the Partnering Transaction within 24 months) from the closing of the Initial Public Offering to complete our initial Partnering Transaction (the “Partnering Period”), we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, of $25.00, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining stockholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii), to the Company’s obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and in all cases subject to the other requirements of applicable law.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity from September 11, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, was in preparation for an Initial Public Offering, and since our Initial Public Offering, our activity has been limited to the search for a prospective Partnering Transaction. We will not generate any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our Partnering Transaction.
For the period from September 11, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of approximately $76,000, which consisted of approximately $65,000 of general and administrative expenses, including approximately $14,000 of general and administrative expenses with related party, and franchise tax expense of approximately $12,000, offset by approximately $1,000 of interest on the investments held in the Trust Account.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $1.3 million in cash and working capital of approximately $1.5 million.
Our liquidity needs through the Initial Public Offering had been satisfied through the payment of $25,000 from our Sponsor to cover for certain expenses on behalf of us in exchange for the issuance of the Founder Shares and the Performance Shares, a loan under the Note from our Sponsor of approximately $148,000, and the net proceeds
from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust Account. We fully repaid the Note to our Sponsor on December 15, 2020. In addition, in order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Partnering Transaction, our Sponsor may, but is not obligated to, provide us Working Capital Loans. As of December 31, 2020, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loan.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of a Partnering Transaction or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective Partnering Transaction candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Partnering Transaction.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Contractual Obligations
Registration and Stockholder Rights
The holders of the Founder Shares, Performance Shares, Forward Purchase Shares, Private Placement Warrants and private placement shares underlying Private Placement CAPS™ and private placement CAPS™ that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any shares of Class A common stock issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants that are part of the Private Placement CAPS™, and CAPS™ may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans and upon conversion of the Founder Shares and the Performance Shares) are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement signed upon the effective date of the Initial Public Offering, requiring the Company to register such securities for resale. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of the Partnering Transaction. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Investments Held in the Trust Account
Our portfolio of investments held in the Trust Account is comprised of investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities. The investments held in the Trust Account are classified as trading securities. Trading securities are presented on the balance sheet at fair value at the end of each reporting period. The estimated fair values of investments held in the Trust Account are determined using available market information, other than for investments in open-ended money market funds with published daily net asset values (“NAV”), in which case the Company uses NAV as a practical expedient to fair value. The NAV on these investments is typically held constant at $1.00 per unit.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Shares of conditionally redeemable Class A common stock (including Class A common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, shares of Class A common stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2020, 16,419,021 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the accompanying balance sheets.
Net Loss Per Share of Common Stock
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of Financial Accounting Standard Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standard Codification (“ASC”) Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” Net loss per share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of common stock outstanding during the period, reduced for shares subject to forfeiture. We have not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 4,201,400 shares of our Class A common stock in the calculation of diluted income per share, since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method.
Our statement of operations includes a presentation of loss per share for common stock subject to redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of loss per share. Net loss per share of common stock, basic and diluted for shares of Class A common stock are calculated by dividing the income earned on investments held in the Trust Account, net of applicable taxes, which was approximately $0 for the period from September 11, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, by the weighted average number of Class A common stock outstanding for the period. Net loss per share of common stock, basic and diluted for shares of Class B and Class F common stock is calculated by dividing the net loss of approximately $76,000, less income attributable to Class A common stock of $0 by the weighted average number of Class B common stock outstanding for the period.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Our management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material impact on our financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As such, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404,
(ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.