Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of the Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review the section titled “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described below.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on the development of drug products that are intended to provide treatment for patients who have a high unmet medical need condition that effects survival or the patient’s quality of life and have few or no treatment options. We currently have three drugs in various stages of clinical development. Our most advanced product candidate, PCS499, is an oral tablet that is a deuterated analog of one of the major metabolites of pentoxifylline (PTX or Trental®). We have completed a Phase 2A trial for PCS499 and will begin recruiting for a Phase 2 trial in the first half of 2021. In addition, we have in-licensed PCS6422 (eniluracil) from Elion Oncology and PCS12852 from Yuhan Corporation. PCS6422 will be orally administered with capecitabine in a Phase 1B dose-escalation study in patients with Advanced Refractory Gastrointestinal (GI) Tract Tumors, with recruitment beginning in the first half of 2021. PCS12852 has already been evaluated in clinical studies in South Korea and we anticipate a response back to our pre-IND meeting questions by March 31, 2021. Our remaining two drug assets whose active molecules have been shown to be clinically efficacious require additional toxicology data in order to advance these candidates to an IND stage of development.
Our Strategy
Our strategy is to acquire or in-license development candidates that will not only treat a specific group of patients with unmet medical needs, but may also have the potential to chart a more efficient path to registration. In many instances, these clinical candidates have significant pre-clinical and clinical data that we can leverage to high value inflection points while de-risking the programs and adding in optionality to potential future indications. The regulatory science approach our team has developed over the last 20+ years seeks to leverage the earlier data and identify the least risk path toward commercialization/registration of these drugs. We apply rigorous standards to identify drugs for our portfolio, namely:
i. The drug must represent a treatment option to patients with a high unmet medical need condition by improving survival and/or quality of life for these patients,
ii. The drug or its metabolite or a drug with similar pharmacological properties must have demonstrated some evidence of efficacy in the target population, and
iii. The drug can be quickly developed such that within 2-4 years, critical value-added clinical milestones can be achieved while advancing the drug closer to commercialization and adding to the potential for a high return on investment.
In order to add significant value to our in-licensed drugs within 2 to 4 years, the drugs must be in the clinical development stage and not in discovery stage, and during those 2 to 4 years we must be able to obtain clinical data to support the added value. The additional clinical data could range from a clinical proof-of-concept data to further demonstrate that the proposed pharmacology occurs clinically in the targeted patient population to a pivotal well-designed randomized controlled trial.
Our portfolio specifically includes drugs that (i) already have clinical proof-of-concept data demonstrating the desired pharmacological activity in humans or, minimally, clinical evidence in the form of case studies or clinical experience demonstrating the drug or a similar drug pharmacologically can successfully treat patients with the targeted indication; (ii) target indications for which the FDA believes that a single positive pivotal study demonstrating efficacy provides enough evidence that the clinical benefits of the drug and its approval outweighs the risks associated with the drug or the present standard of care (e.g., some orphan indications, many serious life-threatening conditions, some serious quality of life conditions); and/or (iii) target indications where the prevalence of the condition and the likelihood of patients enrolling in a study meet the desired time-frame to demonstrate that the drug can, at some level, treat or potentially treat patients with the condition.
To advance our mission, we have assembled an experienced and talented management and product development team. Our team is experienced in developing drug products through all principal regulatory tiers from IND enabling studies to NDA submission. Our combined scientific, development and regulatory experience has resulted in more than 30 drug approvals by the FDA, over 100 meetings with the FDA and involvement with more than 50 drug development programs, including drug products targeted to patients who have an unmet medical need. Although we believe that the skills and experience of our team in drug development and commercialization is an important indicator of our future success, the past successes of our team in developing and commercializing pharmaceutical products does not guarantee that they will successfully develop and commercialize drugs for us. In addition, the growth in revenues of companies at which our executive officers and directors served in was due to many factors and does not guarantee that they will successfully operate or manage us or that we will experience similar growth in revenues, even if they continue to serve as executive officers and/or directors.
Our ability to generate meaningful revenue from any products depends on our ability to out-license the drugs in the U.S. and/or ex-U.S. before or after we obtain FDA NDA approval. Even if our products are authorized and approved by the FDA, it should be noted that the products must still meet the challenges of successful marketing, distribution and consumer acceptance.
Recent Developments
Private Placement - On February 24, 2021, we sold in a private placement 1,321,132 shares of our common stock to accredited and institutional investors for gross proceeds of $10.2 million. Net proceeds from the offering were $9.9 million. We issued warrants for the purchase of 79,268 shares to our placement agent. These warrants are exercisable for cash at $9.30 per share and expire on February 24, 2023.
Conversion of our 8% Senior Notes - On December 15, 2020, all of our outstanding 8% Senior Convertible Notes and related accrued interest were converted into 247,088 shares of our common stock.
License Agreements - In connection with our October 6, 2020 underwritten offering and up-list to Nasdaq, we met the conditions contained on our license agreements with Elion and Aposense and finalized our license agreements with them.
Underwritten Public Offering - On October 6, 2020, we closed on our underwritten public offering of 4,800,000 shares of common stock for a public offering price of $4.00 per share. Net proceeds from the offering were approximately $17.1 million.
Conversion of our Line of Credit with DKBK Enterprises, LLC. - On October 6, 2020, the Lender converted $700,000 principal amount and related accrued interest of $18,333 under the LOC Agreement into 199,537 shares of common. In connection with our October 6, 2020 underwritten offering, we terminated our LOC Agreements with DKBK and CorLyst, both related parties.
Impact of COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic has created uncertainties in the expected timelines for clinical stage biopharmaceutical companies such as ours, including possible delays in clinical trials and disruptions in the supply chain for raw materials used in clinical trial work. Such delays could materially impact our business in future periods. Furthermore, the spread of COVID-19, which has caused a broad impact globally, may materially affect us economically. While the potential economic impact brought by, and the duration of, COVID-19 may be difficult to assess or predict, a widespread pandemic could result in significant disruption of global financial markets, reducing our ability to access capital, which could in the future negatively affect our liquidity. Policymakers around the globe have responded with fiscal policy actions to support the healthcare industries and economies as a whole. The magnitude and overall effectiveness of these actions remain uncertain. Accordingly, the extent to which the COVID-19 global pandemic impacts our business, results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and are difficult to predict. These developments include, but are not limited to, the duration and spread of the outbreak, its severity, the actions to contain the virus or address its impact, U.S. and foreign government actions to respond to the reduction in global economic activity, and how quickly and to what extent normal economic and operating conditions can resume. For more information on the risks associated with COVID-19, refer to Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” herein.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our operations loss during the periods indicated:
Revenues.
We had no revenue during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. We do not currently have any revenue under contract or any immediate sales prospects.
Research and Development Expenses.
Our research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Research and development expenses include (i) licensing of compounds for product testing and development, (ii) program and testing related expenses, (iii) amortization of the exclusive PCS499 license intangible asset used in research and development activities, and (iv) internal research and development staff related payroll, taxes and employee benefits, external consulting and professional fees related to the product testing and our development activities. Non-refundable advance payments for goods and services to be used in future research and development activities are recorded as prepaid expenses and expensed when the research and development activities are performed.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, our research and development expenses increased by $851,812 to $3,172,385 when compared to $2,320,573 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Costs for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
Our research and development salaries and benefits increased by $662,092 for the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the same period in 2019 related to an increase in stock-based compensation of $749,830, which was offset by a decrease in salaries and related benefits of $87,738. The decrease in salaries and related benefits related to the departure of two research and development team members in the first quarter of 2020. We also recognized higher research and development expenses for preclinical, clinical trial and other costs of $189,720 during the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the same period in 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we completed our Phase 2A clinical trial for PCS499, as well as began designing and engaged two CROs for the Phase 2 clinical trial for PCS499 and the Phase 1B clinical trial for PCS6422. In contrast, during the same period in 2019, our focus was on enrolling patients in our trial, along with other trial costs, including providing doses of PCS499 to participants in our Phase 2A clinical trial in NL.
We incurred $347,767 in costs related to our Phase 2A trial during the year ended December 31, 2020, bringing the total cost of the trial to be $1.2 million. PoC Capital paid for $900,000 of the clinical trial costs, and we covered the remaining $336,234 with funds received from the sale of our 2019 Senior Notes and our LOC Agreement with DKBK. During the year ended December 31, 2019, PoC Capital made payments directly to our CRO totaling $689,168 for amounts invoiced and repaid us $210,832 for clinical trial expenses we previously paid to our CRO, $180,119 of which is included in Prepaid and Other on our consolidated balance sheet at December 31, 2019. We amended the existing pledge agreement with PoC Capital on September 30, 2019 to reduce the committed funds from $1.8 million to $900,000, which was paid in full during the year ended December 31, 2019.
We anticipate our research and development costs to increase significantly in the future as we continue having drug products manufactured for us and conduct future clinical trials related to our current drug portfolio as we start clinical trials for PCS499, PCS6422 and PCS12852.
The funding necessary to bring a drug candidate to market is, however, subject to numerous uncertainties. Once a drug candidate is identified, the further development of that drug candidate can be halted or abandoned at any time due to a number of factors. These factors include, but are not limited to, funding constraints, safety or a change in market demand. For each of our drug candidate programs, we periodically assess the scientific progress and merits of the programs to determine if continued research and development is economically viable. Certain of our programs may be terminated due to the lack of scientific progress and lack of prospects for ultimate commercialization. As noted above, we anticipate our research and development costs to increase in the future as we conduct the Phase 2 trial to evaluate the ability of PCS499 to completely close ulcers in patients with NL and begin a Phase 1B clinical trial for PCS6422. We expect to begin recruiting patients for these two clinical trials during the first half of 2021.
Our clinical trial accruals are based on estimates of patient enrollment and related costs at clinical investigator sites, as well as estimates for the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with multiple research institutions and CROs that conduct and manage clinical trials on our behalf.
We estimate third-party manufacturing and clinical trial expenses based on the services performed, pursuant to contracts with research institutions and clinical research organizations that conduct and manage preclinical studies and clinical trials on our behalf. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of patient enrollment and activity expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the estimate, we will adjust the accrual accordingly. Payments made to third parties under these arrangements in advance of the receipt of the related series are recorded as prepaid expenses until the services are rendered.
Acquisition of In-Process Research and Development.
In connection with the Yuhan, Aposense and Elion License Agreements, we recorded $2 million, $2.5 million and $4.2 million (including $800,000 in the acquisition of in-process research and development for the year ended December 31, 2020 related to future issuance of 200,000 shares of common stock to Elion on the first and second anniversary date of the license agreement), respectively, for a total of $8.7 million of acquired in-process research and development expense during the year ended December 31, 2020. We believe the in-process research and development assets acquired have no alternative future use. We did not acquire any in-process research and development assets in 2019.
General and Administrative Expenses.
Our general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $1,649,565 to $3,264,474 when compared to $1,614,909 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase related mostly to increased payroll and related costs of $1,415,029 (including an increase in employee stock-based compensation of $1,308,991) as we began paying closer-to-market salary rates. We also experienced an increase of $141,175 in professional fees as we evaluated opportunities to in-license additional drugs, as well as an increase of $53,226 in other administrative costs such as insurance and office expenses.
Our tax expense also increased by $71,816 in 2020 compared to 2019 due to an increase in our Delaware franchise taxes. This increase was primarily due to the impact of our 1-for-7 reverse stock split in December 2019 on the computation of our franchise tax. On June 25, 2020, we amended our articles of incorporation to reduce the number of authorized shares in part to decrease our future Delaware franchise tax.
These increases were offset by a decrease of $15,727 in expenses such as travel, repairs and maintenance and training. Reimbursable expenses from CorLyst of $119,001 for rent and other costs during the year ended December 31, 2020 were $15,954 greater than the same period in 2019.
We expect the general and administrative expenses to continue to increase as we add staff to support our growing research and development activities and the administration required to operate as a public company.
Other Income and Expense.
Interest expense was $281,122 and $36,658 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, related to our 2019 Senior Notes, borrowings on the LOC Agreement with DKBK, and the PPP loan. Included in interest expense is the amortization of debt issuance costs totaling $199,900 and $0 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Interest income was $3,174 and $11,548 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Interest income represents interest earned on money market funds.
Income Tax Benefit.
An income tax benefit of $1,001,019 and $602,716 was recognized for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. A deferred tax liability was created as a result of our acquisition of CoNCERT’s license and “Know-How” in exchange for Processa stock that had been issued in the Internal Revenue Code Section 351 transaction on March 19, 2018. The Section 351 transaction treated the acquisition of the Know-How for stock as a tax-free exchange. As a result, under ASC 740-10-25-51 Income Taxes, Processa recorded a deferred tax liability of $3,037,147 for the acquired temporary difference between the financial reporting basis of $11,038,929 and the tax basis of $1,782. The deferred tax liability will be reduced for the effect of the non-deductibility of the amortization of the intangible asset and may be offset by the deferred tax assets resulting from net operating tax losses (see Note 4 - Income Taxes). This offset results in the recognition of a deferred tax benefit shown in the consolidated statements of operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On October 6, 2020, we closed an underwritten public offering of 4,800,000 shares of common stock for a public offering price of $4.00 per share. Net proceeds from the offering were approximately $17.1 million. On February 24, 2021, we closed a private placement for the sale of 1,321,132 shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $7.75 per share to accredited and institutional investors for gross proceeds of $10.2 million. Net proceeds from the offering were $9.9 million.
At December 31, 2020, we had $15,416,224 in cash. Net cash used in our operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $3,143,196 compared to $2,750,145 for the year ended December 31, 2019. We have incurred losses since inception, devoting substantially all of our efforts toward research and development, and have an accumulated deficit of approximately $25.4 million at December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated a net loss of approximately $14.4 million and we expect to continue to generate operating losses and negative cash flow from operation for the foreseeable future. However, we believe our cash balance at December 31, 2020, along with the $9.9 million in net proceeds from the February 2021 private placement, is adequate to fund our budgeted operations through 2023. Our ability to execute our longer-term operating plans, including unplanned future clinical trials for our portfolio of drugs depend on our ability to obtain additional funding from the sale of equity and/or debt securities, a strategic transaction or other funding transactions. We plan to continue to actively pursue financing alternatives, but there can be no assurance that we will obtain the necessary funding in the future when necessary.
Our estimate of future cash needs were on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available cash sooner than we currently expect. Our ultimate success depends on the outcome of our planned clinical trials and our research and development activities, as disclosed above. We expect to incur additional losses in the future and we anticipate the need to raise additional capital to fully implement our business plan if the cost of our planned clinical trials are greater than we expect or they take longer than anticipated. We also expect to incur increased general and administrative expenses in the future due in part to planned increased research and development activities as we conduct a Phase 2 trial for PCS499, a Phase 1B trial for PCS6422, and a Phase 2A clinical trial for PCS12852. In addition, there may be costs we incur as we develop these drug products that we do not currently anticipate requiring us to need additional capital sooner than currently expected.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
● the cost of future trials for PCS499, PCS6422 and PCS12852, and the cost of third-party manufacturing;
● the initiation, progress, timing, costs and results of drug discovery, pre-clinical studies and clinical trials of PCS11T and any other future product candidates;
● the number and characteristics of product candidates that we pursue;
● the outcome, timing and costs of seeking regulatory approvals;
● the costs associated with hiring additional personnel and consultants as our pre-clinical and clinical activities increase;
● the emergence of competing therapies and other adverse market developments;
● the costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, expanding, defending and enforcing patent claims, including litigation costs and the outcome of such litigation;
● the extent to which we in-license or acquire other products and technologies; and
● the costs of operating as a public company.
Until such time as we can generate substantial product revenues to support our capital requirements, if ever, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of public or private equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations and licensing arrangements or other capital sources. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be or could be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our common stockholders.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth our sources and uses of cash and cash equivalents for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Net cash used in operating activities
We used net cash in our operating activities of $3,143,196 and $2,750,145 during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in cash used in operating activities during 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily related to clinical trial costs as we completed our Phase 2A study and began our Phase 2 study for PCS499 and Phase 1B study for PCS6422, as well as the payment of 2019 deferred salary costs, increased pay rates to be closer-to-market salaries and additional salary for our newly hired Chief Operating Officer.
Since we are in the process of developing our products, we anticipate our research and development efforts and ongoing general and administrative costs will continue to generate negative cash flows from operating activities for the foreseeable future and that these amounts will increase in the future. We do not currently sell or distribute pharmaceutical products or have any sales or marketing capabilities.
Net cash provided by financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 of $17,867,884 was from our 2020 underwritten public offering, borrowings totaling $700,000 under our LOC Agreement with DKBK and $162,459 we received from the Bank of America pursuant to a promissory note under the Paycheck Protection Program, less transaction costs of $2.1 million related to our underwritten public offering. During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities of $900,000 were funds received from our clinical trial funding investor in partial satisfaction of his stock subscription receivable that he paid directly to our CRO. We also received net proceeds of $800,720 from the issuance of 2019 Senior Notes, offset by $4,280 of debt issuance costs.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations at December 31, 2020:
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with CROs, clinical supply manufacturers and vendors for pre-clinical studies, research supplies and other services and products for operating purposes. These contracts generally provide for termination after a notice period, and, therefore, are cancelable contracts and not included in the table above.
We have also entered into license and collaboration agreements with third parties, which are in the normal course of business. We have not included future payments under these agreements in the table of contractual obligations above since obligations under these agreements are contingent upon future events such as our achievement of specified development, regulatory, and commercial milestones, or royalties on net product sales
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
During the periods presented we did not have, nor do we currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined under SEC rules.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to accrued expenses and stock-based compensation. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe the following accounting policies and estimates are most critical to aid in understanding and evaluating our financial results reported in our consolidated financial statements.
Valuation of Intangible Assets
Our intangible assets consist of the capitalized costs of $20,500 for a software license and $11,038,929 associated with the exercise of the option to acquire the exclusive license from CoNCERT related to patent rights and Know-How to develop and commercialize compounds and products for PCS499 and each metabolite thereof and the related income tax effects. The capitalized costs for the license rights to PCS499, in addition to the fair value of the common stock issued, also includes $1,782 in transaction costs and $3,037,147 associated with the initial recognition of an offsetting deferred tax liability related to the acquired temporary difference for an asset purchased that is not a business combination and has a nominal tax basis in accordance with ASC 740-10-25-51 Income Taxes. In accordance with ASC Topic 730, Research and Development, we capitalized the costs of acquiring the exclusive license rights to PCS499 as the exclusive license rights represent intangible assets to be used in research and development activities that have future alternative uses.
We used a market approach to estimate the fair value of the common stock issued to CoNCERT in this transaction. Our estimate was based on the final negotiated number of shares of stock issued and the volume weighted average price of our common stock quoted on the OTC Pink Marketplace over a 45-day period preceding the mid-February 2018 finalized negotiation of the modification to the option and license agreement with CoNCERT. We believe the fair values used to record intangible assets acquired in this transaction are based upon reasonable estimates and assumptions given the facts and circumstances as of the related valuation dates.
We determined our intangible assets to have finite useful lives and review them for impairment when facts or circumstances suggest that the carrying value of these assets may not be recoverable.
Clinical Trial Accruals / Research and Development
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate expenses resulting from our obligations under contracts with vendors, CROs and consultants and under clinical site agreements related to conducting our clinical trials. The financial terms of these contracts vary and may result in payment flows that do not match the period over which materials or services are provided under such contracts.
Our clinical trial accruals are based on estimates of patient enrollment and related costs at clinical investigator sites as well as estimates for the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with multiple research institutions and CROs that conduct and manage clinical trials on our behalf. During a clinical trial, we will adjust the clinical expense recognition if actual results differ from estimates. We make estimates of accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date based on the facts and circumstances known at that time. Our clinical trial accruals are partially dependent on the accurate reporting by the CRO and other third-party vendors. Although we do not expect estimates to differ materially from actual amounts, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in reporting amounts that may be too high or too low for any reporting period.
Payments made to third parties under these arrangements in advance of the receipt of the related services are recorded as prepaid expenses until the services are rendered. We expense research and development costs as they are incurred.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for the cost of employee services received in exchange for the award of equity instruments based on the fair value of the award, determined on the date of grant. Significant assumptions utilized in determining the fair value of our stock options include the volatility rate, estimated term of the options, risk-free interest rate and forfeiture rate. The expense is to be recognized over the period during which an employee is required to provide services in exchange for the award. We estimate forfeitures at the time of grant and make revisions, if necessary, at each reporting period if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates.
Non-employee stock-based compensation awards generally are immediately vested and have no future performance requirements by the non-employee and the total stock-based compensation charge is recorded in the period of the measurement date.
We estimate the fair value of stock option grants using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, and the assumptions used in calculating the fair value of stock-based awards represent management’s best estimates and involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the use of subjective assumptions that include the expected stock price volatility and the fair value of the underlying common stock on the date of grant. See Note 5 - Stock-Based Compensation for information concerning certain of the specific assumptions we used in applying the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the estimated fair value of our stock options granted during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
All stock-based compensation costs are recorded in general and administrative or research and development costs in the consolidated statements of operations based upon the underlying individual’s role.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes in accordance with ASC Topic 740, Income Taxes. Under the asset and liability method, deferred income taxes are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax basis and operating loss carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the year in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect of changes in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in income in the period such changes are enacted. A valuation allowance is provided against net deferred tax assets if recoverability is uncertain on a more likely than not basis. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we have established a valuation allowance to offset certain deferred tax assets.
We recognize the impact of an uncertain tax position if the position will more likely than not be sustained upon examination by a taxing authority, based on the technical merits of the position. Our policy is to record interest and penalties related to income taxes as part of its income tax provision. As of December 31, 2020, we had no unrecognized tax benefits and as such, no liability, interest or penalties were required to be recorded. We do not expect this to change significantly in the next twelve months.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 of our consolidated financial statements for new accounting pronouncements or changes to the recent accounting pronouncements during the year ended December 31, 2020.