Item 7: Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following commentary presents a discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations by its management. This review highlights the principal factors affecting earnings and the significant changes in balance sheet items for the years 2020 and 2019. Financial information for prior years is presented when appropriate. The objective of this financial review is to enhance investor understanding of the accompanying tables and charts, the consolidated financial statements, notes to financial statements, and financial statistics appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Where applicable, this discussion also reflects management’s insights with respect to known events and trends that have or may reasonably be expected to have a material effect on the Company’s operations and financial condition.
You should read this discussion of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with, and we qualify our discussion in its entirety by, the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere within this annual report, the material contained under Part 1, Item 1. “Description of Business” and Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” of this annual report, and the cautionary disclosure about forward-looking statements at the front of Part I of this annual report.
Introduction
PCTEL is a leading global provider of wireless technology, including purpose-built Industrial Internet of Thing (“IoT”) devices, antenna systems, and test and measurement solutions. We solve complex wireless challenges to help organizations stay connected, transform, and grow. We have two businesses (antennas/Industrial IoT devices and test & measurement products) that address three market segments: Enterprise Wireless, Intelligent Transportation, and Industrial IoT. Our antennas and Industrial IoT devices include antennas deployed in small cells, enterprise Wi-Fi access points, fleet management and transit systems, and in network equipment and devices for the Industrial IoT. Our test & measurement products improve the performance of wireless networks globally. Mobile operators, neutral hosts, and network equipment manufacturers rely on our products to analyze, design, and optimize next generation wireless networks.
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic disrupted the global economy and adversely impacted our business, including demand for our products across multiple end-markets as well as our supply chain and operations. Our foremost focus as we respond to the pandemic has been on the health and safety of our employees. We consider our company to be an essential supplier to our customers and business partners as we provide products which our customers rely upon daily to support crucial functions such as public safety, train control, and agriculture. We continue to operate with enhanced health and safety measures across our facilities, including modifying practices to adhere to guidance from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and local health and governmental authorities with respect to social distancing, physical separation, personal protective equipment, and sanitization. We have restricted the number of employees permitted in common areas at any given time. We also have enhanced procedures for dealing with confirmed COVID-19 cases, compliance auditing, and manufacturing line design. Employees whose duties permit working remotely continue to do so, including our executive, sales, engineering, marketing, and customer service teams. Virtually all employees remain subject to travel restrictions and access to our premises by non-employees is restricted. We will continue to closely monitor the risks posed by COVID-19 and adjust our practices accordingly.
In order to mitigate some of the negative financial impact caused by the pandemic, during 2020 we executed a number of temporary cost saving measures: (i) reduced our capital spending for the year without deferring strategic ongoing initiatives; (ii) reduced operating expenses through temporary salary and director fee reductions; (iii) implemented a hiring freeze; (iv) reduced discretionary spending; and (v) terminated our then-existing stock repurchase program as of April 1, 2020 with $5.0 million remaining. We also deferred payroll taxes under The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act. We did not however, terminate or furlough any employees as a result of the pandemic. Because we were able to maintain our profitability and cash position in the second quarter and based on our third quarter outlook, in July 2020 we reinstated the salaries for all employees not identified as an executive or key manager and approved hiring for open positions. In August 2020, the reinstatement of 5% of the salary reductions for executives and key managers and director fees were approved.
The public health situation, global response measures and corresponding impacts on various markets remain fluid and uncertain and may lead to sudden changes in trajectory and outlook. We will continue to proactively respond to the situation and may take further actions that alter our business activity as may be required by governmental authorities, or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees and operations. Although the COVID-19 pandemic adversely impacted our operations and financial results in with lower revenues and profits in 2020 compared to 2019, we remained profitable and we were able pursue our research and development and growth strategies.
Financial Summary
Revenues were $77.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of 14.5% from the prior year. By product line, revenues decreased to $27.6 million by $0.6 million (2%) for test & measurement products and decreased to $50.5 million by $12.2 million (19.4%) for antennas & Industrial IoT devices. Gross profits of $37.9 million were lower by $3.6 million due to the impact of lower
revenues, but the gross profit percentage increased by 3.2% in 2020 due to a higher mix of test & measurement products which have a higher gross profit than antennas & Industrial IoT devices and a higher gross profit percentage within the test & measurement product line compared to 2019. Operating expenses of $34.6 million decreased by $4.1 million as 2020 included lower employee costs $1.2 million, mainly cash-based incentive compensation expense, lower stock compensation expense of $1.5 million, lower sales commissions of $0.6 million, lower travel expenses of $1.0 million, and lower restructuring expense of $0.4 million, partially offset by higher development costs of $0.2 million for engineering and higher office expense and professional fees of $0.4 million. Other income declined by $0.9 million because interest income declined by $0.4 million, the Company incurred net foreign exchange losses of $0.4 million, and other income declined by $0.1 million. The net impact of these changes resulted in income before tax of $3.4 million in 2020 compared to income before tax of $3.8 million in 2019.
Results of Operations
Years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
(All amounts in tables, other than percentages, are in thousands)
REVENUES BY PRODUCT LINE
Revenues for antennas and Industrial IoT devices of $50.5 million decreased $12.2 million (19.4%) compared to 2019, as we experienced lower revenues for antennas for public safety applications, small cells, and enterprise wireless applications. The decline in revenues for small cell antennas is primarily due to lower demand from Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd. resulting from restrictions imposed by the U.S. Department of Commerce on sales of certain products to Huawei. Revenues in the other antenna markets were also negatively impacted by delays and demand for customer orders as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Revenues from Huawei declined by $2.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Revenues for test & measurement products of $27.6 million decreased by $0.6 million (2.0%) as higher revenues for 5G products and public safety applications offset lower revenues for products with technologies other than 5G.
GROSS PROFIT BY PRODUCT LINE
The gross profit percentage was 49.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of 3.2% compared to 2019. Approximately 2.0% of the gross profit percentage increase was due to a higher mix of test & measurement products in 2020. The proportion of revenues from test & measurement products as a percentage of total revenues increased from 31% in 2019 to 36% in 2020. The remainder of the gross profit percentage increase was primarily due to a higher gross profit percentage for test & measurement products in 2020 compared to 2019. For test & measurement products, the gross profit percentage increased by 3.5% primarily due to revenue mix with more software content and lower inventory reserve provision expense as well as reduced intangible amortization expense in cost of sales. The inventory reserve provisions in 2019 were higher because of write-downs for excess inventory related to older components. For antennas & Industrial IoT devices, the gross profit percentage was approximately the same as more favorable product mix and cost reductions in China offset the negative impact of lower volume.
CONSOLIDATED OPERATING EXPENSES
Research and development expenses increased by $0.2 million from 2019 to 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2020, spending on outside services and materials increased by $0.8 million and depreciation expense increased by $0.2 million, offsetting lower incentive compensation expense of $0.8 million compared to the same period in the prior year. The spending on outside services and materials related to new product development and the depreciation expense was related to test equipment and leasehold improvements in our Clarksburg, Maryland office. We had 56 and 55 full-time equivalent employees in research and development at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Sales and marketing expenses include costs associated with the sales and marketing employees, sales representatives, product line management, and other direct marketing expenses. Sales and marketing expenses decreased by approximately $1.2 million from 2019 to 2020 as lower travel expenses, lower employee sales commissions, and a credit loss recovery offset higher salary expenses. Travel expenses were lower by $0.8 million, employee sales commissions were lower by $0.6 million, and recovery of a credit loss contributed $0.2 million. Salary expenses increased by $0.4 million due to higher average headcount in marketing, business development, and in the U.S. sales organization. We had 50 and 48 full-time equivalent employees in sales and marketing at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
General and administrative expenses include costs associated with the general management, finance, human resources, information technology, legal, public company costs, and other operating expenses to the extent not otherwise allocated to other functions. General and administrative expenses decreased by $2.6 million from 2019 to 2020 primarily due to lower incentive compensation expenses. For the year ended December 31, 2020, performance-based incentive compensation expense decreased by $2.2 million, and time-based stock-based compensation declined by $0.3 million. Additionally, administrative expenses declined by $0.1 million for our China operations. We had 34 and 31 full-time equivalent employees in general and administrative functions at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Amortization of intangible assets within operating expenses was approximately $32 and $0.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in amortization expense in 2020 compared to 2019 was because all intangible assets were fully amortized in 2020.
Restructuring expenses of $0.1 million in 2020 consisted of employee severance and payroll related costs associated with the termination of 12 employees in connection with our transition of manufacturing from our Tianjin, China facility to contract manufacturers. The restructuring expense of $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of employee severance and related costs associated with the termination of 84 employees as a result of transitioning manufacturing from our Tianjin, China facility to contract manufacturers. See Note 4 to the financial statements for additional information related to the Tianjin restructuring.
OPERATING PROFIT
Total operating profit increased $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 as the positive impact of lower operating expenses offset the negative impact of lower gross profits.
OTHER INCOME, NET
Other income, net consists of interest income, foreign exchange gains and losses, and interest expense. For the year ended December 31, 2020, interest income decreased by $0.4 million due to lower average interest rates. Foreign exchange losses during the year ended December 31, 2020 were related to fluctuation in the Chinese Yuan compared to the U.S. dollar. The foreign exchange gains during the year ended December 31, 2019 were also related to the fluctuations in the Chinese Yuan compared to the U.S. Dollar.
EXPENSE FOR INCOME TAXES
The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was lower than the statutory rate of 21.0% by approximately 20% primarily because we have a full valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets.
In accordance with ASC 740 “Accounting for Income Taxes” (“ASC 740”), we evaluate our deferred income tax assets quarterly to determine if valuation allowances are required or should be adjusted. ASC 740 requires that companies assess whether valuation allowances should be established against their deferred tax assets based on consideration of all available evidence, both positive and negative, using a “more likely than not” standard of whether the deferred tax assets will be realized. Our net deferred tax assets consist of assets related to net operating losses and credits as well as assets related to timing differences.
We generated net income and tax income during 2020 but our earnings were below our projections. While we recorded pretax book income for 2020 and 2019 and we believe our financial outlook remains positive, we did not meet expectations during two of the past three years and the COVID-19 pandemic has created a high level of uncertainty. Because of difficulties with forecasting financial results historically, and due to the uncertainties associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, we maintained a full valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets at December 31, 2020. The Company’s performance versus its 2020 and 2018 projections are considered significant negative evidence that is difficult to overcome on a “more likely than not” standard through objectively verifiable data. While the Company believes its financial outlook remains positive, under the accounting standards, objective verifiable evidence will have greater weight than subjective evidence such as the Company’s projections for future growth. Based on an evaluation in accordance with the accounting standards, as of December 31, 2020, we maintained a full valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets. We have a valuation allowance of $12.1 million recorded against our net U.S. deferred tax assets and a valuation allowance of $0.8 million recorded against our net China deferred tax assets to measure the deferred tax assets that are more likely than not to be realized based on the weight of all the available evidence.
Until an appropriate level of profitability is attained, we expect to maintain a full valuation allowance on our U.S. net deferred tax assets, and our China net deferred tax assets. Any U.S. or China tax benefits or tax expense recorded on our Consolidated Statement of Income will be offset with a corresponding valuation allowance until such time that we change our determination related to the realization of deferred tax assets. If we change our determination as to the amount of deferred tax assets that can be realized, we will adjust the valuation allowance with a corresponding impact to the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made.
The analysis that we prepared to determine the valuation allowance required significant judgment and assumptions regarding future market conditions as well as forecasts for profits, taxable income, and taxable income by jurisdiction. Due to the sensitivity of the analysis, changes to the assumptions in subsequent periods could have a material effect on the valuation allowance.
See Note 5 of the consolidated financial statements for more information on income taxes.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
On December 31, 2020, our cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments were approximately $36.3 million, and we had working capital of approximately $52.9 million. In addition, we had $4.6 million of long-term investments at December 31, 2020. On December 31, 2020 we had $2.9 million of cash held in China bank accounts. This cash cannot be accessed without incurring a local withholding tax rate of 10%. These funds are currently considered permanently reinvested. Our primary source of liquidity is cash provided by operations and a significant balance of cash, with short term swings in liquidity supported short-term investments. The balance has fluctuated with cash from operations, acquisitions and divestitures, payment of dividends and the repurchase of our common shares.
Within operating activities, we are historically a net generator of operating funds from our income statement activities. In periods of expansion, we expect to use cash from our balance sheet.
Within investing activities, capital spending historically ranges between 2.0% and 4.0% of our revenues and the primary use of capital is for manufacturing and engineering development requirements. Our capital expenditures during the year ended December 31, 2020 were approximately 5.3% of revenues. Capital expenditures were higher than the upper limit of our historical range in 2020 because we spent $1.4 million for leasehold improvements for the Clarksburg, Maryland facility that opened in 2020.
We historically have significant transfers between investments and cash as we rotate large cash balances and short-term investment balances between money market funds, which are accounted for as cash equivalents, and other investments. We have a history of supplementing our organic revenue growth with acquisitions of product lines or companies, resulting in significant uses of our cash and short-term investment balances from time to time. We expect the historical trend for capital spending and the variability caused by moving money between cash and investments and periodic acquisition activity to continue in the future.
Within financing activities, we are a net user of funds. We have historically used funds for quarterly dividends and generated funds from the exercise of stock options and proceeds from the issuance of common stock through the Employee Stock Purchase Plan (“ESPP”). We also periodically repurchase shares of our common stock through share repurchase programs. We used $3.8 million of cash during 2020 for the repurchase of 663,619 shares.
We believe that cash generated by operating activities, our short-term investment balances, and cash on our balance sheet will be enough to support our operations for the next 12 months, including dividend payments and capital expenditures.
The following table is a summary of cash flow activity for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Operating Activities:
We generated $13.4 million of funds from operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020. The cash from operating activities includes net income of $3.4 million, the add-back of $5.5 million for non-cash expenses, and positive net changes in operating assets and liabilities of $4.5 million. The balance sheet provided cash due to lower inventories of $2.1 million, higher accounts payable of $1.1 million and lower accounts receivables of $1.0 million. The decrease in inventories was primarily within the antenna product line due to lower revenues in the fourth quarter compared to fourth quarter in 2019, and due to the transition of manufacturing to contract manufactures. Accounts payable were higher due to timing of purchases in the fourth quarter 2020 compared to the fourth quarter 2019 and by extending the payment cycle for certain vendors. Accounts receivable declined because revenues were lower in the fourth quarter 2020 compared to the fourth quarter 2019.
We generated $10.9 million of funds from operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2019. The cash from operating activities was due to net income of $3.8 million, the add-back of $7.9 million for non-cash expenses, offset by changes in operating assets and liabilities of $0.8 million. We used cash of $2.8 million for the decrease of accounts payable. Accounts receivable increased by $1.5 million primarily because revenues were higher in the fourth quarter 2019 by $1.7 million compared to the fourth quarter 2018. Accrued liabilities were higher by $2.3 million primarily because the Company’s accrual for its Short-Term Incentive Plan was $2.6 million at December 31, 2019 and was $0 at December 31, 2018.
Investing Activities:
Our investing activities used $6.8 million of cash during the year ended December 31, 2020. Redemptions and maturities of our short-term investments during the year provided $47.0 million in cash and we rotated $49.7 million of cash into new short-term and long-term investments. We used $4.1 million of cash for capital expenditures during the year ended December 31, 2020. The capital expenditures during 2020 included $2.1 million for leasehold improvements and furniture and equipment for the new Clarksburg, Maryland office.
Our investing activities used $3.9 million of cash during the year ended December 31, 2019. Redemptions and maturities of our short-term investments during the year provided $46.6 million in cash and we rotated $48.2 million of cash into new short-term investments. We used $2.3 million of cash for capital expenditures during the year ended December 31, 2019. The capital expenditures during 2019 included $0.6 million for leasehold improvements for the new Clarksburg, Maryland office.
Financing Activities:
We used $8.2 million of cash for financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020. We used $2.0 million for the common stock repurchases during the first quarter and $1.8 million for common stock repurchases during the fourth quarter. We used $4.1 million for cash dividends paid quarterly during 2020 and we used $1.1 million for payroll taxes related to stock-based compensation. The tax payments related to our common stock issued for restricted stock awards. We received $0.9 million in proceeds from the purchase of shares through our ESPP. On April 16, 2020, we received a $3.5 million paycheck protection program (“PPP”) loan from the Small Business Administration. Based upon subsequent guidance regarding PPP loan eligibility, we returned the funds on April 30, 2020.
We used $4.1 million of cash for financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019. We used $4.1 million for cash dividends paid quarterly and we used $1.2 million for payroll taxes related to stock-based compensation. The tax payments related to our common stock issued for restricted stock awards. We received $1.2 million in proceeds from the purchase of shares through our ESPP.
Contractual Obligations and Commercial Commitments
The following summarizes our contractual obligations on December 31, 2020 for office and product assembly facility leases, office equipment leases and purchase obligations, and the effect such obligations are expected to have on the liquidity and cash flows in future periods (in thousands):
(a)
Future payments for the lease of office and production facilities.
(b)
Future payments for the maintenance lease of office equipment.
(c)
Purchase orders or contracts for the purchase of inventory, as well as for other goods and services, in the ordinary course of business, and excludes the balances for purchases currently recognized as liabilities on the balance sheet.
We have a liability related to uncertain positions for income taxes of $0.8 million on December 31, 2020. We do not know when this obligation will be settled.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the period reported. By their nature, these estimates and judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience, market trends, and other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Revenue Recognition - We sell antennas & Industrial IoT devices and test & measurement products. All our revenue relates to contracts with customers. Our accounting contracts are from purchase orders or purchase orders combined with purchase agreements. Most of our revenue is recognized on a “point-in-time” basis and a nominal amount of revenue is recognized “over time”. For the sale of products, we satisfy our performance obligations generally at the time of shipment, or upon delivery based on the contractual terms with our customers. For antennas shipped on consignment, we recognize revenue upon delivery from the consignment location. For our test & measurement software tools, we have performance obligations to provide software maintenance and support for one year. We recognize revenues for the maintenance and support over this period. We allow our major antenna distributors to return a limited number of products under specified terms and conditions and accrue for product returns. See Note 14 for additional information related to revenue policies.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Credit Losses - Accounts receivable is recorded at invoiced amount. We extend credit to our customers based on an evaluation of a customer’s financial condition and collateral is generally not required. We maintain an allowance
for credit losses for estimated uncollectible accounts receivable. The allowance is based on our assessment of known delinquent accounts, historical experience, and other currently available evidence of the collectability and the aging of accounts receivable. Although management believes the current allowance is sufficient to cover existing exposures, there can be no assurance against the deterioration of a major customer’s creditworthiness, or against defaults that are higher than what has been experienced historically.
Excess and Obsolete Inventory - We maintain reserves to reduce the value of inventory to net realizable value and reserves for excess and obsolete inventory. Reserves for excess inventory are calculated based on our estimate of inventory more than normal and planned usage. Reserves for obsolete inventory are based on our identification of inventory where carrying value is above net realizable value. We believe the accounting estimate related to excess and obsolete inventory is a critical accounting estimate because it requires us to make assumptions about future sales volumes and product mix, both of which are highly uncertain. Changes in these estimates can have a material impact on our financial statements.
Warranty Costs - We offer repair and replacement warranties of primarily five years for antennas & Industrial IoT devices and scanning receiver products. Our warranty reserve is based on historical sales and costs of repair and replacement trends. We believe that the accounting estimate related to warranty costs is a critical accounting estimate because it requires us to make assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain, including future rates of product failure and repair costs. Changes in warranty reserves could be material to our financial statements.
Stock-based Compensation - We recognize stock-based compensation expense for all equity awards in accordance with fair value recognition provisions. For service-based equity awards, we amortize stock-based compensation expense over the requisite service period. For performance-based equity awards, we amortize stock-based compensation expense based on the estimated achievement award over the performance period. We record forfeitures as incurred. Stock-based compensation expense is dependent on assumptions used in calculating such amounts. These assumptions include risk-free interest rates, expected term of the stock-based compensation instrument granted, volatility of stock and option prices, expected time between grant date and date of exercise, attrition, performance, and other factors. These factors require us to use judgment. Our estimates of these assumptions typically are based on historical experience and currently available marketplace data. While management believes that the estimates used are appropriate, differences in actual experience or changes in assumptions may affect our future stock-based compensation expense and disclosures.
Income Taxes - Income taxes are accounted for under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
Our Company has an international subsidiary located in Tianjin and a representative office located in Hong Kong. Our Tianjin subsidiary has a branch office in Beijing, China. The complexities that arise from operating in different tax jurisdictions inevitably lead to an increased exposure to worldwide taxes. Should review of the tax filings result in unfavorable adjustments to our tax returns, the operating results, cash flows, and financial position could be materially and adversely affected.
We are subject to the continuous examination of our income tax returns by the Internal Revenue Service and other tax authorities. A change in the assessment of the outcomes of such matters could materially impact our consolidated financial statements. The calculation of tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax regulations. We recognize liabilities for anticipated tax audit issues based on our estimate of whether, and the extent to which, additional taxes may be required. If we ultimately determine that payment of these amounts is unnecessary, then we reverse the liability and recognize a tax benefit during the period in which we determine that the liability is no longer necessary. We also recognize tax benefits to the extent that it is more likely than not that our positions will be sustained if challenged by the taxing authorities. To the extent we prevail in matters for which liabilities have been established or are required to pay amounts in excess of our liabilities, our effective tax rate in a given period may be materially affected. An unfavorable tax settlement would require cash payments and may result in an increase in our effective tax rate in the year of resolution. A favorable tax settlement would be recognized as a reduction in our effective tax rate in the year of resolution.
Valuation Allowances for Deferred Tax Assets - We establish an income tax valuation allowance when available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that all or a portion of a deferred tax asset will not be realized. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we consider the amounts and timing of expected future deductions or carryforwards and sources of taxable income that may enable utilization. We maintain an existing valuation allowance until enough positive evidence exists to support its reversal. Changes in the amount or timing of expected future deductions or taxable income may have a material impact on the level of income tax valuation allowances. Our assessment of the realizability of the deferred tax assets requires judgment about our future results. Inherent in this estimation is the requirement for us to estimate future book and taxable income and possible tax planning strategies. These estimates require us to exercise judgment about our future results, the prudence and feasibility of possible tax planning strategies, and the
economic environment in which we do business. It is possible that the actual results will differ from the assumptions and require adjustments to the allowance. Adjustments to the allowance would affect future net income.
Impairment Reviews of Goodwill - We perform an annual impairment test of goodwill as of the end of the first month of the fiscal fourth quarter (October 31st), or at an interim date if an event occurs or if circumstances change that would indicate that an impairment loss may have been incurred. In performing our annual impairment test, we may consider qualitative factors that would indicate possible impairment. A quantitative fair value assessment is performed at the reporting unit level. If the carrying value exceeds the fair value, the implied fair value of goodwill is then compared against the carrying value of goodwill to determine the amount of impairment.
The process of evaluating the potential impairment of goodwill is subjective because it requires the use of estimates and assumptions in determining a reporting unit’s fair value. We calculate the fair value of each reporting unit by using the income approach based on the present value of future discounted cash flows. The discounted cash flow method requires us to use estimates and judgments about the future cash flows of the reporting units. Although we base cash flow forecasts on assumptions that are consistent with plans and estimates we use to manage the underlying reporting units, there is significant judgment in determining the cash flows attributable to these reporting units, including markets and market share, sales volumes and mix, research and development expenses, tax rates, capital spending, discount rate and working capital changes. Cash flow forecasts are based on reporting unit operating plans for the early years and business projections in later years. We believe the accounting estimate related to the valuation of goodwill is a critical accounting estimate because it requires us to make assumptions that are highly uncertain about the future cash flows of our reporting units.
Impairment Reviews of Finite-Lived Intangible Assets - We evaluate the carrying value of finite-lived intangible assets and other long-lived assets for impairment whenever indicators of impairment exist. We test finite-lived intangible assets for recoverability using undiscounted cash flows. Although we base cash flow forecasts on assumptions that are consistent with plans and estimates we use to manage the underlying reporting units, there is significant judgment in determining the cash flows attributable to these reporting units, including markets and market share, sales volumes and mix, research and development expenses, capital spending and working capital changes. Cash flow forecasts are based on operating plans and business projections. We compare the tax-affected undiscounted cash flows to the carrying value of the asset group. If the carrying value exceeds the sum of the undiscounted cash flows of the asset group, we would assess the fair value of the intangible assets in the group to determine if an impairment charge should be recognized in the financial statements.
We believe the accounting estimate related to the valuation of intangible assets is a critical accounting estimate because it requires us to make assumptions about future sales prices and volumes for products that involve new technologies and applications where customer acceptance of new products or timely introduction of new technologies into their networks are uncertain. The recognition of impairment could be material to our financial statements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 Organization and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in Item 1 of this Form 10-K for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.