Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the section titled “Selected Consolidated Financial and Other Data” and the consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, adverse effects on our business and general economic conditions due to the current COVID-19 pandemic, those identified below, and those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The last day of our fiscal year is January 31. Our fiscal quarters end on April 30, July 31, October 31 and January 31.
Overview
PagerDuty is a digital operations management platform that empowers the right action, when seconds matter.
Our platform, which includes our auto remediation software, is the best way to manage urgent, mission-critical work-and keep digital services always on. It sits at the center of a company’s digital ecosystem ingesting signals and using machine learning and automation to prevent and automate real time work, predict and avoid downtime. We enable teams to reduce outages, improve productivity and accelerate digital transformations.
We collect data from virtually any software-enabled system or device and combine it with human response data correlating and processing it to understand digital opportunities and issues that need to be addressed in real-time. Using the world’s broadest integrations, event management, automated remediation and diagnostics, and human driven runbook automation, we bring together the right people with the right information so they can resolve issues and act on opportunities in minutes and seconds, not hours, days or even weeks like legacy solutions.
Since our founding in 2009, we have expanded our capabilities from a single product focused on on-call management for technical teams to one that serves many roles across the company, delivering a real time source of truth to security, customer service, and executive stakeholders alike. Growing from an on-call tool into a full digital operations management platform, spanning incident response, on-call management, business visibility, advanced analytics, and AI Ops capabilities across automation and event management to reduce the noise, interruptions and redundant tasks from our customer’s lives. We have invested in developing the scalability, reliability, and security of our platform, allowing us to address the needs of even the largest and most demanding customers. We have spent years building deep product integrations to our platform, and our ecosystem now includes over 500 direct integrations to enable our customers to gather and correlate digital signals from virtually any software-enabled
system or device. Those same integrations allow PagerDuty to connect with popular collaboration tools and business applications, as well as all types of technology stacks to drive automation of work.
Our platform is easy to adopt and scalable for businesses of all sizes. We generate revenue primarily from both cloud-hosted and term license software subscription fees with the majority of our revenue from such arrangements. We offer a three-tiered range of pricing plans aligned with our customers’ needs and the sophistication of their digital operations. In addition, our Rundeck automation offering is available on a subscription basis. We also offer a “freemium” plan for less than five users to introduce new users to the platform. We have a land-and-expand business model that leads to viral adoption of our products and subsequent expansion. Our online self-service model is the primary mechanism for landing new customers and enabling teams to get started without assistance. We complement our self-service model with high-velocity inside sales focused on small and medium businesses, a commercial team focused on mid-market customers, and a field sales team focused on enterprise customers. Our mid-market and enterprise customers account for the majority of our revenue today. These teams drive expansion to additional users, additional teams, and new use cases, as well as upsell premium functionality.
As of January 31, 2021, we had more than 13,500 customers globally, ranging from the most disruptive startups to established Fortune 100 companies across every industry including software and technology, telecommunications, retail, travel and hospitality, media and entertainment, and financial services. Our customers use our products across a broad range of use cases such as Engineering, IT Operations, Security, and Customer Service. Of these customers, 426 customers have annual recurring revenue (“ARR”) in excess of $100,000, and 26 customers have ARR in excess of $1,000,000. We define ARR as the annualized recurring value of all active contracts at the end of a reporting period. We define a customer as a separate legal entity, such as a company or an educational or government institution, that has an active subscription with us or one of our partners to access our platform. In situations where an organization has multiple subsidiaries or divisions, we treat the parent entity as the customer instead of treating each subsidiary or division as a separate customer. Our 10 largest customers represented approximately 12% of our revenue for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021, and no single customer represented more than 10% of our revenue in the same period, highlighting the breadth of our customer base. We serve a vital role in our customers’ digital operations and grow with them as their needs expand. As such, we have developed a loyal customer base, with total ARR churn representing less than 5% of beginning ARR for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021. Our ARR churn rate represents lost revenue from customers that were no longer contributing revenue at the end of the current period but did contribute revenue in the equivalent prior year period. We generally bill monthly subscriptions monthly and subscriptions with terms of greater than one year annually in advance.
We expand within our existing customer base by adding more users (e.g., more developers), creating additional use cases (e.g., developer to IT), and upselling higher priced packages and additional products. Once our platform is deployed, we typically see significant expansion within our customer base. Our dollar-based net retention rate was 121% for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021.
We have a highly efficient operating model, which comes from a combination of our cloud-native architecture, optimal utilization of our third-party hosting providers, and prudent approach to headcount expansion. This has allowed us to achieve best-in-class gross margins of over 86% for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021. Our strong gross margins allow us the flexibility to invest more in our platform and go-to market function while maintaining strong operating leverage on our path to profitability.
COVID-19 Update
In December 2019, a novel coronavirus and the resulting disease (“COVID-19”) was reported, and in January 2020, the World Health Organization (“WHO”) declared it a Public Health Emergency of International Concern. In February 2020, the WHO raised its assessment of the COVID-19 threat from high to very high at a global level due to the continued increase in the number of cases and affected countries, and in March 2020, the WHO characterized COVID-19 as a pandemic.
The extent and continued impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business will depend on certain developments including the duration and spread of the pandemic; government responses to the pandemic; impact on our customers and our sales cycles; industry or employee events; and effect on our partners and vendors, all of
which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. While our revenues, billings, and earnings are relatively predictable as a result of our subscription-based business model and the majority of our revenues are generated from annual subscriptions, the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic, along with the seasonality we historically experience, may not be fully reflected in our results of operations and overall financial performance until future periods, if at all. In addition, while the majority of our revenues are generated from annual subscriptions, we have seen, and anticipate there may continue to be greater variability in the demand of our product from small and medium business customers. We also have experienced an increase in churn and a decline in the number of users that we believe to be associated with the impact of COVID-19, and may continue to see a decline in the number of users if our customers are required to make workforce reductions. Because of this, we have, and may continue to experience declines in customer demand, reduced customer spend or contract duration, and lengthened payment terms that could materially adversely impact our business, results of operations, and overall financial performance in future periods.
In March 2020, we temporarily closed all of our offices, transitioned our employees to work remotely, and implemented travel restrictions on all business-related travel. We have extended our paid time off and sick leave benefits for employees directly impacted by COVID-19 or caring for children or a member of their household impacted by COVID-19. In addition, we are providing allowances to our employees to cover expenses related to transitioning to a work from home environment. We also continue to offer local employee assistance programs to employees if needed. These changes remain in effect and could extend into future quarters. We have a limited history of remote working and it is difficult to measure and predict the medium and long-term impacts on productivity across our workforce, and the resulting types of continuing investments for, our employee base is uncertain. The impact, if any, of these and any additional operational changes we may implement is uncertain but changes we have implemented have not affected and are not expected to affect our ability to maintain operations, including financial reporting systems, internal control over financial reporting and disclosure controls, and procedures.
In addition, due to restrictions on travel and in-person meetings, we have converted Summit, our global customer conference series, to virtual events. We have also canceled or shifted other planned events to virtual-only experiences and may determine to alter, postpone or cancel additional customer, employee or industry events in the future. We have typically relied on marketing and promotional events such as Summit and other in-person conferences, events, and meetings to facilitate customer sign-ups and generate leads for potential customers, and we cannot predict whether virtual marketing events and phone or virtual sales interactions will be as successful as in-person events and meetings or, for how long, or the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may continue to constrain our marketing, promotional, and sales activities.
On March 27, 2020, the President of the United States signed the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) which includes several significant provisions for corporations, including modifications to the limitation on business interest expense and the usage of net operating losses, and a payment deferral of employer payroll taxes. We have elected to defer the payment of employer payroll taxes in the nine months ended October 31, 2020. We do not plan to continue to defer the payment of employer taxes in future periods. The CARES Act is not expected to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Refer to Item 1A, “Risk Factors”, for further discussion of the possible impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
Acquisition of Rundeck, Inc. (“Rundeck”)
On October 1, 2020, we completed the acquisition of Rundeck Inc. (“Rundeck”), a leading provider of DevOps automation for enterprise. We acquired Rundeck for purchase consideration of $95.5 million in a combination of cash and common stock. We recognized goodwill of $72.1 million which is primarily attributable to synergies created with our current and future offerings and the value of the assembled workforce. Refer to Note 5, “Business Combinations” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further details on the acquisition of Rundeck.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
Attracting New Customers
Sustaining our growth requires continued adoption of our platform by new customers. We will continue to invest in building brand awareness as we further penetrate our addressable markets. Our financial performance will depend in large part on the overall demand for our platform, particularly demand from mid-market and enterprise customers, and our ability to meet the evolving needs of our customers. As of January 31, 2021, we had over 13,500 customers spanning organizations of a broad range of sizes and industries, compared to over 12,500 as of January 31, 2020.
Expanding Within our Customer Base
The majority of our revenue is generated from our existing customer base. Often our customers expand the deployment of our platform across large teams and more broadly within the enterprise as they realize the benefits of our platform. We believe that our land and expand business model allows us to efficiently increase revenue from our existing customer base. Further, we will continue to invest in enhancing awareness of our brand, creating additional use cases, and developing more products, features, and functionality, which we believe are important factors to achieve widespread adoption of our platform.
Sustaining Product Innovation and Technology Leadership
Our success is dependent on our ability to sustain product innovation and technology leadership in order to maintain our competitive advantage. We believe that we have built highly differentiated platform that will position us to further extend the adoption of our products. While sales of subscriptions to our On-Call Management product account for the substantial majority of our revenue, we intend to continue to invest in building additional products, features and functionality that expand our capabilities and facilitate the extension of our platform to new use cases. Our future success is dependent on our ability to successfully develop, market and sell these additional products to both new and existing customers.
Continued Investment in Growth
We plan to continue investing in our business so we can capitalize on our market opportunity. We intend to grow our sales team to target expansion within our mid-market and enterprise customers and to attract new customers. We expect to continue to make focused investments in marketing to drive brand awareness and enhance the effectiveness of our self-service, low friction customer acquisition model. We also intend to continue to add headcount to our research and development team to develop new and improved products, features and functionality. Although these investments may adversely affect our operating results in the near term, we believe that they will contribute to our long-term growth.
Key Business Metrics
We review the following key business metrics to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans, and make strategic decisions.
While these numbers are based on what we believe to be a reasonable representation of our customer base for the applicable period of measurement, we rely on a third party to validate legal entities, which uses the best available data at period end, and therefore is subject to change as new information becomes available. In addition, we are continually seeking to improve our methodology, which may result in future changes to our key metrics.
Our key metrics include the results of Rundeck, to the extent applicable, beginning on the acquisition date of October 1, 2020.
Number of Customers
We believe that the number of customers using our platform, particularly those that have subscription agreements for more than $100,000 in ARR are indicators of our market penetration, particularly within enterprise
accounts, the growth of our business, and our potential future business opportunities. Increasing awareness of our platform and the broad range of capabilities, coupled with the fact that the world is always on and powered by increasingly complex technology, has expanded the diversity of our customer base to include organizations of all sizes across virtually all industries. Over time, enterprise and mid-market customers have constituted a greater share of our revenue.
Dollar-based Net Retention Rate
We use dollar-based net retention rate to evaluate the long-term value of our customer relationships, since this metric reflects our ability to retain and expand the ARR from our existing customers. Our dollar-based net retention rate compares our ARR from the same set of customers across comparable periods.
We calculate dollar-based net retention rate as of a period end by starting with the ARR from the cohort of all customers as of 12 months prior to such period end, or Prior Period ARR. We then calculate the ARR from these same customers as of the current period end, or Current Period ARR. Current Period ARR includes any expansion and is net of downgrades or churn over the last 12 months but excludes ARR from new customers in the current period. We then divide the total Current Period ARR by the total Prior Period ARR to arrive at the dollar-based net retention rate. The calculation of dollar-based net retention rate for the year ended January 31, 2021 includes the Current Period ARR of Rundeck customers to the extent that they were PagerDuty customers as of 12 months prior to period end.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We generate revenue primarily from cloud-hosted subscription fees with the majority of its revenue from such arrangements. We also generate an immaterial amount of revenue from term license software subscription fees. Our subscriptions are typically one year in duration but can range from monthly to multi-year. Subscription revenue is driven primarily by the number of customers, the number of users per customer, and the level of subscription purchased. We generally invoice customers in advance in annual installments for subscriptions to our platform. For our cloud-hosted software subscriptions, we recognize subscription revenue ratably over the term of the subscription period beginning on the date we grant access to our platform, assuming that all other revenue recognition criteria have been met. For our term-license software subscriptions, we recognize license revenue upon delivery and software maintenance revenue ratably, typically beginning on the start of the contractual term of the arrangement.
Due to the low complexity of implementation and integration of our platform with our customers’ existing infrastructure, revenue from professional services has been immaterial to date.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue primarily consists of expenses related to providing our platform to customers, including personnel expenses for operations and global support, payments to our third-party cloud infrastructure providers for hosting our software, payment processing fees, amortization of capitalized internal-use software costs, amortization of acquired developed technology, and allocated overhead costs for facilities, information technology, and other allocated overhead costs. We will continue to invest additional resources in our platform infrastructure and our customer support and success organizations to expand the capability of our platform and ensure that our customers
are realizing the full benefit of our offerings. The level and timing of investment in these areas could affect our cost of revenue in the future.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit represents revenue less cost of revenue. Gross margin is gross profit expressed as a percentage of revenue. Our gross margin may fluctuate from period to period as our revenue fluctuates, and as a result of the timing and amount of investments to expand the capacity of our third-party cloud infrastructure providers and our continued efforts to enhance our platform support and customer success teams.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of research and development, sales and marketing, and general and administrative expenses. Personnel expenses are the most significant component of operating expenses and consist of salaries, benefits, bonuses, stock-based compensation expense, and sales commissions. Operating expenses also include amortization of acquired intangible assets, acquisition-related expenses, allocated overhead costs for facilities, shared IT related expenses, including depreciation expense, and certain company-wide events and functions.
Research and development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel costs for our engineering, product, and design teams. Additionally, research and development expenses include contractor fees, depreciation of equipment used in research and development activities, acquisition-related expenses and allocated overhead costs. We expect that our research and development expenses will increase in dollar value as our business grows.
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel costs, costs of general marketing activities and promotional activities, travel related expenses, amortization of acquired intangible assets, allocated overhead costs, and bad debt expense. Sales commissions earned by our sales force that are considered incremental and recoverable costs of obtaining a subscription with a customer are deferred and amortized on a straight-line basis over the expected period of benefit, which we have determined to be four years. We expect that our sales and marketing expenses will increase in dollar value and continue to be our largest operating expense for the foreseeable future as we expand our sales and marketing efforts.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs and contractor fees for finance, legal, human resources, information technology, and other administrative functions. In addition, general and administrative expenses include non-personnel costs, such as legal, accounting, and other professional fees, hardware and software costs, certain tax, license and insurance-related expenses, acquisition-related expenses, and allocated overhead costs. We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase in dollar value as our business grows. However, we expect that our general and administrative expenses will decrease as a percentage of our revenue over the longer term as we expect our investments to allow for improved efficiency for future growth in the business.
Interest Income
Interest income consists of income earned on our cash and cash equivalents and interest earned on our short-term investments which consist of U.S. Treasury securities, commercial paper, corporate debt securities, and U.S. Government agency securities.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of contractual interest expense and amortization of the debt discount and debt issuance costs on our 1.25% Convertible Senior Notes (the “Notes”) due 2025. Refer to Note 8, “Debt and Financing Arrangements” for additional details.
Other (Expense) Income, Net
Other (expense) income, net primarily consists of accretion income and amortization expense on our held-to-maturity and available-for-sale investments, foreign currency transaction gains and losses, and sublease income related to our San Francisco lease, which expired in the fiscal year ended January 31, 2019.
Benefit from (Provision for) Income Taxes
Benefit from (provision for) income taxes consists primarily of the benefit associated with the reduction in our valuation allowance from the increase in the deferred tax liability associated with the acquired intangible assets from the acquisition of Rundeck in the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021. This also includes income taxes in certain foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business. We maintain a full valuation allowance on our net federal and state deferred tax assets as we have concluded that it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will not be realized for all years presented.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data for the periods indicated:
______________
(1) Includes stock-based compensation expense and non-cash charitable contribution expense as follows:
______________
(1) Stock-based compensation expense above includes a one-time stock-based compensation expense of $3.1 million related to the modification of certain stock option awards in the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021.
(2) Stock-based compensation expense above includes $6.2 million of non-cash charitable contribution expense in the fiscal year ended January 31, 2019.
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data expressed as a percentage of revenue:
______________
Note: Certain figures may not sum due to rounding.
Comparison of the Years Ended January 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Revenue increased by $47.2 million, or 28%, for fiscal year ended January 31, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended January 31, 2020. The increase in revenue was primarily attributable to the growth from existing customers as well as new customers. Growth from existing customers is attributable to both increases in the number of users and upsell of additional products.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Gross margin was 86% for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021 compared to 85% for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2020, improving as a result of efficiency from our cloud native infrastructure. Cost of revenue increased by $6.1 million, or 25%, primarily due to an increase of $4.0 million in personnel expenses as a result of increased headcount, and an increase of $1.3 million in hosting, software, and telecom costs, all of which are to support the continued growth of the business and related infrastructure. This was partially offset by a $0.4 million decrease in travel expenses due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased by $15.6 million, or 32%, for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended January 31, 2020 and increased as a percentage of revenue. The increase was primarily driven by an increase in personnel expenses of $14.5 million as a result of increased headcount to support our continued investment in our platform and an increase of $2.1 million in costs to support the continued growth of the business and related infrastructure, which includes allocated overhead costs. This was partially offset by a $1.7 million decrease in travel and other personnel expenses due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $24.8 million, or 25%, for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended January 31, 2020 and decreased as a percentage of revenue. The increase was
primarily due to an increase of $20.7 million in personnel expenses driven by headcount growth, a one-time stock-based compensation charge due to the modification of certain stock option awards, and amortization of deferred contract costs, a $3.9 million increase in marketing and promotional expenses primarily due to increased volume of digital marketing and advertising activities, and an increase in bad debt expense of $1.2 million. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in travel expenses of $3.9 million as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased by $11.5 million, or 22%, for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended January 31, 2020 and decreased as a percentage of revenue. The increase was primarily driven by an increase of $13.1 million in personnel expenses as a result of increased headcount and an increase of $1.8 million in outside services primarily related to the transaction costs associated with the Rundeck acquisition. This was partially offset by a decrease in travel and other program related expenses of $3.3 million as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased by $10.0 million for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended January 31, 2020, due to contractual interest expense and amortization of the debt discount and issuance costs on the Notes.
Interest Income and Other (Expense) Income, Net
Interest income and other income decreased by $1.5 million and $1.0 million, respectively, for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended January 31, 2020, primarily due to lower interest rates on our cash, cash equivalent and investment balances in the current year.
Comparison of the Years Ended January 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
Revenue increased by $48.5 million, or 41%, for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2020 compared to the fiscal year ended January 31, 2019. The increase in revenue was primarily attributable to the growth from existing
customers and, to a lesser extent, from revenue attributable to new customers. Growth from existing customers is attributable to both increases in the number of users and upsells of additional products.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Gross margin was 85% for the fiscal years ended January 31, 2020 and 2019, and while cost of revenue increased by $7.3 million, or 42%, for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2020 compared to the fiscal year ended January 31, 2019, the increase was in line with our increase in revenue, resulting in gross margin remaining unchanged year-over-year. This increase in cost of revenue was primarily due to an increase of $2.7 million in hosting, software, and telecom costs to support the continued growth of the business and related infrastructure, an increase of $2.3 million in personnel expenses, and an increase of $1.4 million in allocated overhead costs, both of which are due to increased headcount.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased by $10.2 million, or 26%, for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2020 compared to the fiscal year ended January 31, 2019 and decreased as a percentage of revenue. The increase was primarily driven by an increase in personnel expenses of $4.6 million as a result of increased headcount to support our continued investment in our platform, an increase of $3.9 million in costs to support the continued growth of the business and related infrastructure, which includes allocated overhead costs, and an increase of $0.7 million in outside professional services due to an increase in consulting for engineering services
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $33.3 million, or 52%, for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2020 compared to the fiscal year ended January 31, 2019 and increased as a percentage of revenue. This increase was primarily due to an increase of $21.9 million in personnel expenses as a result of increased headcount to support our go-to-market strategy and increased variable compensation for our sales personnel (including amortization of deferred contract costs). Sales and marketing expenses also increased due to increased allocated overhead costs of $4.8 million to support the continued growth of the business and related infrastructure, a $2.5 million increase in travel related expenses reflecting the increase in headcount, a $2.2 million increase in outside professional services due to our increased focus on growing our marketing presence, a $1.8 million increase in marketing and promotional expenses driven by increases in advertising for our brand campaign, and a $1.4 million increase in hosting and software costs due to new software purchases. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in bad debt expense of $1.4 million, which was primarily due to improvements in the aging of our accounts receivable.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased by $11.0 million, or 28%, for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2020 compared to the fiscal year ended January 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by an increase of $14.3 million in personnel expenses as a result of increased headcount to support growth and becoming a public company. General and administrative expenses also increased due to a $1.2 million increase in other costs, including certain charitable contributions, events, and fees, and an increase of $1.0 million in travel costs, reflecting the increase in headcount. This was offset by a decrease in non-cash expense of $6.2 million recognized during the fiscal year ended January 31, 2019 for the warrant issued to the Tides Foundation.
Interest Income and Other Income, Net
Interest income increased by $4.4 million for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2020 compared to the fiscal year ended January 31, 2019, primarily due to higher cash and cash equivalents balance and investments balances following our IPO. Other income, net decreased by $0.8 million for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2020 compared to the fiscal year ended January 31, 2019. The decrease in other income was primarily related to sublease income that we received prior to the sublease expiring in fiscal 2019.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our results determined in accordance with GAAP, we believe the following non-GAAP financial measures are useful in evaluating our operating performance. We use the below referenced non-GAAP financial information, collectively, to evaluate our ongoing operations and for internal planning and forecasting purposes. We believe that non-GAAP financial information, when taken collectively, may be helpful to investors because it provides consistency and comparability with past financial performance and assists in comparisons with other companies, some of which use similar non-GAAP financial information to supplement their GAAP results. The non-GAAP financial information is presented for supplemental informational purposes only, should not be considered a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with GAAP, and may be different from similarly-titled non-GAAP measures used by other companies. The principal limitation of these non-GAAP financial measures is that they exclude significant expenses that are required by GAAP to be recorded in our financial statements. In addition, they are subject to inherent limitations as they reflect the exercise of judgment by our management about which expenses are excluded or included in determining these non-GAAP financial measures. A
reconciliation is provided below for each non-GAAP financial measure to the most directly comparable financial measure stated in accordance with GAAP.
Non-GAAP Gross Profit and Non-GAAP Gross Margin
We define non-GAAP gross profit as gross profit adjusted for stock-based compensation expense and amortization of acquired intangible assets. We define non-GAAP gross margin as non-GAAP gross profit as a percentage of revenue.
Non-GAAP Operating Loss and Non-GAAP Operating Margin
We define non-GAAP operating loss as loss from operations plus our stock-based compensation expense, amortization of acquired intangible assets, and acquisition-related expenses, which include transaction costs and acquisition-related retention payments, which are not necessarily reflective of operational performance during a given period. We define non-GAAP operating margin as non-GAAP operating loss as a percentage of revenue.
______________
(1) Stock-based compensation expense above includes a one-time stock-based compensation expense of $3.1 million related to the modification of certain stock option awards in the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021, and $6.2 million of non-cash charitable contribution expense in the fiscal year ended January 31, 2019.
Non-GAAP Net Loss
We define non-GAAP net loss as net loss plus our stock-based compensation expense, amortization of debt discount and issuance costs, amortization of acquired intangible assets, acquisition-related expenses, which include
transaction costs and acquisition-related retention payments, which are not necessarily reflective of operational performance during a given period, and acquisition-related tax benefit.
______________
(1) Stock-based compensation expense above includes a one-time stock-based compensation expense of $3.1 million related to the modification of certain stock option awards in the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021 and $6.2 million of non-cash charitable contribution expense in the fiscal year ended January 31, 2019.
Free Cash Flow
We define free cash flow as net cash provided by (used in) operating activities, less cash used for purchases of property and equipment and capitalized internal-use software costs. We believe that free cash flow is useful to investors as a liquidity measure because it measures our ability to generate or use cash in excess of our capital investments in property and equipment to enhance the strength of our balance sheet and further invest in our business and potential strategic initiatives. A limitation of the utility of free cash flow as a measure of our liquidity is that it does not represent the total increase or decrease in our cash balance for the period. We use free cash flow in conjunction with traditional GAAP measures as part of our overall assessment of our liquidity, including the preparation of our annual operating budget and quarterly forecasts, to evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies, and to assess our liquidity.
Quarterly Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our unaudited quarterly statements of operations data for each of the last eight quarters in the period ended January 31, 2021. The information for each of these quarters has been prepared on the same basis as the audited annual financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and, in the opinion of management, includes all adjustments, which includes only normal recurring adjustments, necessary for the fair statement of the results of operations for these periods. This data should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual
Report on Form 10-K. These quarterly results of operations are not necessarily indicative of our future results of operations that may be expected for any future period.
______________
(1) Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
All values from the statement of operations, expressed as percentage of revenue were as follows:
______________
Note: Certain figures may not sum due to rounding.
Quarterly Revenue Trends
Our quarterly revenue increased sequentially in each of the periods presented above due primarily to expansion within existing customers and increases in the number of new customers.
Quarterly Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin Trends
Our quarterly cost of revenue has generally increased quarter-over-quarter in each period presented above primarily as a result of the increased cost of providing support and delivering our services to our expanding customer base.
Our quarterly gross margins have fluctuated between 84% and 87% in each period presented.
Quarterly Operating Expense Trends
Excluding the impact of stock-based compensation expenses, sales and marketing, research and development, and general and administrative expenses have generally increased over the periods presented above as we increased our headcount used to support growth and expansion in the business. Sales and marketing expenses for the three months ended October 31, 2020 included an increase in stock-based compensation expense related to the modification of certain stock option awards. In addition, general and administrative expenses for the three months ended October 31, 2020 included $1.6 million in transaction costs associated with the Rundeck acquisition.
Quarterly Non-GAAP Quarterly Financial Measures
The following table reconciles loss from operations determined under GAAP to non-GAAP operating loss and non-GAAP operating margin. In addition to our results determined in accordance with GAAP, we believe non-GAAP operating loss and operating margin are useful in evaluating our operating performance. See “Selected Consolidated Financial and Other Data-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for a description of the non-GAAP measures and their limitations as an analytical tool.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since inception, we have financed operations primarily through sales of our cloud- hosted software subscriptions, net proceeds we have received from sales of equity securities, and the issuance of our Notes.
On April 15, 2019, upon the closing of our IPO, we received net proceeds of $213.7 million, after deducting underwriters' discounts and commissions of $16.6 million and other issuance costs of $6.4 million.
On June 25, 2020, we issued $287.5 million aggregate principal amount of convertible senior notes in a private placement to qualified institutional buyers pursuant to Rule 144A under the Securities Act. The total net proceeds from the sale of the Notes, after deducting the initial purchasers’ discounts and debt issuance costs of $9.3 million, and purchases of the Capped Calls of $35.7 million, were $242.5 million.
As of January 31, 2021, our principal sources of liquidity were cash and cash equivalents and investments totaling $560.3 million. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, investments and cash provided by sales of our subscriptions will be sufficient to support working capital and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next 12 months. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, our subscription growth rate, subscription renewal activity, including the timing and the amount of cash received from customers, the timing and extent of spending to support development efforts, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, the introduction of new and enhanced product offerings, and the continuing market adoption of our platform. We may in the future enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services, and technologies. We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event that we require additional financing, we may not be able to raise such financing on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital or generate cash flows necessary to expand our operations and invest in continued innovation, we may not be able to compete successfully, which would harm our business, operations, and financial condition.
A significant majority of our customers pay in advance for our cloud- hosted software subscriptions. Therefore, a substantial source of our cash is from our deferred revenue, which is included in the liabilities section of our consolidated balance sheet. Deferred revenue consists of the unearned portion of customer billings, which is recognized as revenue in accordance with our revenue recognition policy. As of January 31, 2021, we had deferred revenue of $130.0 million, of which $123.7 million was recorded as a current liability and expected to be recorded as revenue in the next 12 months, provided all other revenue recognition criteria have been met.
Cash Flows
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for the periods presented:
Operating Activities
Our largest source of operating cash is cash collection from sales of our cloud-hosted software subscriptions to our customers. Our primary uses of cash from operating activities are for personnel expenses, marketing expenses and hosting and software expenses. In the last several years, we have had periods in which we generated negative cash flows from operating activities and have supplemented working capital requirements through net proceeds from both private and public sales of equity securities and issuance of the Notes.
Cash provided by operating activities for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021 of $10.1 million primarily related to our net loss of $68.9 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $74.2 million and net cash inflows of $4.8 million due to changes in our operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of stock-based compensation of $43.2 million, amortization of our deferred contract costs of $11.0 million, amortization of debt discount and issuance costs of $7.8 million, depreciation and amortization of property and equipment and capitalized implementation costs of $5.3 million, and noncash lease expense of $4.4 million. Changes in operating assets and liabilities reflected cash inflows from a $34.7 million increase in deferred revenue resulting from increased billings for subscriptions, an $11.2 million increase in accrued compensation primarily due to increased headcount, and a $0.5 million decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses and other liabilities. These amounts were partially offset by a $17.6 million increase in accounts receivable due a combination of timing of cash collections and a growth in billings, a $16.9 million increase in deferred contract costs due to commissions paid on new bookings, payments for operating lease liabilities of $4.1 million, and a $2.0 million increase in prepaid expenses and other assets related to timing of payments made in advance for future services.
Cash used in operating activities for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2020 of $0.2 million primarily related to our net loss of $50.3 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $37.0 million and net cash inflows of $13.2 million due to changes in our operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of stock-based compensation of $27.2 million, amortization of our deferred contract costs of $7.8 million, and depreciation and amortization of property and equipment and capitalized implementation costs of $2.3 million. Changes in operating assets and liabilities reflected cash inflows from a $28.5 million increase in deferred revenue, resulting from increased billings for subscriptions, a $3.9 million increase in accrued compensation primarily due to employee contributions on the ESPP and increased headcount, and a $2.6 million increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses and other liabilities. These amounts were partially offset by a $16.0 million increase in deferred contract costs due to commissions paid on new bookings, a $3.6 million increase in accounts receivable due to timing of cash collections, and an increase of $2.1 million in prepaid expenses and other assets related to prepayments made in advance for future services.
Cash used in operating activities for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2019 of $5.6 million primarily related to our net loss of $40.7 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $32.9 million and net cash inflows of $2.2 million
due to changes in our operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of stock-based compensation of $19.1 million, expense on the warrant issued in conjunction with a charitable contribution of $6.2 million, amortization of our deferred contract costs of $4.5 million, and depreciation and amortization of property and equipment of $1.7 million. The main drivers of the changes in operating assets and liabilities related to a $25.9 million increase in deferred revenue, resulting primarily from increased billings for subscriptions, a $5.2 million increase in accrued compensation due to an increase in headcount, and a net increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses and other liabilities of $3.3 million. These amounts were partially offset by a $15.5 million increase in accounts receivable, a $13.8 million increase in deferred contract costs due to commissions paid on new bookings, and an increase of $2.9 million in prepaid expenses and other assets related to prepayments made in advance for future services.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021 of $49.3 million consisted of purchases of investments of $222.0 million, cash paid for the Rundeck acquisition, net of cash acquired of $49.7 million, purchases of property and equipment of $4.0 million primarily to support additional office space for our San Francisco and Atlanta offices and purchases of computers for new employees, and capitalization of internal use software costs of $0.8 million. These costs were partially offset by proceeds from maturities and sales of investments of $227.2 million.
Cash used in investing activities for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2020 of $232.1 million consisted of purchases of investments of $269.8 million and purchases of property and equipment of $5.2 million primarily to support additional office space for our San Francisco and Atlanta offices and purchases of computers for new employees. These costs were partially offset by proceeds from maturities of investments of $43.0 million.
Cash used in investing activities for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2019 of $4.1 million consisted primarily of $2.5 million of leasehold improvements for our Toronto and San Francisco offices, $1.2 million in purchases of computers and related equipment for new employees, and $0.4 million of capitalized internal-use software costs.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021 of $254.4 million consisted primarily of net proceeds of $278.2 million related to the issuance of the Notes, proceeds from the exercise of stock options of $14.1 million, and proceeds from our employee stock purchase plan of $6.0 million. This was partially offset by purchases of the Capped Calls of $35.7 million.
Cash provided by financing activities for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2020 of $225.9 million consisted primarily of net proceeds from our IPO of $220.1 million after underwriting discounts and commissions, proceeds from the exercise of stock options of $7.2 million, and proceeds from our employee stock purchase plan of $4.1 million. This was partially offset by $5.9 million in payments related to costs associated with our initial public offering.
Cash provided by financing activities for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2019 of $93.6 million consisted primarily of net proceeds from the issuance of Series D redeemable convertible preferred stock of $89.8 million and proceeds from the exercise of stock options and warrants of $4.2 million, partially offset by $0.4 million in payments related to deferred offering expense associated with our initial public offering.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Our principal commitments consist of our convertible senior notes, obligations under operating leases for office space, and contractual commitments for third-party managed hosting and other support services. The following table summarizes our contractual obligations at January 31, 2021:
(1) Includes principal and interest payments. For more information regarding our convertible senior notes, refer to Note 8, “Debt and Financing Arrangements”.
(2) Represents obligations under non-cancellable lease agreements for our corporate headquarters and worldwide offices.
(3) Primarily relates to contractual third-party services.
The commitment amounts in the table above are associated with contracts that are enforceable and legally binding and that specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum services to be used, fixed, minimum or variable price provisions, and the approximate timing of the actions under the contracts.
We have excluded the amount of the liability for uncertain tax benefits as of January 31, 2021 in the table above. As of January 31, 2021, we had $5.1 million of uncertain tax benefits, including interest and penalties, related to uncertain tax positions. The timing of future cash outflows associated with our liabilities for uncertain tax benefits is highly uncertain. As such, we are unable to make reasonably reliable estimates of the period of cash settlement with the respective tax authority.
Indemnification Agreements
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into agreements of varying scope and terms pursuant to which we agree to indemnify customers, vendors, lessors, business partners, and other parties with respect to certain matters, including, but not limited to, losses arising out of the breach of such agreements, services to be provided by us, or from intellectual property infringement claims made by third parties. In addition, we have entered into indemnification agreements with our directors and certain officers and employees that will require us, among other things, to indemnify them against certain liabilities that may arise by reason of their status or service as directors, officers, or employees. No demands have been made upon us to provide indemnification under such agreements, and there are no claims that we are aware of that could have a material effect on our consolidated balance sheets, consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss, or consolidated statements of cash flows.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not currently have and, as of January 31, 2021 or during the periods presented, did not have any off-balance sheet financing arrangements or any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, including entities sometimes referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, that were established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or U.S. GAAP. The
preparation of consolidated financial statements also requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ significantly from the estimates made by management. To the extent that there are differences between our estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows will be affected. We believe that the accounting policies described below involve a greater degree of judgment and complexity. Accordingly, these are the policies we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our consolidated financial condition and results of operations.
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue primarily from cloud-hosted subscription fees with the majority of our revenue from such arrangements. We also generate an immaterial amount of revenue from term license software subscription fees. Our cloud-hosted software subscription arrangements do not provide customers with the right to take possession of the software supporting the cloud-based products and, as a result, are accounted for as service arrangements. Revenue is recognized when control of these services is transferred to customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those services. Subscription revenue excludes sales and other indirect taxes.
We determine revenue recognition through the following steps:
•Identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer.
•Identification of the performance obligations in the contract.
•Determination of the transaction price.
•Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract.
•Recognition of revenue when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation
Cloud-hosted software subscriptions
The majority of our cloud-hosted software subscriptions allow customers to use our cloud-hosted software over the contract period without taking possession of the software. Our cloud-hosted software subscription agreements generally have monthly or annual contractual terms. Revenue related to our cloud-hosted software subscriptions is recognized ratably over the related contractual term beginning on the date that our platform is made available to a customer. Access to the platform represents a series of distinct services as we continually provide access to, and fulfill our obligation to, the end customer over the subscription term. The series of distinct services represents a single performance obligation that is satisfied over time. We recognize revenue ratably because the customer receives and consumes the benefits of the platform throughout the contract period.
Term license software subscriptions
Our subscriptions sold through our on-premise service are primarily term (or time-based) license subscriptions to our platform, which includes both open source and proprietary software as well as support, patches, and the right to receive unspecified software updates and upgrades released when and if available during the subscription. Our term license software subscription agreements generally have annual contractual terms. We account for the license to the software and support as two separate performance obligations. As the open source software is publicly available at no cost to the customer, we have determined that there is no value to be assigned to the open source software in our term license software subscription arrangements. The proprietary software license represents a promise to provide a license to use functional intellectual property that is recognized at a point in time on the date access to the software is made available to the customer and the term license software subscription period has begun. We have concluded the support is a stand-ready performance obligation that consists of a series of distinct services that are satisfied ratably over time as the services are provided. We use a time-based output method to measure progress because our efforts are expended evenly throughout the period given the nature of the promise
is a stand-ready service. We recognize support revenue ratably, typically beginning on the start of the contractual term of the arrangement.
In order to determine the stand-alone selling price, we conduct a periodic analysis that requires judgment and considers multiple factors that are reasonably available and maximizes the use of observable inputs that may vary over time depending upon the unique facts and circumstances related to each performance obligation. To have observable inputs, we require that a substantial majority of the stand-alone selling prices for a product offering fall within a pricing range. We believe that this analysis results in an estimate that approximates the price we would charge for the product offerings if they were sold separately.
Our cloud-hosted and term-license software subscription arrangements are generally non-cancellable and do not contain refund provisions. We bill for monthly cloud-hosted and term-license software subscriptions on a monthly basis and annually in advance for arrangements with terms of one year or more.
The price of the cloud-hosted and term-license software subscriptions is generally fixed at contract inception and therefore, our contracts do not contain a significant amount of variable consideration. As a result, the amount of revenue recognized in the periods presented from performance obligations satisfied (or partially satisfied) in previous periods due to changes in the transaction price was not material. Subscription revenue excludes sales and other indirect taxes.
Deferred Contract Costs
Deferred contract costs include sales commissions earned by our sales force which are considered incremental and recoverable costs of obtaining a contract with a customer. Sales commissions for initial contracts are deferred and then amortized on a straight-line basis over a period of benefit, determined to be four years. We determined the period of benefit by taking into consideration our customer contracts, technology, and other factors. Amounts anticipated to be recognized within one year of the balance sheet date are recorded as deferred contract costs, current, with the remaining portion recorded as deferred contract costs, noncurrent, on the consolidated balance sheets. Amortization expense of deferred contract costs is recorded as sales and marketing expense in the consolidated statements of operations.
Convertible Senior Notes
The Notes are accounted for in accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”), issued Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, Subtopic 470-20, Debt with Conversion and Other Options. Pursuant to ASC Subtopic 470-20, issuers of certain convertible debt instruments, such as the Notes, that have a net settlement feature and may be settled wholly or partially in cash upon conversion are required to separately account for the liability (debt) and equity (conversion option) components of the instrument. The carrying amount of the liability component of the instrument is computed by estimating the fair value of a similar liability without the conversion option using a market-based approach. The amount of the equity component is then calculated by deducting the fair value of the liability component from the principal amount of the instrument. The difference between the principal amount and the liability component represents a debt discount that is amortized to interest expense over the respective terms of the Notes using an effective interest rate method. The equity component is not remeasured as long as it continues to meet the conditions for equity classification. In accounting for the issuance costs related to the Notes, the allocation of issuance costs incurred between the liability and equity components was based on their relative values.
Business Combinations and Valuation of Goodwill and Intangible Assets
We apply the acquisition method of accounting for business combinations. Under this method of accounting, all assets acquired and liabilities assumed are recorded at their respective fair values at the date of the acquisition. We allocate the purchase consideration to the net tangible and identifiable intangible assets. Determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires management’s judgment and often involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. These estimates can include, but are not limited to, the cash flows that an asset is expected to generate in the future, the appropriate weighted-average cost of capital, and the cost savings expected to be derived from acquiring an asset. These estimates are inherently uncertain and unpredictable.
Goodwill is evaluated for impairment annually in the fourth quarter, and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable. Triggering events that may indicate impairment include, but are not limited to, a significant adverse change in customer demand or business climate or a significant decrease in expected cash flows. Goodwill is evaluated for impairment at the consolidated level, as we operate as a single reporting unit.
Acquired intangible assets consist of identifiable intangible assets, including developed technology, customer relationships, and tradename, resulting from our acquisition. Acquired intangible assets are recorded at fair value on the date of acquisition and amortized over their estimated useful lives. The carrying amounts of our acquired intangible assets are periodically reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of these assets may not be recoverable or that the useful life is shorter than originally estimated.
Stock-Based Compensation
Compensation expense related to stock-based transactions, including employee, consultant, and non-employee director stock option awards and restricted stock units (“RSUs”), is measured and recognized in the consolidated financial statements based on fair value. The fair value of each option award is estimated on the grant date using the Black Scholes option-pricing model. We estimate the fair value of RSUs at our stock price on the grant date. We recognize compensation expense for employee stock-based payment awards on a straight-line basis over the period during which an award recipient is required to provide services in exchange for the award (generally the vesting period of the award). We account for forfeitures as they occur.
Our option-pricing model requires the input of highly subjective assumptions, including the expected term of the option, the expected volatility of the price of our common stock, risk-free interest rates, and the expected dividend yield of our common stock. The assumptions used in our option-pricing model represent management’s best estimates. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. If factors change and different assumptions are used, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
These assumptions are estimated as follows:
Expected volatility-Expected volatility is a measure of the amount by which the stock price is expected to fluctuate. Since we do not have sufficient trading history of our common stock, we estimate the expected volatility of our stock options at the grant date by taking the average historical volatility of a group of comparable publicly traded companies over a period equal to the expected term of the options.
Expected term-We determine the expected term based on the average period the stock options are expected to remain outstanding using the simplified method, generally calculated as the midpoint of the stock options’ vesting term and contractual expiration period, as we do not have sufficient historical information to develop reasonable expectations about future exercise patterns and post-vesting employment termination behavior.
Risk-free rate-We use the U.S. Treasury yield for our risk-free interest rate that corresponds with the expected term.
Expected dividend yield-We utilize a dividend yield of zero, as we do not currently issue dividends, nor do we expect to do so in the future.
We will continue to use judgment in evaluating the assumptions related to our stock-based compensation on a prospective basis. As we continue to accumulate additional data related to our common stock, we may have refinements to our estimates and assumptions, which could materially impact our future stock-based compensation expense.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
For further information on our recently adopted accounting pronouncements, refer to Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the consolidated financial statements contained within this Annual Report on Form 10-K.