ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data and also with Item 1A. Risk Factors of this report. A discussion of changes in our results of operations from 2018 to 2019 has been omitted from this report but may be found in Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis, of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 27, 2020. Further, we encourage you to review the Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements in Part I of this report.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
2020 Financial Overview of Operations and Liquidity
COVID-19 Impact
During 2020, the effects of the coronavirus 2019 (“COVID-19”) pandemic led to a significant decline in global demand for crude oil and natural gas, contributing to a drastic reduction in commodity prices and negatively impacting oil and natural gas producers located in the United States, including PDC. The commodity price environment may remain volatile for an extended period as a result of reduced global oil and natural gas demand and the global economic recession. We expect to be able to fund our operations, planned capital expenditures, working capital and other requirements during the next 12 months and for the foreseeable future. See Item 1A. Risk Factors for additional information regarding the potential impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Financial Matters
Production volumes increased 38 percent to 68.4 MMBoe in 2020 compared to 2019. The majority of the increase is attributed to producing properties acquired in the SRC Acquisition. Total liquids production of crude oil and NGLs comprised 60 percent of production in 2020. For the month ended December 31, 2020, we maintained an average production rate of approximately 178,000 Boe per day, up from approximately 139,000 Boe per day for the month ended December 31, 2019.
Crude oil, natural gas and NGLs sales revenue decreased to $1.2 billion in 2020 compared to $1.3 billion in 2019, driven by a 36 percent decrease in weighted-average realized commodity prices, partially offset by the 38 percent increase in production.
We had positive net settlements from commodity derivative contracts of $279.3 million for 2020 as compared to negative net settlements of $17.6 million for 2019.
The combined revenue from crude oil, natural gas and NGLs sales and net settlements received on our commodity derivative instruments was $1.4 billion in 2020 and $1.3 billion in 2019.
In 2020, we generated a net loss of $724.3 million or, $7.37 per diluted share, compared to net loss of $56.7 million, or $0.89 per diluted share, in 2019. Our net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to December 31, 2019 was most significantly impacted by the increase in impairment of properties and equipment and the decrease in crude oil, natural gas and NGLs sales, partially offset by the net commodity price risk management gain.
Adjusted EBITDAX, a non-U.S. GAAP financial measure, was $990.6 million and $882.7 million, in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Cash flows from operations were $870.1 million and $858.2 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively, and adjusted cash flows from operations, a non-U.S. GAAP financial measure, were $921.6 million and $825.4 million, respectively. Adjusted free cash flow, a non-U.S. GAAP financial measure, was $399.3 million for 2020 as compared to $37.7 million for 2019.
See Reconciliation of Non-U.S. GAAP Financial Measures below for a more detailed discussion of these non-U.S. GAAP financial measures and a reconciliation of these measures to the most comparable U.S. GAAP measures.
SRC Acquisition
In January 2020, we merged with SRC in a transaction valued at $1.7 billion, inclusive of SRC's net debt. Upon closing, we issued approximately 38.9 million shares of our common stock to SRC shareholders and holders of SRC equity awards, reflecting the issuance of 0.158 of a share of our common stock in exchange for each share of SRC common stock and the cancellation of outstanding SRC equity awards pursuant to the Merger Agreement.
Liquidity
Available liquidity as of December 31, 2020 was $1.4 billion, which was comprised of $2.6 million of cash and cash equivalents and $1.4 billion available for borrowing under our revolving credit facility. In September 2020, we issued an additional $150.0 million principal amount of 2026 Senior Notes. The net proceeds from the offering were used to repay a portion of the amount outstanding under our revolving credit facility. In October 2020, as part of our fall 2020 semi-annual redetermination, the borrowing base of our credit facility was reduced from $1.7 billion to $1.6 billion, with a corresponding automatic reduction of our elected commitment level to $1.6 billion. Looking into 2021, based on our expected cash flows from operations, our cash and cash equivalents and availability under our revolving credit facility, we believe that we will have sufficient capital available to repay our 2021 Convertible Notes, which mature in September 2021, and to fund our planned activities through the 12-month period following the filing of this report. We exited 2020 with a debt balance of $1.6 billion.
Stock Repurchase Program
As previously noted, our board of directors has approved a Stock Repurchase Program of $525 million, of which approximately $346.8 million remains available. We suspended the program in March 2020 but recently reinstated it in light of our reduced level of indebtedness. The program may extend until December 31, 2023.
Drilling and Completion Overview
We ran three drilling rigs in the Wattenberg Field through the middle of April 2020, when we dropped to a two-rig pace. We released a second rig at the end of May 2020 and continued at a one-rig pace for the remainder of the year. We also released our only completion crew in the Wattenberg Field in early May 2020 but resumed completion activities in September 2020. In the Delaware Basin, we ran one drilling rig through early May 2020 and we released our only active completion crew in March 2020. We did not have material activity in the Delaware Basin for the remainder of 2020. Our total 2020 capital investments in crude oil and natural gas properties was $522.3 million.
The following tables summarize our drilling and completion activity for the year ended December 31, 2020:
_____________
(1)In the Delaware Basin, we had eight operated batch drilled wells that were spud in late December 2019 with final laterals being reached in early 2020.
(2)Represents in-process wells and wells being completed that we received as part of the SRC Acquisition.
Our in-process wells represent wells that are in the process of being drilled or have been drilled and are waiting to be fractured and/or for gas pipeline connection. Our in-process wells are generally completed and turned-in-line within two years of drilling.
2021 Operational and Financial Outlook
We anticipate that our total production for 2021 will range between 190,000 Boe to 200,000 Boe per day, approximately 64,000 Bbls to 68,000 Bbls of which are expected to be crude oil. Our planned 2021 capital investments in crude
oil and natural gas properties, which we expect to be between $500 million and $600 million, are focused on continued execution of our development plans in the Wattenberg Field and the Delaware Basin.
We believe that we maintain a degree of operational flexibility to control the pace of our capital spending. As we execute our capital investment program, we continually monitor, among other things, expected rates of return, the political environment and our remaining inventory in order to best meet our short- and long-term corporate strategy. We may revise our 2021 capital investment program during the year as a result of, among other things, changes in commodity prices or our internal long-term outlook for commodity prices, requirements to hold acreage, the cost of services for drilling and well completion activities, drilling results, changes in our borrowing capacity, a significant change in cash flows, regulatory issues, requirements to maintain continuous activity on leaseholds or acquisition and/or divestiture opportunities.
Wattenberg Field. We are drilling in the horizontal Niobrara and Codell plays in the rural areas of the core Wattenberg Field, which is further delineated between the Kersey, Prairie, Plains, and Summit development areas. Our 2021 capital investment program for the Wattenberg Field is approximately 75 percent of our expected total capital investments in crude oil and natural gas properties, of which approximately 90 percent is expected to be invested in operated drilling and completion activity. In 2021, we plan to drill standard-reach lateral ("SRL"), mid-reach lateral (“MRL”) and extended-reach lateral (“XRL”) wells in the Wattenberg Field. In 2021, we anticipate spudding approximately 75 to 85 operated wells and turning-in-line approximately 150 to 175 operated wells. As of December 31, 2020, we have approximately 214 gross operated DUCs and 300 approved permitted locations. In 2021,we expect to operate with one full-time horizontal rig and completion crew along with a part-time spudder rig. Our program is expected to have an average development cost per well between $2.5 million and $3.6 million, depending upon the lateral length of the well. The remainder of the Wattenberg Field capital investment program is expected to be used for land, capital workovers, facilities projects and non-operated drilling.
Delaware Basin. Total capital investments in crude oil and natural gas properties in the Delaware Basin for 2021 are expected to be approximately 25 percent of our total capital investments, of which approximately 90 percent is expected to be invested in operated drilling and completion activity. In 2021, we anticipate spudding and turning-in-line approximately 15 to 20 operated wells. The majority of the wells we plan to drill in 2021 in the Delaware Basin are MRL and XRL wells. We expect to drill at a one-rig pace in 2021 along with a completion crew for four months starting towards the end of the first quarter, with an average development costs per well between $6.7 million and $8.0 million for MRL and XRL wells, depending upon the lateral length of the well.
We are committed to our disciplined approach to managing our development plans. Based on our current production forecast for 2021 and assumed average NYMEX prices of $45.00 per Bbl of crude oil and $2.50 per Mcf of natural gas and an assumed average composite price of $12.00 per Bbl for NGLs, we expect 2021 cash flows from operations to exceed our capital investments in crude oil and natural gas properties. Any excess cash flows from operations will be used towards reducing our indebtedness as well as returning capital to our shareholders.
Colorado Political Update
Certain interest groups in Colorado opposed to oil and natural gas development generally, and hydraulic fracturing in particular, have historically advanced various alternatives for ballot initiatives which would result in significantly limiting or preventing oil and natural gas development in the state. Senate Bill 19-181 ("SB19-181") was enacted by the Colorado legislature in 2019 to address concerns underlying the ballot initiatives. The COGCC conducted a series of rulemaking hearings pursuant to SB 19-181 during 2020 which resulted in updated regulatory and permitting requirements, including setbacks and siting requirements. The COGCC commissioners determined that locations with residential or high occupancy building units, schools or child care facilities within 2,000 feet would be subject to additional siting requirements, but also supported “off ramps” allowing oil and gas operators to site their drill pads as close as 500 feet from residential or high occupancy building units (excluding schools and child care facilities) in certain circumstances. The 2020 rulemaking hearings also resulted in the adoption of a number of other new regulatory requirements, including requirements regarding permitting, cumulative and surface impacts, asset transfers, venting and flaring, and remediation. However, third-party proposals which were presented to the COGCC prohibit or dramatically restrict oil and gas development were not adopted by the Commissioners. Governor Polis has publicly stated his opposition to further ballot initiatives in 2022 while rulemaking under SB 19-181 is in process and has acknowledged the importance of regulatory certainty.
It is nevertheless possible that future ballot initiatives will be proposed that would dramatically limit the areas of the state in which drilling would be permitted to occur. See Part I, Item1A. Risk Factors- Relating to Our Business and the
Industry-Changes in laws and regulations applicable to us could increase our costs, impose additional operating restrictions or have other adverse effects on us.
Results of Operations
Summary of Operating Results
The following table presents selected information regarding our operating results:
____________
* Percent change is not meaningful.
(1)In March 2018, we completed the disposition of our Utica Shale properties.
Crude Oil, Natural Gas and NGLs Sales
Crude oil, natural gas and NGLs sales revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to the following:
Crude Oil, Natural Gas and NGLs Production
The following table presents crude oil, natural gas and NGLs production.
____________
* Percent change is not meaningful.
(1)In March 2018, we completed the disposition of our Utica Shale properties.
Net production volumes for oil, natural gas and NGLs increased 38% during 2020 compared to 2019. The overall production increase between periods was primarily due to producing properties acquired in the SRC Acquisition, which added approximately 19.7 MMBoe of incremental production in 2020, and wells turned-in-line during 2020. These volume increases were partially offset by normal field production declines across our existing wells.
The following table presents our crude oil, natural gas and NGLs production ratio by operating region:
____________
(1)In March 2018, we completed the disposition of our Utica Shale properties.
Midstream Capacity
Our ability to market our production depends substantially on the availability, proximity and capacity of in-field gathering systems, compression and processing facilities, as well as transportation pipelines out of the basin, all of which are owned and operated by third parties. If adequate midstream facilities and services are not available on a timely basis and at acceptable costs, our production and results of operations could be adversely affected. In response to the substantial development drilling in our current areas of operation in recent years, third-party midstream providers have significantly expanded their midstream facilities and services. These third-party midstream facility expansions, in conjunction with the more recent slowdown in producer activity, have provided for improved and more stabilized line pressures and a production environment that is more favorable for producers, both currently and for the near term given anticipated producer activity levels.
The ultimate timing and availability of adequate infrastructure remains out of our control. Weather, regulatory developments and other factors also affect the adequacy of midstream infrastructure. Like other producers, from time to time we enter into volume commitments with midstream providers in order to incentivize them to provide increased capacity to sufficiently meet our projected volume growth from our areas of operation. If our production falls below the level required under these agreements, we could be subject to transportation charges or aid in construction payments for commitment shortfalls.
Wattenberg Field. Beginning in the mid-fourth quarter of 2019 and continuing through the fourth quarter of 2020, the combination of DCP Midstream, LP's ("DCP") continued system expansions and the availability of both residue gas and NGL takeaway out of the basin allowed us to experience reduced line pressures for all of our operated areas of the Wattenberg Field. Given current and forecasted activity levels in the basin, we anticipate that this expansion will provide ample processing capacity to accommodate our future operated production.
Our production in the Wattenberg Field is significantly dependent on DCP's gathering system, and this reliance increased considerably when we closed the SRC Acquisition. We continue to work with our midstream service providers in an
effort to ensure all of the existing in-basin infrastructure is fully utilized and that all options for system expansion are evaluated and implemented to the extent possible to accommodate projected future volume growth from the field.
As midstream infrastructure development and upstream capital discipline continues, we anticipate having the ability to move additional volumes on DCP’s system in the long-term. The successful and timely completion of incremental development projects depends on continued capital investment by midstream providers, which could be impacted during times of challenging market conditions.
Delaware Basin. Our production from the Delaware Basin was not materially affected by midstream or downstream capacity constraints during the year ended December 31, 2020. Similar to the Wattenberg Field, our crude oil netback pricing realizations were most negatively impacted by the demand reduction that resulted from COVID-19.
Pipeline utilization in the Permian Basin has fallen from the constrained levels experienced during the first quarter of 2020. The COVID-19-induced downturn also forced widespread curtailments in natural gas production, which lowered pipeline utilization and eventually improved pricing differentials in the basin during the remainder of 2020. The completion of Kinder Morgan’s Permian Highway Pipeline occurred in the fourth quarter of 2020 and provides additional takeaway capacity out of the Permian Basin. A portion of our natural gas production is committed to the use of this pipeline starting in January 2021.
Crude Oil, Natural Gas and NGLs Pricing
Our results of operations depend upon many factors. Key factors include market prices of crude oil, natural gas and NGLs and our ability to market our production effectively. Crude oil, natural gas and NGLs prices have a high degree of volatility and our realizations can change substantially. Our realized sales prices for crude oil, natural gas and NGLs decreased 36 percent during 2020 as compared to 2019. The NYMEX average daily crude oil and NYMEX first-of-the-month natural gas prices decreased 31 percent and 21 percent, respectively, as compared to 2019. The decreases were primarily due to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, geopolitical conditions and supply disruptions.
The following table presents weighted-average sales prices of crude oil, natural gas and NGLs for the periods presented:
____________
* Percent change is not meaningful.
(1)In March 2018, we completed the disposition of our Utica Shale properties.
Crude oil, natural gas and NGLs revenues are recognized when we transfer control of crude oil, natural gas or NGLs production to the purchaser. We consider the transfer of control to occur when the purchaser has the ability to direct the use of, and obtain substantially all of the remaining benefits from, the crude oil, natural gas or NGLs production. We record sales revenue based on an estimate of the volumes delivered at estimated prices as determined by the applicable sales agreement. We estimate our sales volumes based on company-measured volume readings. We then adjust our crude oil, natural gas and NGLs sales in subsequent periods based on the data received from our purchasers that reflects actual volumes delivered and prices received.
Our crude oil, natural gas and NGLs sales are recorded using either the “net-back” or "gross" method of accounting, depending upon the related purchase agreement. We use the net-back method when control of the crude oil, natural gas or NGLs has been transferred to the purchasers of these commodities that are providing transportation, gathering or processing services. In these situations, the purchaser pays us based on a percent of proceeds or a sales price fixed at index less specified deductions. The net-back method results in the recognition of a net sales price that is lower than the index on which the production is based because the operating costs and profit of the midstream facilities are embedded in the net price we are paid. We use the gross method of accounting when control of the crude oil, natural gas or NGLs is not transferred to the purchaser and the purchaser does not provide transportation, gathering or processing services as a function of the price we receive. Rather, we contract separately with midstream providers for the applicable transportation and processing on a per unit basis. Under this method, we recognize revenues based on the gross selling price and recognize transportation, gathering and processing expenses.
Beginning in the second quarter of 2020, COVID-19 led to government restrictions on movement and economic activity, triggering a dramatic reduction in crude oil demand. This negatively impacted crude oil netback pricing realizations, which resulted in meaningful production curtailments during the second quarter of 2020. We expect our realized crude oil prices to be volatile through 2021 due to market uncertainties in crude oil demand as a result of COVID-19.
As discussed above, we enter into agreements for the sale and transportation, gathering and processing of our production, the terms of which can result in variances in the per unit realized prices that we receive for our crude oil, natural gas and NGLs. Information related to the components and classifications in the consolidated statements of operations is shown below. For crude oil, the average NYMEX prices shown below are based on average daily prices throughout each month and, for natural gas, the average NYMEX pricing is based on first-of-the-month index prices, as in each case this is the method used to sell the majority of these commodities pursuant to terms of the relevant sales agreements. For NGLs, we use the NYMEX crude oil price as a reference for presentation purposes. The average realized price both before and after transportation, gathering and processing expenses shown in the table below represents our approximate composite per barrel price for NGLs.
Our average realization percentages for crude oil decreased in 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily due to higher quantity deducts, larger negative roll realizations and oil storage constraints in the second quarter of 2020, and changes in revenue contracts.
Commodity Price Risk Management
We use commodity derivative instruments to manage fluctuations in crude oil and natural gas prices, including collars, fixed-price exchanges and basis protection exchanges on a portion of our estimated crude oil and natural gas production. For our commodity exchanges, we ultimately realize the fixed price value related to the exchanges. See Note 6 - Commodity Derivative Financial Instruments in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data included elsewhere in this report for a summary of our derivative positions as of December 31, 2020.
Commodity price risk management, net, includes cash settlements upon maturity of our derivative instruments, and the change in fair value of unsettled commodity derivatives related to our crude oil and natural gas production.
Net settlements of commodity derivative instruments are based on the difference between the crude oil and natural gas index prices at the settlement date of our commodity derivative instruments compared to the respective strike prices contracted for the settlement months that were established at the time we entered into the commodity derivative transaction. The net change in fair value of unsettled commodity derivatives is comprised of the net increase or decrease in the beginning-of-period fair value of commodity derivative instruments that settled during the period and the net change in fair value of unsettled commodity derivatives during the period or from inception of any new contracts entered into during the applicable period. The net change in fair value of unsettled commodity derivatives during the period is primarily related to shifts in the crude oil and natural gas forward price curves and changes in certain differentials.
The following table presents net settlements and net change in fair value of unsettled derivatives included in commodity price risk management, net:
Lease Operating Expenses
Lease operating expenses ("LOE") increased by 13 percent to $161.3 million in 2020 compared to $142.2 million in 2019. The year-over-year increase in LOE is primarily attributable to the wells acquired from our SRC Acquisition in January 2020 and wells turned-in-line during 2020. Specifically, the increase was primarily due to $10.0 million in additional well services, an increase of $2.6 million in produced water disposal, and a $2.7 million increase in non-operated well expenses. The increases were partially offset by operational efficiencies achieved during 2020. LOE per Boe decreased 18 percent to $2.36 in 2020 from $2.88 in 2019, primarily due to a 38 percent increase in production volumes.
Production Taxes
Production taxes are comprised mainly of severance tax and ad valorem tax, and are directly related to crude oil, natural gas and NGLs sales and are generally assessed as a percentage of net revenues. From time to time, there are adjustments to the statutory rates for these taxes based upon certain credits that are determined based upon activity levels and relative commodity prices.
Production taxes decreased 26 percent to $59.4 million in 2020 compared to $80.8 million in 2019, primarily due to the 12 percent decrease in crude oil, natural gas and NGLs sales for 2020 compared to 2019, reductions in effective severance tax rates in the Wattenberg Field and well classifications in the Delaware Basin. Production taxes per Boe decreased 47 percent to $0.87 in 2020 compared to $1.63 in 2019 due to lower realized prices for crude oil, natural gas and NGLs and a 38 percent increase in production volumes between periods.
Transportation, Gathering and Processing Expenses
Transportation, gathering and processing expenses ("TGP") increased 68 percent to $77.8 million in 2020 compared to $46.4 million in 2019, primarily due to higher production volumes between periods as a result of the SRC Acquisition, as well as amendments to existing and new crude oil sales contracts, some of which resulted in a change in recognition from a net-back to a gross presentation of TGP. TGP per Boe increased to $1.14 for 2020 compared to $0.94 for 2019. The increase of TGP per Boe between periods was primarily due to an increase in TGP as discussed above, partially offset by an increase in production volume delivered.
Exploration, Geologic and Geophysical Expense
Geological and geophysical costs decreased 66 percent to $1.4 million in 2020 compared to $4.1 million in 2019, primarily due to costs incurred related to geological and geophysical projects and seismic studies in the Delaware Basin in 2019.
Impairment of Properties and Equipment
The following table sets forth the major components of our impairment of properties and equipment:
Impairment Charges. The significant decline in crude oil prices in the first quarter of 2020 was considered a triggering event that required us to assess our crude oil and natural gas properties for possible impairment. As a result of our assessment, we recorded impairment charges of $881.1 million to our proved and unproved properties. Of these impairment charges, approximately $753.0 million was related to our Delaware Basin proved properties. These impairment charges represented the amount by which the carrying value of the crude oil and natural gas properties exceeded the estimated fair value. The estimated fair value was determined based on estimated future discounted net cash flows. In addition to our proved property impairment, we also recognized approximately $127.3 million of impairment charges in the first quarter of 2020 for our unproved properties in the Delaware Basin. These impairment charges were recognized based on a review of our current drilling plans, estimated future cash flows for probable well locations and expected future lease expirations, primarily in areas where we have no development plans. We did not recognize any significant impairment write-downs with respect to our proved and unproved properties during the remainder of 2020. If crude oil prices decline, or we change other estimates impacting future net cash flows (e.g. reserves, price differentials, future operating and/or development costs), our proved and unproved oil and gas properties could be subject to additional impairments in future periods.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense decreased slightly to $161.1 million in 2020 compared to $161.8 million in 2019. Transaction costs relating to the SRC Acquisition increased from $7.8 million in 2019 to $19.9 million in 2020, and we also incurred $10.2 million of transition expenses relating to the acquisition in 2020. However, these increases were offset by (i) the non-recurrence of certain 2019 expenses including $6.0 million related to shareholder activism, $5.5 million in consultant fees related to business management and ERP implementation and a $3.4 million allowance for royalty owner payments and (ii) a $6.6 million decrease relating to ongoing corporate cost savings initiatives.
Depreciation, Depletion and Amortization Expense
Crude oil and natural gas properties. During 2020 and 2019, we invested $522.3 million and $787.7 million, respectively, exclusive of changes in accounts payable related to capital expenditures, in the development of our crude oil and natural gas properties. Depreciation, depletion and amortization expense ("DD&A") related to crude oil and natural gas properties is directly related to proved reserves and production volumes. DD&A expense related to crude oil and natural gas properties was $611.0 million and $638.5 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The year-over-year change in DD&A expense for 2020 compared to 2019 related to crude oil and natural gas properties was primarily due to the following:
The following table presents our per Boe DD&A expense rates for crude oil and natural gas properties:
The decrease in DD&A expense rate in the Delaware Basin was primarily due to the proved property impairment recognized in the first quarter of 2020, which lowered the carrying value of our depletion base. The effect of this impairment, however, was partially offset by 31.3 MMBoe in net downward revisions to our proved reserves in 2020, which were mainly due to lower SEC reserve pricing and a change in our drilling plan year over year due to the SRC Acquisition.
The decrease in DD&A expense rate in the Wattenberg Field was primarily due to the SRC Acquisition, which added 295 MMBoe in total proved reserves, offset by a $1.6 billion increase in our cost basis.
Non-crude oil and natural gas properties. Depreciation expense for non-crude oil and natural gas properties was $8.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $5.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in depreciation expense between periods was primarily due to our new ERP system which was implemented at the beginning of 2020.
Interest Expense, net
Interest expense, net increased by $17.6 million to $88.7 million in 2020 compared to $71.1 million in 2019. The increase was primarily related to a $9.2 million increase in interest expense related to our revolving credit facility as a result of higher borrowings between periods, a $9.2 million increase related to the assumption of the SRC Senior Notes and a $2.5 million increase related to the issuance of an additional $150 million aggregate principal amount of the 2026 Senior Notes in September 2020. Higher credit facility borrowings in 2020 were primarily due to our payment and termination of SRC's revolving credit facility as well as the partial redemption of the SRC Senior Notes in the first quarter of 2020. The increases in interest expense were offset by a $6.3 million increase in capitalized interest in 2020 as compared to 2019.
Provision for Income Taxes
We recorded an income tax benefit of $7.9 million and $3.3 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively, resulting in effective tax rates of 1.1 percent and 5.5 percent on the respective pre-tax losses. The effective tax rate of 1.1 percent for 2020 differs from the amount that would be provided by applying the statutory U.S. federal income tax rate of 21 percent to the pre-tax loss due to the effect of a full valuation allowance against our deferred income tax assets at December 31, 2020. The effective tax rate of 5.5 percent for 2019 differs from the statutory U.S. federal income tax rate of 21 percent due to state income taxes, non-deductible lobbying expenses, stock-based compensation and non-deductible officers’ compensation.
The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during the
periods in which those temporary differences become deductible. At each reporting period, management considers the
scheduled reversal of deferred tax liabilities, available taxes in carryback periods, tax planning strategies and projected future
taxable income in making this assessment. As previously noted, we recorded impairments totaling $882.4 million in 2020. These impairments resulted in three years of cumulative historical pre-tax losses and a net deferred tax asset position. The impairment losses were a key consideration that led us to continue to provide a valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2020 since we cannot conclude that it is more likely than not that our net deferred tax asset will be fully realized in future periods. As a result, we recorded a $7.9 million benefit in 2020 to increase our deferred tax valuation allowance to $165.6 million and reduce the carrying value of our deferred tax assets to zero.
Net Income (Loss)/Adjusted Net Income (Loss)
The factors impacting net losses of $724.3 million and $56.7 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively, are discussed above.
Adjusted net loss, a non-U.S. GAAP financial measure, was $625.3 million and for the year ended December 31, 2020 and adjusted net income, a non-U.S. GAAP financial measure, was $53.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. With the exception of the tax-affected (when applicable) net change in fair value of unsettled derivatives, the same factors impacted adjusted net income (loss). See Reconciliation of Non-U.S. GAAP Financial Measures below for a more detailed discussion of these non-U.S. GAAP financial measures and a reconciliation of these measures to the most comparable U.S. GAAP measures.
Financial Condition, Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash flows from operating activities, borrowings from our revolving credit facility, asset sales and proceeds raised in debt and equity capital market transactions. In 2020, our net cash flows from operating activities were $870.1 million.
Our primary source of cash flows from operating activities is the sale of crude oil, natural gas and NGLs. Fluctuations in our operating cash flows are principally driven by commodity prices and changes in our production volumes. Commodity prices have historically been volatile, and we manage a portion of this volatility through our use of commodity derivative instruments. We enter into commodity derivative instruments with maturities of no greater than five years from the date of the instrument. Our revolving credit facility imposes limits on the amount of our production we can hedge, and we may choose not to hedge the maximum amounts permitted. Therefore, we may still have fluctuations in our cash flows from operating activities due to the remaining non-hedged portion of our future production.
We may use our available liquidity for operating activities, capital investments, working capital requirements, acquisitions and for general corporate purposes. We maintain a significant capital investment program to execute our
development plans, which requires capital expenditures to be made in periods prior to initial production from newly developed wells.
From time to time, these activities may result in a working capital deficit; however, we do not believe that our working capital deficit as of December 31, 2020 is an indication of a lack of liquidity. We had working capital deficits of $471.6 million and $57.2 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase was primarily attributable to our 2021 Convertible Notes maturing in September 2021, which resulted in the notes being classified in current liabilities, an increase in the fair value liability of our commodity derivatives and additional current liabilities resulting from the SRC Acquisition. We intend to continue to manage our liquidity position by a variety of means, including through the generation of cash flows from operations, investment in projects with favorable rates of return, protection of cash flows on a portion of our anticipated sales through the use of an active commodity derivative hedging program, utilization of the borrowing capacity under our revolving credit facility and, if warranted, capital markets transactions from time to time.
Our cash and cash equivalents were $2.6 million at December 31, 2020 and availability under our revolving credit facility was $1.4 billion, providing for total liquidity of $1.4 billion as of December 31, 2020. In October 2020, as part of our semi-annual redetermination, the borrowing base of our credit facility was reduced from $1.7 billion to $1.6 billion, with a corresponding reduction of our elected commitment level to $1.6 billion. The borrowing base is primarily based on the loan value assigned to the proved reserves attributable to our crude oil and natural gas interests. Based on our current production forecast for 2021 and assumed average NYMEX prices of $45.00 per Bbl of crude oil and $2.50 per Mcf of natural gas and an assumed average composite price of $12.00 per Bbl for NGLs, we expect 2021 cash flows from operations to exceed our capital investments in crude oil and natural gas properties.
As a result of merging with SRC, we assumed the SRC Senior Notes and paid off and terminated SRC's revolving credit facility. On January 17, 2020, we commenced an offer to repurchase the outstanding SRC Senior Notes at 101 percent of the principal amount. Upon expiration of the repurchase offer on February 18, 2020, holders of $447.7 million of the outstanding SRC Senior Notes accepted our redemption offer for a total redemption price of approximately $452.2 million, plus accrued and unpaid interest of $6.2 million. We funded the repurchase with proceeds from our revolving credit facility. An aggregate principal amount of approximately $102.3 million of the SRC Senior Notes remains outstanding.
In September 2020, we issued an additional $150.0 million principal amount of our 2026 Senior Notes. The net proceeds from the offering were used to repay a portion of the amount outstanding under our revolving credit facility.
In April 2019, our board of directors approved the Stock Repurchase Program. Effective with the closing of the SRC Acquisition, our board of directors approved an increase and extension to the Stock Repurchase Program from $200 million to $525 million. Pursuant to the Stock Repurchase Program, we repurchased 1.3 million shares and 4.7 million shares of outstanding common stock at a cost of $23.8 million and $154.4 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We suspended the program in March 2020; however, we reinstated the program in late February 2021, in light of a reduction in our aggregate indebtedness to below $1.5 billion. Repurchases may extend into 2023 based on current market conditions, although the board of directors could elect to suspend or terminate the program at any time, including if certain share price parameters are not achieved. Approximately $346.8 million remained available for repurchases when we reinstated the program.
In addition, we may from time to time seek to pay down, retire or repurchase our outstanding debt using cash or through exchanges of other debt or equity securities, in open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions or otherwise. Such repurchases or exchanges, if any, will depend on available funds, prevailing market conditions, our liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions in our revolving credit agreement and other factors.
Based on our expected cash flows from operations, our cash and cash equivalents and availability under our revolving credit facility, we believe that we will have sufficient capital available to repay our 2021 Convertible Notes maturing in September 2021 and to fund our planned activities through the 12-month period following the filing of this report.
Our revolving credit facility is available for working capital requirements, capital investments, acquisitions, to support letters of credit and for general corporate purposes. The borrowing base is primarily based on the loan value assigned to the proved reserves attributable to our crude oil and natural gas interests.
The revolving credit facility contains covenants customary for agreements of this type, with the most restrictive being certain financial tests on a quarterly basis. The financial tests, as defined per the revolving credit facility, include requirements to: (a) maintain a minimum current ratio of 1.0:1.0 and (b) not exceed a maximum leverage ratio of 4.0:1.0. For purposes of the current ratio covenant, the revolving credit facility's definition of total current assets, in addition to current assets as presented under U.S. GAAP, includes, among other things, unused commitments under the revolving credit facility. Additionally, the current ratio covenant calculation allows us to exclude the current portion of our long-term debt and other short-term loans from the U.S. GAAP total current liabilities amount. Accordingly, the existence of a working capital deficit under U.S. GAAP is not necessarily indicative of a violation of the current ratio covenant. At December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all covenants in the revolving credit facility with a current ratio of 3.5:1.0 and a leverage ratio of 1.7:1.0. We expect to remain in compliance throughout the 12-month period following the filing of this report.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities. Our net cash flows from operating activities are primarily impacted by commodity prices, production volumes, net settlements from our commodity derivative positions, operating costs and general and administrative expenses. Cash flows from operating activities increased by $11.9 million to $870.1 million in 2020 as compared to $858.2 million in 2019. The increase between periods was primarily due to an increase in commodity derivative settlements and $82.0 million received in June 2020 from the divestiture of certain midstream assets in 2019. The increases were partially offset by a decrease in crude oil, natural gas and NGLs sales and a $84.3 million net decrease in working capital.
Adjusted cash flows from operations, a non-U.S. GAAP financial measure, increased by $96.2 million in 2020 to $921.6 million from $825.4 million in 2019. The increase was primarily due to the factors mentioned above for changes in cash flows provided by operating activities, without regard to timing of cash payments and receipts of assets and liabilities. Adjusted free cash flow, a non-U.S GAAP financial measure, increased by $361.6 million in 2020 to $399.3 million from $37.7 million in 2019. The increase was primarily due to a decrease in capital investments in crude oil and natural gas properties.
See Reconciliation of Non-U.S. GAAP Financial Measures, below, for a more detailed discussion of these non-U.S. GAAP financial measures and a reconciliation of these measures to the most comparable U.S. GAAP measures.
Investing Activities. As crude oil and natural gas production from a well declines rapidly in the first few years of production, we need to continue to commit significant amounts of capital in order to maintain and grow our production and replace our crude oil and natural reserves. If capital is not available or is constrained in the future, we will be limited to our cash flows from operations and liquidity under our revolving credit facility as the sources for funding our capital investments.
Cash flows from investing activities primarily consist of the acquisition, exploration and development of crude oil and natural gas properties, net of dispositions of crude oil and natural gas properties. Net cash used in investing activities of $687.2 million during 2020 was primarily related to our drilling and completion activities of $551.0 million and $139.8 million related to the closing of the SRC Acquisition.
Net cash used in investing activities of $677.8 million during 2019 was primarily related to our drilling and completion activities of $855.9 million. Partially offsetting these investing activities was $202.1 million of net cash received from divestitures of certain midstream assets and Delaware Basin crude oil and natural gas properties.
Financing Activities. Net cash used in financing activities in 2020 of $181.3 million was primarily due to the redemption of a portion of the 2025 Senior Notes totaling $452.2 million, the repurchase and retirement of shares of our common stock totaling $23.8 million pursuant to the Stock Repurchase Program and $9.3 million related to purchases of our stock for employee stock-based compensation tax withholding obligations. These financing cash outflows were financed by our net borrowings from our credit facility of $164 million, proceeds from the issuance of 2026 Senior Notes of $148.5 million and cash flows from operating activities.
Net cash used in financing activities in 2019 of $188.9 million was primarily due to the repurchase and retirement of shares of our common stock totaling $154.4 million pursuant to the Stock Repurchase Program, net borrowings from our credit facility of $28.5 million and $4.0 million related to purchases of our stock for employee stock-based compensation tax withholding obligations.
Subsidiary Guarantor
PDC Permian, Inc., a Delaware corporation (the “Guarantor”), our wholly-owned subsidiary, guarantees our obligations under our 2024 Senior Notes, 2025 Senior Notes and 2026 Senior Notes (collectively, the "Senior Notes") and our 2021 Convertible Notes. The Guarantor holds our assets located in the Delaware Basin. The Senior Notes and 2021 Convertible Notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed on a joint and several basis by the Guarantor. The guarantees are subject to release in limited circumstances only upon the occurrence of certain customary conditions.
The indentures governing the Senior Notes contain customary restrictive covenants that, among other things, limit our ability and the ability of our restricted subsidiaries to: (a) incur additional debt including under our revolving credit facility, (b) make certain investments or pay dividends or distributions on our capital stock or purchase, redeem or retire capital stock, (c) sell assets, including capital stock of our restricted subsidiaries, (d) restrict the payment of dividends or other payments by restricted subsidiaries to us, (e) create liens that secure debt, (f) enter into transactions with affiliates and (g) merge or consolidate with another company.
The following summarized subsidiary guarantor financial information has been prepared on the same basis of accounting as our condensed consolidated financial statements. Investments in subsidiaries are accounted for under the equity method.
Contractual Obligations and Contingent Commitments
The following table presents our contractual obligations and contingent commitments as of December 31, 2020:
____________
(1)Amount presented does not agree with the consolidated balance sheets as it excludes $6.8 million of unamortized net debt discounts and premium and $10.9 million of unamortized debt issuance costs.
(2)Represents our gross liability related to the fair value of commodity derivative positions.
(3)Includes deferred compensation to former executive officers and deferred payments related to firm transportation agreements.
(4)Excludes termination benefits related to employment agreements with our executive officers, due to the uncertainty surrounding the ultimate settlement of amounts and timing of these obligations.
(5)Amounts presented include $258.8 million to the holders of our 2026 Senior Notes, $98.0 million to the holders of our 2024 Senior Notes, $32.0 million to holders of our 2025 Senior Notes and $2.2 million payable to the holders of our 2021 Convertible Notes. Amounts also include $29.3 million commitment fees due which, as of December 31, 2020, includes a commitment equal to 0.375 percent per annum of the unused portion of the borrowing base of the Company's revolving credit facility. At December 31, 2020, we had variable-rate debt outstanding under our credit facility of $168.0 million.
(6)Represents our gross commitment which includes volumes produced by us and purchased from third parties and produced by other third-party working, royalty and overriding royalty interest owners whose volumes we market on their behalf.
From time to time, we are a party to various legal proceedings in the ordinary course of business. We are not currently a party to any litigation that we believe would have a materially adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations or liquidity. Information regarding our legal proceedings can be found in Note 12 - Commitments and Contingencies - Litigation and Legal Items in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data included elsewhere in this report.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
At December 31, 2020, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under SEC rules, which have or are reasonably likely to have a material current or future effect on our financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital investments or capital resources.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these statements requires us to make certain assumptions, judgments and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, as well as the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities and commitments as of the date of our financial statements. We analyze and base our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be
reasonable under the circumstances. Changes in facts and circumstances or additional information may result in revised estimates, and actual results may differ from these estimates.
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data included elsewhere in this report. We have identified the following policies as critical to the understanding of our financial position and results of operations and which require the application of significant judgment by management.
Crude Oil and Natural Gas Properties. We account for our crude oil and natural gas properties under the successful efforts method of accounting. Under this method, costs of proved developed producing properties, successful exploratory wells and developmental dry hole costs are capitalized and depleted by the unit-of-production method based on estimated proved developed producing reserves. In determining the estimates of reserve and economic evaluations, management utilizes independent petroleum engineers.
Further, under the successful efforts method, exploration costs, including geological and geophysical expenses, seismic costs on unproved leaseholds and delay rentals are expensed as incurred. Exploratory well drilling costs, including the cost of stratigraphic test wells, are initially capitalized, but charged to expense if the well is determined to be economically nonproductive. This accounting method may yield significantly different results than the full cost method of accounting. Judgment is required to determine the proper classification of wells designated as developmental or exploratory, which will ultimately determine the proper accounting treatment of costs incurred.
The successful efforts method inherently relies on the estimation of proved crude oil, natural gas and NGL reserves. Reserve quantities and the related estimates of future net cash flows are used as inputs in our calculation of depletion, evaluation of proved properties for impairment, assessment of expected realizability of our deferred income tax assets and calculation of the standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows. The process of estimating and evaluating crude oil and natural gas reserves is complex, requiring significant decisions in the evaluation of available geological, geophysical, engineering and economic data. Significant inputs and engineering assumptions used in developing the estimates of proved crude oil and natural gas reserves include reserves volumes, future operating and development costs and historical commodity prices. The data for a given property may also change substantially over time as a result of numerous factors, including additional development activity, evolving production history and a continual reassessment of the viability of production under changing economic conditions. As a result, revisions in existing reserve estimates occur. We cannot predict the amounts or timing of such future revisions.
Our reserves estimate has been prepared by our internal and external engineers. For more information regarding reserve estimation, including historical reserve revisions, see Items 1 and 2. Business and Properties - Preparation of Reserves Estimates and Supplemental Oil and Gas Information to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data included elsewhere in this report.
Annually, or upon a triggering event, we assess the valuation of our proved crude oil and natural gas properties for possible impairment by comparing the carrying value to estimated undiscounted future net cash flows on a field-by-field basis using estimated production and prices at which we estimate the commodity will be sold. If carrying values exceed undiscounted future net cash flows, the measurement of impairment is based on estimated fair value utilizing a discounted future cash flows analysis. The impairment recorded is the amount by which the carrying values exceed the fair value. In the impairment assessment we estimate the fair value of proved crude oil and natural gas properties using valuation techniques that convert future cash flows to a single discounted amount. Significant inputs and assumptions to the valuation of proved crude oil and natural gas properties include estimates of reserves volumes, future operating and development costs, future commodity prices, and a market based weighted average cost of capital rate.
Future commodity prices are estimated by using a combination of assumptions management uses in its budgeting and forecasting process, historical and future prices adjusted for geographical location and quality differentials, as well as other factors that management believes will impact realizable prices. In the event that there are downward revisions in estimates to our estimated reserves quantities, commodity prices significantly decline or rising operating costs, management would test the recoverability of the carrying value of our oil and gas properties and, if necessary, record an impairment charge. Fair value is calculated by discounting the future cash flows. The discount factor used is the market based weighted average cost of capital which is based on rates utilized by market participants that are commensurate with the risks inherent in the development and production of the underlying crude oil and natural gas.
Although our cash flow estimates are based on the relevant information available at the time the estimates are made, estimates of future cash flows are, by their nature, highly uncertain and may vary significantly from actual results.
Unproved properties consist of costs to acquire undeveloped leases as well as costs to acquire unproved reserves. Unproved properties with individually significant acquisition costs are periodically assessed for impairment based on remaining average lease terms, drilling results, reservoir performance, seismic interpretation or changes in future plans to develop acreage. Changes in our assumptions of the estimated nonproductive portion of our undeveloped leases could result in additional impairment expense.
Impairment charges would have no effect on cash flows but would result in a decrease in net income for the period in which the impairment charge is recorded.
Asset Retirement Obligations. The majority of our asset retirement obligations ("ARO") relate to the plugging and abandonment of crude oil and gas wells. We account for asset retirement obligations by recording the fair value of our plugging and abandonment obligations when incurred, which is at the time the related well is completed. The recognition of an asset retirement obligation requires management to make assumptions that include estimated plugging and abandonment costs, timing of settlements, inflation rates and discount rate. Over time, the liability is accreted for the change in the present value (accretion expense). The initial capitalized cost, net of salvage value, is depleted over the useful life of the related asset through a charge to DD&A expense. If the fair value of the estimated asset retirement obligation changes, an adjustment is recorded to both the asset retirement obligation and the asset retirement cost. When the judgments used to estimate the initial fair value of the asset retirement obligation change, an adjustment is recorded to both the obligation and the carrying amount of the related long-lived asset.
Valuation of Commodity Derivative Financial Instruments. Our results of operations and operating cash flows are affected by changes in market prices for crude oil, natural gas and NGLs. To manage a portion of our exposure to price volatility from producing crude oil and natural gas we enter into commodity derivative contracts to protect against price declines in future periods. We have not elected to designate any of our derivative instruments as cash flow hedges; therefore, these instruments do not qualify for hedge accounting. Accordingly, changes in the fair value of our derivative instruments are recorded in the consolidated statements of operations. Under applicable accounting standards, the fair value of each derivative instrument is recorded as either an asset or liability on the consolidated balance sheet. We measure the fair value of our commodity derivative instruments based upon a pricing model that utilizes market-based inputs, including, but not limited to, contractual price of the underlying position, current market prices, crude oil and natural gas forward curves, discount rates, volatility factors and nonperformance risk.
Our financial condition, results of operations and liquidity can be significantly impacted by changes in the market value of our commodity derivative instruments due to volatility of commodity prices, including basis differentials.
Deferred Income Tax Asset Valuation Allowance. Deferred income tax assets are recognized for deductible temporary differences, net operating loss carryforwards and credit carryforwards if it is more likely than not that the tax benefits will be realized. We must periodically evaluate whether it is more likely than not we will realize these deferred income tax assets and establish a valuation allowance for those that do not meet the more likely than not threshold. When assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we primarily consider future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences. To a lesser extent, we may also consider future taxable income exclusive of reversing temporary differences and carryfowards, and tax planning strategies that would, if necessary, be implemented to accelerate taxable amounts to utilize expiring carryforwards. The ultimate amount of deferred tax assets realized could be materially different from those recorded, as influenced by future operational performance, potential changes in jurisdictional income tax laws and other circumstances surrounding the actual realization of related tax assets.
Valuation of Business Combinations. As part of our business strategy, we regularly pursue the acquisition of oil and natural gas properties. The purchase price in an acquisition is allocated to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their relative fair values as of the acquisition date, which may occur many months after the announcement date. Therefore, while the consideration to be paid may be fixed, the fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed is subject to change during the period between the announcement date and the acquisition date. As the allocation of the purchase price is subject to significant estimates, the accuracy of this assessment is inherently uncertain.
In estimating the fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed the most significant assumptions relate to the estimated fair values assigned to proved and unproved crude oil and natural gas properties. To estimate the fair values of these properties as part of acquisition accounting, we estimate the fair value of proved crude oil and natural gas properties using valuation techniques that convert future cash flows to a single discounted amount. Significant inputs and assumptions to the valuation of proved crude oil and natural gas properties include estimates of reserves volumes, future operating and development costs, future commodity prices, and a market based weighted average cost of capital rate. Additionally, for acquisitions with significant unproved properties, we may also review comparable purchases and sales of crude oil and natural gas properties within the same regions and use that data as a basis for fair market value as such sales represent the amount at which a willing buyer and seller would enter into an exchange for such properties to determine an estimation of fair value.
If applicable, we record deferred taxes for any differences between the assigned values and tax basis of assets and liabilities. Estimated deferred taxes are based on available information concerning the tax basis of assets acquired and liabilities assumed and loss carryforwards at the acquisition date, although such estimates may change in the future as additional information becomes known.
Estimated fair values assigned to assets acquired can have a significant effect on results of operations in the future. A higher fair value assigned to a property results in a higher depletion expense, which results in lower net earnings. This increases the likelihood of impairment if future commodity prices or reserves quantities are lower than those originally used to determine fair value or if future operating expenses or development costs are higher than those originally used to determine fair value.
Acreage Exchanges. From time to time, we enter into acreage exchanges in order to consolidate our core acreage positions, enabling us to have more control over the timing of development activities, achieve higher working interests and providing us the ability to drill longer lateral length wells within those core areas. We account for our nonmonetary acreage exchanges of non-producing interests and unproved mineral leases in accordance with the guidance prescribed by Accounting Standards Codification 845, Nonmonetary Transactions. For those exchanges that lack commercial substance, we record the acreage received at the net carrying value of the acreage surrendered to obtain it. For those acreage exchanges that are deemed to have commercial substance, we record the acreage received at fair value, with a related gain or loss recognized in earnings, in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification 820, Fair Value Measurement. We estimate the fair value of proved crude oil and natural gas properties utilizing the same valuation techniques, significant inputs and assumptions as previously described.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Recently Adopted Accounting Standards in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data included elsewhere in this report.
Reconciliation of Non-U.S. GAAP Financial Measures
We use "adjusted cash flows from operations," "adjusted free cash flow (deficit)," "adjusted net income (loss)" and "adjusted EBITDAX," non-U.S. GAAP financial measures, for internal management reporting, when evaluating period-to-period changes and, in some cases, in providing public guidance on possible future results. In addition, we believe these are measures of our fundamental business and can be useful to us, investors, lenders and other parties in the evaluation of our performance relative to our peers and in assessing acquisition opportunities and capital expenditure projects. These supplemental measures are not measures of financial performance under U.S. GAAP and should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for, net income (loss) or cash flows from operations, investing or financing activities and should not be viewed as liquidity measures or indicators of cash flows reported in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The non-U.S. GAAP financial measures that we use may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies. In the future, we may disclose different non-U.S. GAAP financial measures in order to help us and our investors more meaningfully evaluate and compare our future results of operations to our previously reported results of operations. We strongly encourage investors to review our financial statements and publicly filed reports in their entirety and to not rely on any single financial measure.
Adjusted cash flows from operations and adjusted free cash flow (deficit). We believe adjusted cash flows from operations can provide additional transparency into the drivers of trends in our operating cash flows, such as production, realized sales prices and operating costs, as it disregards the timing of settlement of operating assets and liabilities. We believe adjusted free cash flow (deficit) provides additional information that may be useful in an investor analysis of our ability to generate cash from operating activities from our existing oil and gas asset base to fund exploration and development activities
and to return capital to stockholders in the period in which the related transactions occurred. We exclude from this measure cash receipts and expenditures related to acquisitions and divestitures of oil and gas properties and capital expenditures for other properties and equipment, which are not reflective of the cash generated or used by ongoing activities on our existing producing properties and, in the case of acquisitions and divestitures, may be evaluated separately in terms of their impact on our performance and liquidity. Adjusted free cash flow is a supplemental measure of liquidity and should not be viewed as a substitute for cash flows from operations because it excludes certain required cash expenditures. For example, we may have mandatory debt service requirements or other non-discretionary expenditures which are not deducted from the adjusted free cash flow measure.
We are unable to present a reconciliation of forward-looking adjusted cash flow because components of the calculation, including fluctuations in working capital accounts, are inherently unpredictable. Moreover, estimating the most directly comparable GAAP measure with the required precision necessary to provide a meaningful reconciliation is extremely difficult and could not be accomplished without unreasonable effort. We believe that forward-looking estimates of adjusted cash flow are important to investors because they assist in the analysis of our ability to generate cash from our operations.
Adjusted net income (loss). We believe that adjusted net income (loss) provides additional transparency into operating trends, such as production, realized sales prices, operating costs and net settlements on commodity derivative contracts, because it disregards changes in our net income (loss) from mark-to-market adjustments resulting from net changes in the fair value of our unsettled commodity derivative contracts, and these changes are not directly reflective of our operating performance.
Adjusted EBITDAX. We believe that adjusted EBITDAX provides additional transparency into operating trends because it reflects the financial performance of our assets without regard to financing methods, capital structure, accounting methods or historical cost basis. In addition, because adjusted EBITDAX excludes certain non-cash expenses, we believe it is not a measure of income, but rather a measure of our liquidity and ability to generate sufficient cash for exploration, development, and acquisitions and to service our debt obligations.
Beginning in the third quarter of 2019, we included a reconciling item for gains or losses on the sale of properties and equipment when calculating adjusted EBITDAX, thereby no longer including such gains or losses in our reported adjusted EBITDAX. We believe this methodology for calculating adjusted EBITDAX will enable greater comparability to our peers, as well as consistent treatment of adjustments for impairment and gains or losses on the sale of properties and equipment. For comparability, all prior periods presented have been conformed to the aforementioned methodology.
PV-10. We define PV-10 as the estimated present value of the future net cash flows from our proved reserves before income taxes, discounted using a 10 percent discount rate. We believe that PV-10 provides useful information to investors as it is widely used by professional analysts and sophisticated investors when evaluating oil and gas companies. We believe that PV-10 is relevant and useful for evaluating the relative monetary significance of our reserves. Professional analysts, investors and other users of our financial statements may utilize the measure as a basis for comparison of the relative size and value of our reserves to other companies' reserves. Because there are many unique factors that can impact an individual company when estimating the amount of future income taxes to be paid, we believe the use of a pre-tax measure is valuable in evaluating us and our reserves. PV-10 is not intended to represent the current market value of our estimated reserves.
The following table presents a reconciliation of each of our non-U.S. GAAP financial measures to its most comparable U.S. GAAP measure:
_____________
(1)Due to the full valuation allowance recorded against our net deferred tax assets, there is no tax effect for the year ended December 31, 2020.