Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
We offer products and services designed to empower engineers and data scientists across the semiconductor ecosystem to connect, collect, manage, and analyze data about design, equipment, manufacturing, and test to improve the yield and quality of their products. We derive revenues from two sources: Analytics and Integrated Yield Ramp. Our offerings combine proprietary software, professional services using proven methodologies, electrical measurement hardware tools, and physical IP for IC designs. We primarily monetize our offerings through license fees, contract revenue for professional services, and increasingly recently, time-based fees for software as a service (or SaaS). In some cases, especially on our historical IYR engagements, we also receive a value-based royalty that we call Gainshare. Our products, services, and solutions have been sold to IDMs, fabless semiconductor companies, foundries, OSATs, capital equipment manufacturers, and system houses.
Industry Trend
The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly affected how we and our customers are operating our businesses. For example, most U.S. states and countries worldwide imposed in 2020, and may continue to impose from time-to-time for the foreseeable future, restrictions on the physical movement of people to limit the spread of COVID-19, including travel restrictions and stay-at-home orders. As a result, from January to April 2020, our Shanghai office was temporarily shut down and our local employees were restricted from traveling to customer sites or visiting our other offices. Several other impacted locations were temporarily closed partially or fully in 2020, with minimal staffing only for essential activities including, for example, supporting essential businesses with our U.S. clean room facility. By the third quarter of 2020, our offices in Canada, France, Korea, and Japan had generally reopened with some restrictions returning temporarily at the end of the year. We are closely monitoring the COVID-19 situation and are currently planning to reopen our corporate headquarters in the United States and other offices with a focus on our employees’ safety. In addition, our personnel worldwide continue to be subject to various country-to-country travel restrictions, which limits the ability of some employees to travel to other offices or customer sites. We believe the lack of an ability to meet face-to-face during most of 2020 may have made it harder for us to sell complex or new technologies to such customers during 2020. If we can again begin to meet with customers face-to-face, we may improve traction with these customers. To date, we have been able to provide uninterrupted access to our products and services due to our globally distributed workforce, many of whom were working remotely prior to the pandemic, and our pre-existing infrastructure, which supports secure access to our internal systems. The total duration and full extent of the impact from the COVID-19 pandemic depends on future developments that cannot be accurately predicted at this time, such as the ultimate severity and transmission rate of the virus and variants, the extent and effectiveness of containment actions and vaccinations, and the impact of these and other factors on our employees, customers, partners, and suppliers.
Certain other trends may affect our Analytics revenue specifically. In particular, the confluence of Industry 4.0 (i.e. the fourth industrial revolution, or the automation and data exchange in manufacturing technologies and processes) and cloud computing (i.e. the on-demand availability of computing resources and data storage without direct active management by the user) is driving increased innovation in semiconductor and electronics manufacturing and analytics, as well as in the organization of IT networks and computing at semiconductor and electronics companies across the ecosystem. First, the ubiquity of wireless connectivity and sensor technology enables any manufacturing company to augment its factories and visualize its entire production line. In parallel, the cost per terabyte of data storage has continually decreased year to year. The combination of these two trends means that more data is collected and stored than ever before. Further, semiconductor companies are striving to analyze these very large data sets in real-time to make rapid decisions that measurably improve manufacturing efficiency and quality. In parallel, the traditional practice of on-site data storage, even for highly sensitive data, is changing. The ability to cost-effectively and securely store, analyze, and retrieve massive quantities of data from the cloud versus on-premise enables data to be utilized across a much broader population of users, frequently resulting in greater demands on analytics programs. The combination of these latter two trends means that cloud-based, analytic programs that effectively manage identity management, physical security, and data protection are increasingly in demand for insights and efficiencies across the organizations of these companies. We believe that all these trends will continue for the next few years, and the challenges involved in adopting Industry 4.0 and secure cloud computing will create opportunities for our combination of advanced analytics capabilities, proven and established supporting infrastructure, and professional services to configure our products to meet customers’ specialized needs.
Other trends may continue to affect our Integrated Yield Ramp revenue specifically. The logic foundry market at the leading edge nodes, such as 10nm and 7nm, underwent significant change over the past few years. The leading foundry continues to dominate market share as other foundries either started later than originally forecast in some cases. This trend will likely continue to negatively impact our Integrated Yield Ramp business on these nodes. We expect most logic foundries to invest in derivatives of older process nodes, such as 28nm and 14nm, to extract additional value as many of their customers will not move to advanced nodes due to either technological barriers or restrictive economics. Foundries that participate at leading edge nodes are expected to continue to invest in new technologies such as memory, packaging, and multi-patterned and EUV lithography, as well as new innovations in process control and variability management. We expect China’s investment in semiconductors to continue. In order for these trends to provide opportunities for us to increase our business leveraging electrical characterization, Chinese semiconductors manufacturers will need to increase their production volumes on advanced technology nodes and continue to engage foreign suppliers, subject to compliance with changing U.S. export restrictions. As a result of these market developments, we have chosen to focus our resources and investments in products, services, and solutions for analytics.
There are other business trends that may affect our business opportunities generally. For instance, the demand for consumer electronics, communications devices, and high-performance computing continues to drive technological innovation in the semiconductor industry as the need for products with greater performance, lower power consumption, reduced costs, and smaller size continues to grow with each new product generation. In addition, advances in computing systems and mobile devices continue to fuel demand for higher capacity memory chips. To meet these demands, IC manufacturers and designers are constantly challenged to improve the overall performance of their ICs by designing and manufacturing ICs with more embedded applications to create greater functionality while lowering power and cost per transistor. As this trend continues, companies will continually be challenged to improve process capabilities to optimally produce ICs with minimal random and systematic yield loss, which is driven by the lack of compatibility between the design and its respective manufacturing process. We believe that these difficulties will continue to create a need for our products and services that address yield loss across the IC product life cycle.
Early decisions by the Biden U.S. Presidential Administration confirm continuity of a bipartisan consensus in the U.S. government favoring increased confrontation of China in trade practices and economic matters, national security, and human rights. The Biden Administration views technology as a domain of strategic competition in which the U.S. and allies must stay ahead of China. The Administration has reaffirmed the U.S. government consensus identifying semiconductor, artificial intelligence, and 5G technologies, and protection of U.S. supply chains, as priority efforts. It appears that the Administration may now augment ongoing U.S. efforts by enlisting the cooperation of allied countries in both advanced development and protection against P.R.C. use of U.S. and allied advances. The prior U.S. presidential administration expanded and intensified export controls and sanctions, including addition of many P.R.C. companies to the U.S. Export Administration Regulations (EAR) Entity List. These listings restrict supply to designees of items that are subject to the EAR. After an internal evaluation, we determined that a large percentage of our software products are not of U.S. origin and are, thus, not subject to the EAR. Our standard operations include development, distribution processes, software download sites, and professional service centers and processes located in various geographies around the world to better serve our customers. Some customers have nonetheless expressed concerns to us that continued action by the U.S. government could potentially interrupt their ability to make use of our products or services. The continuing tension between the U.S. and P.R.C. governments in trade and security matters or the perception of that tension could lead to disruptions or reductions in international trade, deter or prevent purchasing activity of customers, and negatively impact us in our China sales and financial results.
Our Strategic Partnership with Advantest
On July 29, 2020, we entered into a strategic partnership with Advantest Corporation through its wholly-owned subsidiary, Advantest America, Inc., (collectively, “Advantest”) that includes: (i) a significant agreement for our assistance in development of cloud-based applications for Advantest tools that leverage our Exensio software analytics platform; (ii) a commercial agreement providing for the license to third parties of solutions that result from the development work that combine Advantest’s testing applications and our Exensio platform; (iii) a 5-year cloud-based subscription for our Exensio analytics platform and related services; and (iv) the purchase of 3,306,924 shares of our common stock, for aggregate gross proceeds of $65.2 million. Concurrent with the share purchase, Advantest Corporation also entered into multi-year voting and lock-up agreements.
We entered into this partnership to expand test and measurement solutions throughout the semiconductor value chain. We believe that the combination of our Exensio platform with Advantest’s advanced testing equipment will provide Advantest tool users with the ability to connect, test, measure, and analyze manufacturing data generated by the tools at any point in the semiconductor value chain, helping customers increase yield and reduce testing costs. Further, we believe collaboration with Advantest’s technology, direction connection to its customer relationships, and the breadth of its global footprint will enable us to both accelerate our technology roadmap and customer adoption of our AI-driven data analytics solutions across the supply chain.
Cimetrix Acquisition
On December 1, 2020, we completed the acquisition of Cimetrix for approximately $35.0 million in cash consideration, net of cash on Cimetrix’s balance sheet as of closing, and subject to other closing adjustments, for all of the outstanding equity of Cimetrix. The combination of Cimetrix connectivity products with our Exensio platform, which leverages machine learning, is intended to enable IC, assembly, and equipment manufacturer customers to extract more intelligence from their tools, not just data, to build more reliable chips and systems at lower manufacturing costs. We accounted for this acquisition as a business combination in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 805, Business Combinations. This method requires that assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination be recognized at their respective estimated fair values as of the Acquisition Date. The excess of purchase consideration over the fair value of net tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired was recorded as goodwill. The goodwill recorded from this acquisition represents business benefits we anticipates from the acquired workforce and expectation for expanded sales opportunities to foster further business growth. Identifiable definite-lived intangible assets comprised of developed technology, customer relationships, non-competition agreements, trademark and trade names, and in-process research and development (“IP R&D”). For further information about this acquisition, see Note 4 of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” (Item 8 of Part II of this Report).
Financial Highlights
The following are our financial highlights for the year ended December 31, 2020:
•
Total revenues were $88.0 million, which was an increase of $2.5 million, or 3%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Analytics revenue was $57.2﻿ million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was an increase of $7.6 million, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in Analytics revenue was driven by a $10.2 million increase, primarily due to an increase in fees from Exensio licenses, higher hours for characterization services worked across multiple contracts and customers, and revenue from Cimetrix, partially offset by a $2.6 million decrease in revenue from DFI systems. Integrated Yield Ramp revenue decreased $5.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, due primarily to a $1.7 million decrease in revenue from lower hours worked across multiple contracts and customers and $3.3 million less in revenue for the period when compared to the non-recurring revenue from a customer contract amendment, which was recognized in 2019.
•
Costs of revenues increased $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to (i) a $2.9 million increase in cloud-delivery related costs and depreciation expense of test equipment,(ii) a $1.4 million increase in personnel-related costs, (iii) a $0.8 million increase in direct costs related to third-party software royalty and licenses expense, equipment and hardware expense, and the timing of deferral of contract costs, and (iv) a $0.1 million increase in amortization intangible assets related to our acquisition of Cimetrix, all partially offset by a $1.8 million decrease in travel expenses resulting from reduced business travel due to the global COVID-19 pandemic, and a $0.2 million decrease in facilities and other expenses.
•
Net loss was $40.4 million, compared to $5.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in net loss was primarily attributable to a (i) $24.2 million increase in income tax provision due primarily to the recognition of a full valuation allowance against our U.S. net deferred tax assets, (ii) a $3.3 million increase in costs of revenues, (iii) a $8.3 million increase in operating expenses as we continued to make investments in research and development and sales and marketing activities, and due to an increase in general and administrative expenses, primarily due to the acquisition of Cimetrix, increased subcontractor expenses, and legal fees related to an arbitration proceeding over a disputed customer contract, and (iv) a $1.5 million increase in interest and other expense (income), net, all partially offset by a $2.5 million increase in revenues.
•
Cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments increased $47.7 million to $145.3 million at December 31, 2020, from $97.6 million at December 31, 2019, primarily due to the proceeds from the issuance of our common stock in connection with our strategic partnership with Advantest and cash generated from the operating activities, partially offset by cash used in investing activities, primarily due to $28.6 million in cash used in the period for the acquisition of Cimetrix and cash used for additions to property and equipment for our DFI™ solution, including investments in constructing eProbe tools.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires us to make judgments, assumptions, and estimates that affect the amounts reported in the Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes. Notes 1 and 2 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements describe the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements. We consider the accounting policies described below to be our critical accounting policies. These critical accounting policies are impacted significantly by judgments, assumptions, and estimates used in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements and actual results could differ materially from the amounts reported based on these policies.
Revenue Recognition
We derive revenue from two sources: Analytics and Integrated Yield Ramp.
Analytics Revenue
Analytics revenue is derived from the following primary offerings: licenses for software, SaaS, Data Connectivity and Equipment Control Software, DFI™ and CV® systems that do not include performance incentives based on customers’ yield achievement, and services related to the foregoing.
Revenue from standalone software is recognized depending on whether the license is perpetual or time-based. Perpetual (one-time charge) license software is recognized at the time of the inception of the arrangement when control transfers to the customers, if the software license is considered as a separate performance obligation from the services offered by us. Revenue from post-contract support is recognized over the contract term on a straight-line basis because we are providing (i) support and (ii) unspecified software updates on a when-and-if available basis over the contract term. Revenue from time-based-licensed software is allocated to each performance obligation and is recognized either at a point in time or over time as follows. The license component is recognized at the time when control transfers to customers, with the post-contract support component recognized ratably over the committed term of the contract. For contracts with any combination of licenses, support, and other services, distinct performance obligations are accounted for separately. For contracts with multiple performance obligations, we allocate the transaction price of the contract to each performance obligation on a relative basis using standalone selling price (or SSP) attributed to each performance obligation.
Revenue from Exensio SaaS arrangements, which allow for the use of a cloud-based software product or service over a contractually determined period of time without the customer having to take possession of software, is accounted for as a subscription and is recognized as revenue ratably, on a straight-line basis, over the subscription period beginning on the date the service is first made available to customers. For contracts with any combination of SaaS and related services, distinct performance obligations are accounted for separately. For contracts with multiple performance obligations, we allocate the transaction price of the contract to each performance obligation on a relative basis using SSP attributed to each performance obligation.
Revenue from DFI and CV systems that do not include performance incentives based on customers’ yield achievement is recognized primarily as services are performed. Where there are distinct performance obligations, we allocate revenue to all deliverables based on their SSPs. For these contracts with multiple performance obligations, we allocate the transaction price of the contract to each performance obligation on a relative basis using SSP attributed to each performance obligation. Where there are not discrete performance obligations, historically, revenue is primarily recognized as services are performed using a percentage of completion method based on costs or labor-hours inputs, whichever is the most appropriate measure of the progress towards completion of the contract. The estimation of percentage of completion method is complex and subject to many variables that require significant judgement.
Integrated Yield Ramp Revenue
Integrated Yield Ramp revenue is derived from our IYR engagements that include performance incentives based on customers’ yield achievement and Gainshare royalties, typically based on customer’s wafer shipments, pertaining to these fixed-price contracts, which royalties are variable.
Revenue under these project-based contracts, which are delivered over a specific period of time typically for a fixed fee component paid on a set schedule, is recognized as services are performed using a percentage of completion. Similar to the services provided in connection with CV systems that are contributing to Analytics revenue, due to the nature of the work performed in these arrangements, the estimation of percentage of completion method is complex and subject to many variables that require significant judgment.
The Gainshare royalty contained in yield ramp contracts is a variable fee related to continued usage of our IP after the fixed-fee service period ends, based on a customer’s yield achievement. Revenue derived from Gainshare is contingent upon our customers reaching certain defined production yield levels. Gainshare royalty periods are generally subsequent to the delivery of all contractual services and performance obligations. We are required to record Gainshare royalty revenue in the same period in which the usage occurs. Because we generally do not receive the acknowledgment reports from our customers during a given quarter within the time frame necessary to adequately review the reports and include the actual amounts in quarterly results for such quarter, we accrue the related revenue based on estimates of customers underlying sales achievement. Our estimation process can be based on historical data, trends, seasonality, changes in the contract rate, knowledge of the changes in the industry and changes in customers’ manufacturing environment learned through discussions with customers and sales personnel. As a result of accruing revenue for the quarter based on such estimates, adjustments will be required in the following quarter to true-up revenue to the actual amounts reported.
Income Taxes
We are required to assess whether it is “more-likely-than-not” that we will realize our deferred tax assets. If we believe that they are not likely to be fully realizable before the expiration dates applicable to such assets, then to the extent we believe that recovery is not likely, we must establish a valuation allowance. Based on all available evidence, both positive and negative, we determined a full valuation allowance was appropriate for our federal and state net deferred tax assets (or DTAs) in the fourth quarter of 2020, primarily driven by an increased cumulative loss incurred over the 12-quarter period ended December 31, 2020, near term forecasted book losses, and the likelihood that we will not utilize tax attributes before they begin to expire at the end of 2022. The valuation allowance was approximately $41.9 million and $10.5 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2019, the valuation allowance was primarily related to California R&D tax credits and California net operating losses (or NOLs) related to an acquisition that we currently do not believe to be “more-likely-than-not” to be ultimately realized. We will continue to evaluate the need for a valuation allowance and may change our conclusion in a future period based on changes in facts (e.g., 12-quarter cumulative profit, significant new revenue, etc.). If we conclude that we are more likely than not to utilize some or all of our U.S. DTAs, we will release some or all of our valuation allowance and our tax provision will decrease in the period in which we make such a determination.
We evaluate our DTAs for realizability considering both positive and negative evidence, including our historical financial performance, projections of future taxable income, future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, tax planning strategies, and any carryback availability. In evaluating the need for a valuation allowance, we estimate future taxable income based on management approved business plans. This process involves significant management judgment about assumptions that are subject to change from period to period based on changes in tax laws or variances between future projected operating performance and actual results. Changes in the net DTAs, less offsetting valuation allowance, in a period are recorded through the income tax provision and could have a material impact on the Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Loss.
Our income tax calculations are based on application of applicable U.S. federal or state or foreign tax law. Our tax filings, however, are subject to audit by the respective tax authorities. Accordingly, we recognize tax liabilities based upon our estimate of whether, and the extent to which, additional taxes will be due when such estimates are more-likely-than-not to be sustained. An uncertain income tax position will not be recognized if it has less than a 50% likelihood of being sustained. To the extent the final tax liabilities are different than the amounts originally accrued, the increases or decreases are recorded as income tax expense or benefit in the Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Loss. At December 31, 2020, no deferred taxes have been provided on undistributed earnings from our international subsidiaries. We intend to reinvest the earnings of our non-U.S. subsidiaries in those operations indefinitely. As such, we have not provided for any foreign withholding taxes on the earnings of foreign subsidiaries as of December 31, 2020. The earnings of our foreign subsidiaries are taxable in the United States in the year earned under the Global Intangible Low-Taxed Income rules implemented under 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) was enacted. The CARES Act includes, among other things, refundable payroll tax credits, deferment of some employer FICA taxes, allowance of net operating loss carrybacks for up to five years, alternative minimum tax credit refunds, and technical amendments regarding the income tax depreciation of qualified improvement property placed in service after December 31, 2017. The removal of certain limitations on the utilization of NOLs resulted in our recognition of an income tax benefit of $1.2 million from the carryback of federal NOLs during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Software Development Costs
Internally developed software is software developed to meet our internal needs to provide certain services to our customers. Our capitalized software development costs consist of internal compensation related costs and external direct costs incurred during the application development stage and are amortized over their useful lives, which is generally five to six years. The costs to develop software that is marketed externally have not been capitalized as we believe our current software development process is essentially completed concurrent with the establishment of technological feasibility. As such, all related software development costs are expensed as incurred and included in research and development expense in our Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Loss.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation using the fair value method, which requires us to measure stock-based compensation based on the grant-date fair value of the awards and recognize the compensation expense over the requisite service period. As stock-based compensation expense recognized is based on awards ultimately expected to vest, it has been reduced for estimated forfeitures. Forfeitures are estimated at the time of grant and revised, if necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates.
The fair value of our restricted stock units is equal to the market value of our common stock on the date of the grant. These awards are subject to time-based vesting which generally occurs over a period of four years.
The fair value of our stock options is estimated using the Black-Scholes-Merton option-pricing model, which incorporates various assumptions including volatility, expected life and interest rates. The expected volatility is based on the historical volatility of our common stock over the most recent period commensurate with the estimated expected life of our stock options. The expected life is based on historical experience and on the terms and conditions of the stock options granted. The interest rate assumption is based upon observed Treasury yield curve rates appropriate for the expected life of our stock options.
Business Combinations
We allocate the fair value of purchase consideration to the tangible assets acquired, liabilities assumed and intangible assets acquired based on their estimated fair values at the date of the business combination. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. Such valuations require us to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Significant estimates in valuing certain intangible assets include, but are not limited to, estimated replacement costs and future expected cash flows from acquired customers, acquired technology, acquired patents, and trade names from a market participant perspective, useful lives and discount rates. The estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. Allocation of purchase consideration to identifiable assets and liabilities affects our amortization expense, as acquired finite-lived intangible assets are amortized over the useful life, whereas any indefinite lived intangible assets, including IP R&D and goodwill, are not amortized. During the measurement period, which is not to exceed one year from the acquisition date, we record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to earnings.
Valuation of Long-lived Assets including Goodwill and Intangible Assets
We record goodwill when the purchase consideration of an acquisition exceeds the fair value of the net tangible and identified intangible assets as of the date of acquisition. We have one operating segment and one operating unit. We perform an annual impairment assessment of goodwill during the fourth quarter of each calendar year or more frequently, if required to determine if any events or circumstances exist, such as an adverse change in business climate or a decline in the overall industry demand, that would indicate that it would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount, including goodwill. If events or circumstances do not indicate that the fair value of a reporting unit is below its carrying amount, then goodwill is not considered to be impaired and no further testing is required. If the carrying amount exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss would be recognized equal to the amount of excess, limited to the amount of total goodwill. There was no impairment of goodwill for the year ended December 31, 2020
Our long-lived assets, excluding goodwill, consist of property, equipment, and intangible assets. We periodically review our long-lived assets for impairment. For assets to be held and used, we initiate our review whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of a long-lived asset group may not be recoverable. Recoverability of an asset group is measured by comparison of its carrying amount to the expected future undiscounted cash flows that the asset group is expected to generate.
If it is determined that an asset group is not recoverable, an impairment loss is recorded in the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset group exceeds its fair value. There was no impairment of long-lived assets including intangible assets for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Leases
We have operating leases for our administrative and sales offices, research and development laboratory and clean room. We recognize our long-term operating lease rights and commitments as operating lease right-of-use assets, operating lease liabilities and operating lease liabilities, non-current, respectively, on our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
We determine if an arrangement is, or contains, a lease at inception. Operating lease right-of-use assets, and operating lease liabilities are initially recorded based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. Lease terms include the minimum unconditional term of the lease, and may include options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain at the commencement date that such options will be exercised. The decision to include these options involves consideration of our overall future business plans and other relevant business economic factors that may affect our business. Since the determination of the lease term requires an application of judgment, lease terms that differ in reality from our initial judgment may potentially have a material impact on our Consolidated Balance Sheet. In addition, our leases do not provide an implicit rate. In determining the present value of our expected lease payments, the discount rate is calculated using our incremental borrowing rate determined based on the information available, which requires additional judgment.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements and Accounting Changes
See our Note 1, “Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” included under Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for a description of recent accounting pronouncements and accounting changes, including the expected dates of adoption and estimated effects, if any, on our consolidated financial statements.
Results of Operations
Discussion of Financial Data for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues, Costs of Revenues, and Gross Margin
Analytics Revenue
Analytics revenue was $57.2﻿ million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was an increase of $7.6 million, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in Analytics revenue was driven by a $10.2 million increase, primarily due to an increase in fees from Exensio licenses, higher hours for characterization services worked across multiple contracts and customers, and revenue from Cimetrix, partially offset by a $2.6 million decrease in revenue from DFI systems.
Integrated Yield Ramp Revenue
Integrated Yield Ramp revenue decreased $5.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, due primarily to a $1.7 million decrease in revenue from lower hours worked across multiple contracts and customers and $3.3 million less in revenue for the period when compared to the non-recurring revenue from a customer contract amendment, which was recognized in 2019. Our Integrated Yield Ramp revenue may continue to fluctuate from period to period primarily due to the contribution of Gainshare royalty, which is dependent on many factors that are outside our control, including among others, continued production of ICs by our customers at facilities at which we generate Gainshare, sustained yield improvements by our customers, and our ability to enter into new contracts containing Gainshare.
Our revenues may also fluctuate in the future due to other factors, including the semiconductor industry’s continued acceptance of our products, services and solutions, the timing of purchases by existing and new customers, cancellations by existing customers, our ability to attract new customers and penetrate new markets, and further penetration of our current customer base. Fluctuations in future results may also occur if any of our significant customers renegotiate pre-existing contractual commitments, including due to adverse changes in their own business.
Costs of Revenues
Costs of revenues consist primarily of costs incurred to provide and support our services, costs recognized in connection with licensing our software, and amortization of acquired technology. Services costs include material, employee compensation and related benefits, overhead costs, travel, and allocated facilities-related costs. Software license costs consist of costs associated with cloud-delivery related expenses and licensing third-party software used by us in providing services to our customers in solution engagements or sold in conjunction with our software products.
The increase in costs of revenues of $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily due to (i) a $2.9 million increase in cloud-delivery related costs and depreciation expense of test equipment, (ii) a $1.4 million increase in personnel-related costs, (iii) an $0.8 million increase in direct costs related to third-party software royalty and licenses expense, equipment and hardware expense, and the timing of deferral of contract costs, and (iv) a $0.1 million increase in amortization intangible assets related to our acquisition of Cimetrix, partially offset by a $1.8 million decrease in travel expenses due to the global COVID-19 pandemic, and a $0.2 million decrease in facilities and other expenses.
Gross Margin
Gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 58% compared to 61% for the year-ago period, or a decrease of 3%. The higher gross margin during year December 31, 2019 was primarily due to $4.5 million in nonrecurring revenue from a customer contract amendment recognized in such period.
Operating Expenses:
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs to support product development activities, including compensation and benefits, outside development services, travel, facilities cost allocations, and stock-based compensation charges.
Research and development expenses increased for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to (i) a $0.7 million increase in personnel-related expense, (ii) a $0.6 million increase in subcontractor expenses that is primarily related to our DFI systems and Exensio initiatives, (iii) a $0.5 million increase in facilities and information technology related-costs, (iv) a $0.4 million increase in software licenses and maintenance expense, and (v) a $0.3 million write-down in carrying value of certain equipment, all partially offset by a $0.6 million decrease in travel expenses due to the global COVID-19 pandemic.
We anticipate our expenses in research and development will fluctuate in absolute dollars from period to period as a result of the size and the timing of product development projects.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of compensation and benefits for sales, marketing and general and administrative personnel, legal and accounting services, marketing communications expenses, travel and facilities cost allocations, and stock-based compensation expense.
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to (i) a $1.8 million increase in personnel-related costs, (ii) a $1.5 million increase in acquisition-related costs for Cimetrix, (iii) a $1.5 million increase in subcontractor expenses, (iv) a $1.3 million increase in fees for legal services primarily related to the arbitration proceeding over a disputed customer contract, (v) a $0.6 million increase in cloud-services related costs, and (vi) a $0.2 million increase from a write-down of equipment, all partially offset by a $0.6 million decrease in travel expenses.
We anticipate our selling, general and administrative expenses will fluctuate in absolute dollars from period to period as a result of cost control initiatives and to support increased selling efforts in the future.
Amortization of other acquired intangible assets
Amortization of other acquired intangible assets consists of amortization of intangibles acquired as a result of certain business combinations. The increase in amortization of other acquired intangible assets for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily related to amortization of other acquired intangible assets in the acquisition of Cimetrix.
Interest and Other Expense (Income), Net
Interest and other expense (income), net primarily consists of interest income, gains, and losses from foreign currency forward contracts, and foreign currency transaction exchange gains and losses.
Interest and other expense (income), net increased for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to a decrease in interest income due to lower interest rates and a higher net unfavorable fluctuations in foreign exchange rates, partially offset by a decrease in loss related to foreign currency forward contracts and an increase in other income.
Income Tax Provision (Benefit)
Our effective tax rate for 2020 was (123.5%), which was different from the statutory federal tax rate primarily due to recognition of a full valuation allowance against our U.S. net deferred tax assets due to the uncertainty of the ultimate realization of the future benefits of such deferred tax assets, partially offset by an income tax benefit from the carryback of federal NOLs pursuant to the provisions of the CARES Act.
Any significant change in our future effective tax rates could adversely impact our consolidated financial position, results of operations and cash flows. Our future tax rates may be adversely affected by a number of factors including increase in expenses not deductible for tax purposes, tax legislations in the United States and in foreign countries where we are subject to tax jurisdictions, the geographic composition of our pre-tax income, the amount of our pre-tax income as business activities fluctuate, our ability to use tax attributes such as research and development tax credits and net operation losses, the tax effects of employee stock activity, audit examinations with adverse outcomes, changes in general accepted accounting principles and the effectiveness of our tax planning strategies.
For a discussion of our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2019, and 2018, please see our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 filed with the SEC on March 10, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, our working capital, defined as total current assets less total current liabilities, was $151.2 million, compared to $119.6 million as of December 31, 2019. Cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments, on a consolidated basis, were $145.3 million as of December 31, 2020, compared to $97.6 million as of December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, cash and cash equivalents held by our foreign subsidiaries were $4.0 million and $3.8 million, respectively. We believe that our existing cash resources and anticipated funds from operations will satisfy our cash requirements to fund our operating activities, capital expenditures, and other obligations, for at least the next twelve months.
There has been no significant impact to our liquidity and capital resources from the global COVID-19 pandemic. For risk discussion about the continuing impact of global COVID-19 pandemic on our operations or demand for our products, refer to Item 1A, Risk Factors on Part I of this Report.
Private Placement
On July 29, 2020, we entered into a strategic partnership with Advantest, which included the sale to Advantest America, Inc. of 3,306,924 shares of our common stock, at a purchase price of $19.7085 per share, for aggregate gross proceeds of $65.2 million on July 30, 2020. All of the shares were offered and sold by us pursuant to an exemption from the registration requirements of the Securities Act 1933, as amended.
Cimetrix Acquisition
As of December 31, 2020, payment made for the Cimetrix acquisition, net of cash acquired, amounted to $28.6 million. The Company held back $3.5 million of the purchase price (the “Holdback Amount”) to satisfy adjustments to the closing balance sheet and claims for indemnity arising out of breaches of certain representations, warranties and covenants, and certain other enumerated items in the merger agreement. The Holdback Amount, as adjusted, is expected to be paid to the participating equity holders in 2021 on approximately the one-year anniversary of the closing.
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows Data
Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Cash flow from operating activities during 2020 mostly consisted of net loss, adjusted for certain non-cash items, which primarily consisted of depreciation and amortization, share-based compensation expense and deferred tax assets. Cash generated from operating activities decreased by $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, driven primarily by (i) a $34.9 million increase in net loss, (ii) a $27.9 million increase in non-cash adjustments to net loss, primarily due to increase in deferred taxes of $25.5 million and increase in stock-based compensation expense of $1.0 million, and (iii) a $4.2 million increase in net change in operating assets and liabilities, the major contributors to the net change in operating assets and liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2020, were as follows:
● accounts receivable decreased by $8.1 million, primarily due to increased collections and lower contractual invoicing activity during the fourth quarter of 2020;
● other non-current assets decreased by $2.1 million, primarily due to a decrease in the noncurrent portion of unbilled receivables due to the timing of billing and revenue recognition;
● accrued compensation and related benefits increased by $1.9 million, primarily due to the timing of payments of accrued bonuses and accrued payroll taxes, and increases in accrued vacation; and,
● billings in excess of recognized revenues and deferred revenues and increased by $8.0 million, primarily due to the timing of billing and revenue recognition.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities increased by $137.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in investing activities primarily related to (i) purchases of $131.5 million short-term investments and property, (ii) a $28.6 million payment for the acquisition of Cimetrix, and (iii) a $7.0 million for equipment purchased and prepayment for our DFI system, including construction of additional eProbe tools, partially offset by $16.5 million proceeds from maturities of short-term investments.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in investing activities related to (i) $10.6 million of property and equipment purchased primarily related to the construction of our DFI™ assets and expansion of our research and development laboratory and clean room, and (ii) a $2.7 million payment for acquisition of certain assets from StreamMosaic, Inc.
Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities increased by $74.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities primarily consisted of $65.1 million net proceeds from the issuance of common stock in connection with the Securities Purchase Agreement with Advantest, and $4.2 million of proceeds under our Employee Stock Purchase Plan and the exercise of stock options, partially offset by $4.5 million in cash payments for taxes related to net share settlement of equity awards.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in financing activities primarily consisted of $9.6 million in cash used to repurchase shares of our common stock, and $2.7 million in cash payments for taxes related to net share settlement of equity awards, partially offset by $2.7 million of proceeds under our Employee Stock Purchase Plan and the exercise of stock options.
Related Party Transactions
Refer to Note 3, Strategic Partnership Agreement with Advantest and Related Party Transactions of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Item 8 of Part II of this Report) for a discussion on related party transactions between the Company and Advantest.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, investments in special purpose entities or undisclosed borrowings or debt.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our known contractual obligations (in thousands) as of December 31, 2020:
(1) Refer to Note 7 of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” (Item 8 of Part II of this Report) for further discussion.
(2) Purchase obligations consist of agreements to purchase goods and services entered in the ordinary course of business.
(3) The contractual obligation table above excludes liabilities for uncertain tax positions of $2.9 million, which are not practicable to assign to any particular years due to the inherent uncertainty of the tax positions. See Note 12 of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” (Item 8 of Part II of this Report) for further discussion.