ITEM 7 MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Forward-Looking Statements
Certain statements made in this Form 10-K, which are not historical fact, are forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act , Section 21E of the Exchange Act, and the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Words such as "anticipate," "estimate," "may," "feel," "expect," "believe," "plan," "will," "will likely," "would," "should," "could," "project," "goal," "target," "potential," "seek," "intend," and similar expressions are intended to identify these forward-looking statements but are not the exclusive means of identifying such statements. Forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that may cause actual results to differ materially. Factors that might cause such a difference include, but are not limited to:
(1)the ever-changing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic - the duration, extent and severity of which are impossible to predict, including the possibility of further resurgence in the spread of COVID-19 - on economies (local, national and international) and markets, and on Peoples' customers, counterparties, employees and third-party service providers, as well as the effects of various responses of governmental and nongovernmental authorities to the COVID-19 pandemic, including public health actions directed toward the containment of the COVID-19 pandemic (such as quarantines, shut downs, and other restrictions on travel and commercial, social and other activities), the development, availability and
effectiveness of vaccines, and the implementation of fiscal stimulus packages, which could adversely impact sales volumes, add volatility to the global stock markets, and increase loan delinquencies and defaults;
(2)changes in the interest rate environment due to economic conditions related to the COVID-19 pandemic or other factors and/or the fiscal and monetary policy measures undertaken by the U.S. government and the Federal Reserve Board in response to such economic conditions, which may adversely impact interest rates, the interest rate yield curve, interest margins, loan demand and interest rate sensitivity;
(3)the success, impact, and timing of the implementation of Peoples' business strategies and Peoples' ability to manage strategic initiatives, including the expansion of commercial and consumer lending activities, in light of the continuing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on customers' operations and financial condition;
(4)competitive pressures among financial institutions, or from non-financial institutions, which may increase significantly, including product and pricing pressures, which can in turn impact Peoples' credit spreads, changes to third-party relationships and revenues, changes in the manner of providing services, customer acquisition and retention pressures, and Peoples' ability to attract, develop and retain qualified professionals;
(5)uncertainty regarding the nature, timing, cost, and effect of legislative or regulatory changes or actions, or deposit insurance premium levels, promulgated and to be promulgated by governmental and regulatory agencies in the State of Ohio, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Federal Reserve Board and the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, which may subject Peoples, its subsidiaries, or one or more acquired companies to a variety of new and more stringent legal and regulatory requirements which adversely affect their respective businesses, including in particular the rules and regulations promulgated and to be promulgated under the CARES Act and the follow-up legislation enacted as the CAA, on December 27, 2020, the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010, and the Basel III regulatory capital reform;
(6)the effects of easing restrictions on participants in the financial services industry;
(7)local, regional, national and international economic conditions (including the impact of potential or imposed tariffs, a U.S. withdrawal from or significant renegotiation of trade agreements, trade wars and other changes in trade regulations, and changes in the relationship of the U.S. and its global trading partners) and the impact these conditions may have on Peoples, its customers and its counterparties, and Peoples' assessment of the impact, which may be different than anticipated;
(8)Peoples may issue equity securities in connection with future acquisitions, which could cause ownership and economic dilution to Peoples' current shareholders;
(9)changes in prepayment speeds, loan originations, levels of nonperforming assets, delinquent loans, charge-offs, and customer and other counterparties performance and creditworthiness generally, which may be less favorable than expected in light of the COVID-19 pandemic and adversely impact the amount of interest income generated;
(10)Peoples may have more credit risk and higher credit losses to the extent there are loan concentrations by location or industry of borrowers or collateral;
(11)changes in accounting standards, policies, estimates or procedures may adversely affect Peoples' reported financial condition or results of operations;
(12)the impact of assumptions, estimates and inputs used within models, which may vary materially from actual outcomes, including under the CECL model;
(13)the discontinuation of LIBOR and other reference rates which may result in increased expenses and litigation, and adversely impact the effectiveness of hedging strategies;
(14)adverse changes in the conditions and trends in the financial markets, including the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and the related responses by governmental and nongovernmental authorities to the pandemic, which may adversely affect the fair value of securities within Peoples' investment portfolio, the interest rate sensitivity of Peoples' consolidated balance sheet, and the income generated by Peoples' trust and investment activities;
(15)the volatility from quarter to quarter of mortgage banking income, whether due to interest rates, demand, the fair value of mortgage loans, or other factors;
(16)Peoples' ability to receive dividends from its subsidiaries;
(17)Peoples' ability to maintain required capital levels and adequate sources of funding and liquidity;
(18)the impact of larger or similar-sized financial institutions encountering problems, which may adversely affect the banking industry and/or Peoples' business generation and retention, funding and liquidity;
(19)Peoples' ability to secure confidential information and deliver products and services through the use of computer systems and telecommunications networks, including those of Peoples' third-party vendors and other service providers, which may prove inadequate, and could adversely affect customer confidence in Peoples and/or result in Peoples incurring a financial loss;
(20)Peoples' ability to anticipate and respond to technological changes, and Peoples' reliance on, and the potential failure of, a number of third-party vendors to perform as expected, including Peoples' primary core banking system provider, which can impact Peoples' ability to respond to customer needs and meet competitive demands;
(21)operational issues stemming from and/or capital spending necessitated by the potential need to adapt to industry changes in information technology systems on which Peoples and its subsidiaries are highly dependent;
(22)changes in consumer spending, borrowing and saving habits, whether due to changes in retail distribution strategies, consumer preferences and behavior, changes in business and economic conditions (including as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic), legislative or regulatory initiatives (including those in response to the COVID-19 pandemic), or other factors, which may be different than anticipated;
(23)the adequacy of Peoples' internal controls and risk management program in the event of changes in strategic, reputational, market, economic, operational, cybersecurity, compliance, legal, asset/liability repricing, liquidity, credit and interest rate risks associated with Peoples' business;
(24)the impact on Peoples' businesses, personnel, facilities, or systems, of losses related to acts of fraud, theft, or violence;
(25)the impact on Peoples' businesses, as well as on the risks described above, of various domestic or international widespread natural or other disasters, pandemics (including COVID-19), cybersecurity attacks, system failures, civil unrest (including any resulting branch closures or damage), military or terrorist activities or international conflicts;
(26)the impact on Peoples' businesses and operating results of any costs associated with obtaining rights in intellectual property claimed by others and adequately protecting Peoples' intellectual property;
(27)risks and uncertainties associated with Peoples' entry into new geographic markets and risks resulting from Peoples' inexperience in these new geographic markets;
(28)Peoples' ability to identify, acquire, or integrate suitable strategic acquisitions, which may be unsuccessful, or may be more difficult, time-consuming or costly than expected;
(29)Peoples' continued ability to grow deposits;
(30)the impact of future governmental and regulatory actions upon Peoples' participation in and execution of government programs related to the COVID-19 pandemic;
(31)uncertainty regarding the impact of changes to the U.S. presidential administration and Congress on the regulatory landscape, capital markets, elevated government debt, potential changes in tax legislation that may increase tax rates and the response to and management of the COVID-19 pandemic; and
(32)other risk factors relating to the banking industry or Peoples as detailed from time to time in Peoples' reports filed with the SEC, including those risk factors included in the disclosures under the heading "ITEM 1A RISK FACTORS" of this Form 10-K.
All forward-looking statements speak only as of the filing date of this Form 10-K and are expressly qualified in their entirety by the cautionary statements. Although management believes the expectations in these forward-looking statements are based on reasonable assumptions within the bounds of management’s knowledge of Peoples’ business and operations, it is possible that actual results may differ materially from these projections. Additionally, Peoples undertakes no obligation to update these forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances after the filing date of this Form 10-K or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events except as may be required by applicable legal requirements. Copies of documents filed with the SEC are available free of charge at the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov and/or through Peoples' website - www.peoplesbancorp.com under the "Investor Relations" section.
The following discussion and analysis of Peoples' Consolidated Financial Statements is presented to provide insight into management's assessment of the financial position and results of operations for the periods presented. This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the audited Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto, as well as the ratios and statistics, contained elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Summary of Significant Transactions and Events
The following is a summary of transactions or events that have impacted or are expected by management to impact Peoples’ results of operations or financial condition:
◦On January 29, 2021, Peoples announced that on January 28, 2021, Peoples' Board of Directors authorized a share repurchase program authorizing Peoples to purchase up to an aggregate of $30 million of its outstanding common shares. This program replaced the share repurchase program authorizing Peoples to purchase up to an aggregate of $40 million of its outstanding common shares, which Peoples' Board of Directors had authorized on February 27, 2020 and which was terminated on January 28, 2021. During 2020, Peoples repurchased 1,299,577 common shares for $29.3 million compared to 26,427 common shares for $805,000 during 2019.
◦Peoples originated $489.0 million of PPP loans during 2020 under the loan guarantee program created under the CARES Act. These loans were targeted to provide small businesses with support to cover payroll and certain other expenses. Loans made under the PPP are fully guaranteed by the SBA. Additional information can be found later in this discussion under the caption “FINANCIAL CONDITION - COVID-19 Loan Impacts." As of December 31, 2020, Peoples had $366.9 million in PPP loans outstanding, which were included in commercial and industrial loan balances. Peoples recognized interest income of $10.7 million on PPP loans during 2020, which included $7.5 million for deferred fee/cost accretion.
◦During 2020, Peoples recorded a provision for credit losses of $26.3 million, compared to $2.5 million for 2019 and $5.4 million for 2018. During 2020, Peoples recorded $932,000 of the provision for credit losses to establish the allowance for credit losses for the loans acquired from Triumph Premium Finance. The increase in the provision for credit losses compared to 2019 was primarily related to the impact of COVID-19 on the CECL model, as well as the implementation of the CECL accounting standard.
◦Peoples has been providing relief solutions to consumer and commercial borrowers, including forbearance and modifications, during the COVID-19 pandemic. Additional information can be found later in this discussion under the caption “FINANCIAL CONDITION - COVID-19 Loan Impacts."
◦Peoples was selected to partner with JobsOhio, a private nonprofit organization charged with economic development. Additional information can be found later in this discussion under the caption “FINANCIAL CONDITION - COVID-19 Loan Impacts."
◦Peoples incurred $1.1 million in pension settlement charges in 2020 and $267,000 in 2018, due to the aggregate amount of lump-sum distributions to participants in Peoples' defined benefit pension plan exceeding the threshold for recognizing settlement charges during the period. There were no such settlement charges during 2019.
◦During 2020, Peoples recorded $1.3 million of expenses related to the COVID-19 pandemic. These expenses were primarily related to donations made to community food banks and pantries, as well as contributions to funds to support employees, including, in the second quarter of 2020, the issuance of unrestricted common share awards totaling $396,000 granted to employees at the Assistant Vice President level and below.
◦During 2020, Peoples incurred $489,000 of acquisition-related expenses, compared to $7.3 million for each of 2019 and 2018. The acquisition-related expenses in 2020 were related to the Triumph Premium Finance acquisition, while the expenses during 2019 and 2018 were due to the First Prestonsburg and ASB acquisitions, respectively.
◦During 2020, Peoples sold restricted Class B Visa stock for a gain of $680,000, which was recorded in other non-interest income. Peoples also sold restricted Class B Visa stock during 2019, resulting in a gain of $787,000.
◦Effective July 1, 2020, Peoples completed the business combination under which Peoples Bank acquired the operations and assets of Triumph Premium Finance (referred to as the "premium finance acquisition"), a division of TBK Bank, SSB. Based in Kansas City, Missouri, the division operating as Peoples Premium Finance will continue to provide insurance premium financing loans for commercial customers to purchase property and casualty insurance products through its growing network of independent insurance agency partners nationwide. Peoples Bank acquired $84.7 million in loans, at acquisition date, after fair value adjustments. Peoples also recorded $4.3 million of other intangible assets and $5.5 million of goodwill. Total consideration paid for this acquisition was $94.5 million. As of December 31, 2020, Peoples Premium Finance loans had grown to $114.8 million.
◦During 2020, Peoples recognized credits to its FDIC insurance expense as the FDIC issued credits to member banks to offset against the quarterly assessment as a result of the deposit insurance fund reaching its target threshold for smaller banks. These credits were used by Peoples beginning in 2019 and were fully exhausted during the second quarter of 2020.
◦On April 2, 2020, Peoples entered into a First Amendment to the Loan Agreement with U.S. Bank National Association (the “U.S. Bank Loan Agreement”), entered into on April 3, 2019, to extend the maturity. The First Amendment to Loan Agreement extends the maturity from April 2, 2020 to April 1, 2021. The U.S. Bank Loan Agreement provides Peoples with a revolving line of credit in the maximum aggregate principal amount of $20.0 million that may be used: (i) for working capital purposes; (ii) to finance dividends or other distributions (other than stock dividends and stock splits) on or in respect of Peoples’ capital stock and redemptions, repurchases or other acquisitions of any of Peoples’ capital stock permitted under the U.S. Bank Loan Agreement; and (iii) to finance acquisitions permitted under the U.S. Bank Loan Agreement.
◦During 2020, Peoples recognized $109,000 in bank owned life insurance ("BOLI") income related to tax-free death benefits, compared to $482,000 in 2019.
◦In an effort to stimulate an economy that was being adversely impacted by the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Federal Reserve Board first lowered the benchmark Federal Funds Target Rate by 50 basis points on March 3, 2020 and then lowered the target rate another 100 basis points at the next FOMC meeting on March 15, 2020. The Federal Funds Target Rate range was 0% - 0.25% as of March 31, 2020 and maintained this rate as of December 31, 2020. According to the Chair of the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Funds Target Rate is not likely to drop below this range. However, the Federal Reserve Board does have other tools available that it can employ and has expressed an intention to do so in order to maintain a targeted level of liquidity. Furthermore, the Federal Reserve Board has indicated it is committed to a target 0% - 0.25% range for Federal Funds through at least 2023.
◦On January 1, 2020, Peoples Insurance acquired a property and casualty-focused independent insurance agency for a purchase price amount equal to $866,000, and recorded $735,000 of customer relationship intangibles, and $27,000 of other assets, resulting in $104,000 of goodwill.
◦On August 22, 2019, Peoples Risk Management, Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of Peoples, was formed. Peoples Risk Management, Inc. is a Nevada-chartered captive insurance company which insures against certain risks unique to the operations of Peoples and for which insurance may not be currently available or economically feasible. Peoples Risk Management, Inc. pools resources with several other similar insurance company subsidiaries of financial institutions to help minimize the risk allocable to each participating insurer.
◦At the close of business on April 12, 2019, Peoples completed the merger with First Prestonsburg. First Prestonsburg merged into Peoples and First Prestonsburg's wholly-owned subsidiary, The First Commonwealth Bank of Prestonsburg, Inc., which operated nine full-service bank branches in central and eastern Kentucky, merged into Peoples Bank. First Prestonsburg shareholders received total merger consideration of $43.7 million, of which $11.3 million was in the form of a special cash dividend paid by First Prestonsburg to its shareholders prior to the merger with the remainder being paid in the form of an aggregate of 1,005,478 Peoples common shares by Peoples. The merger added $129.4 million of total loans and $257.2 million of total deposits at the acquisition date, after fair value adjustments. Peoples also recorded $4.3 million of other intangible assets and $15.2 million of goodwill. Refer to "Note 19 Acquisitions" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
◦At the close of business on April 13, 2018, Peoples completed the merger with ASB. ASB merged into Peoples, and ASB's wholly-owned subsidiary, American Savings Bank, fsb, which operated seven full-service bank branches and two loan production offices in southern Ohio and eastern Kentucky, merged into Peoples Bank. Under the terms of the merger agreement, Peoples paid total merger consideration of $41.5 million. The merger added an aggregate of $239.2 million of total loans and loans held for sale, and $198.6 million of total deposits at the acquisition date, after fair value adjustments. Peoples also recorded $2.6 million of other intangible assets and $18.1 million of goodwill.
The impact of these transactions, where material, is discussed in the applicable sections of this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Critical Accounting Policies
The accounting and reporting policies of Peoples conform to US GAAP and to general practices within the financial services industry. A summary of significant accounting policies is contained in "Note 1 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. While all of these policies are important to understanding the Consolidated Financial Statements, certain accounting policies require management to exercise judgment and make estimates or assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying Notes. These estimates and assumptions are based on information available as of the date of the Consolidated Financial Statements; accordingly, as this information changes, the Consolidated Financial Statements could reflect different estimates or assumptions.
Management has identified four accounting policies as those that, due to the judgments, estimates and assumptions inherent in the policies, are critical to an understanding of Peoples' Consolidated Financial Statements and Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. The four accounting policies identified were the allowance for credit losses, business combinations, goodwill, and income taxes. These four accounting policies are described in further detail below.
Allowance for Credit Losses
Peoples adopted ASU 2016-13 "Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments" on January 1, 2020, and began using the CECL model to estimate its allowance for credit losses. The allowance for credit losses is estimated by management using relevant available information, from both internal and external sources, relating to past events, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts. The allowance for credit losses is measured on a pool basis, with loans collectively evaluated when similar risk characteristics exist. Peoples evaluated risk characteristics, including but not limited to: internal or third-party credit scores or credit ratings, risk ratings or classifications, financial asset type, collateral type, size, effective interest rate, term, geographical location, industry of the borrower, vintage,
historical or credit loss patterns, and reasonable and supportable forecast periods. Peoples identified 17 segments for which it believes there are similar risk characteristics and utilized a discounted cash flow methodology in determining an allowance for credit losses for each segment.
In estimating credit losses, Peoples uses a loss driver method, which analyzes one or more economic variables to the change in default rate using a regression analysis. Variables that had a strong correlation were selected as economic factors, or variables, for the model. If a single variable was not found to be strongly correlated, additional variables were included. Peoples utilizes the U.S. unemployment, Ohio unemployment, Ohio Gross Domestic Product, and the Ohio Case Shiller Home Price Indices as economic factors in modeling.
In general, Peoples completes a quarterly evaluation based on several qualitative factors to determine if there should be adjustments made to the allowance for credit losses. These factors include economic conditions, collateral, concentrations, troubled assets, Peoples' loss trends, peer loss trends, delinquency trends, portfolio composition and loan growth, underwriting, and certain other risks.
The allowance for credit losses related to specific loans was based on management's estimate of potential losses on impaired loans as determined by (1) the present value of expected future cash flows, (2) the fair value of collateral if the loan is determined to be collateral dependent, or (3) the loan's observable market price.
There can be no assurance that the allowance for credit losses will be adequate to cover all losses, but management believes the allowance for credit losses at December 31, 2020 was adequate to provide for expected losses from existing loans based on information available at that time. While management uses available information to estimate losses, the ultimate collectability of a substantial portion of the loan portfolio, and the need for future additions to the allowance, will be based on changes in economic conditions and other relevant factors. As such, adverse changes in economic activity could reduce currently estimated cash flows for both commercial and individual borrowers, which would likely cause Peoples to experience increases in problem assets, delinquencies and losses on loans in the future.
Peoples also completes a quarterly evaluation for unfunded commitments for loans that are not unconditionally cancellable, which includes construction loans, floor plan lines of credit, home equity lines of credit, other credit lines and letters of credit. Peoples performed a study to determine the historical funding rates of unadvanced portions of loans, and applied these funding rates to the unfunded commitments at period end. The loss rates, including qualitative factors, in determining the allowance for credit losses were applied at the segment level to the unfunded commitment amounts to determine the allowance for credit loss liability for unfunded commitments.
Prior to January 1, 2020, Peoples utilized the incurred loss model for estimating its allowance for loan losses.
Business Combinations
Peoples utilizes the acquisition method of accounting for business combinations. As of the acquisition date, Peoples records the acquired company's net assets at fair value. The determination of fair value as of the acquisition date requires management to consider various factors that involve judgment and estimation, including the application of discount rates, prepayment rates, attrition rates, future estimates of interest rates, as well as many other assumptions. These assumptions can have a material impact on the estimated fair value, and as a result, the goodwill recorded in a business combination.
Goodwill
Peoples records goodwill as a result of acquisitions accounted for under the acquisition method of accounting. Under the acquisition method, Peoples is required to allocate the consideration paid for an acquired company to the assets acquired, including identified intangible assets, and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values at the date of acquisition. Goodwill represents the excess cost over the fair value of net assets acquired and is not amortized but is tested for impairment when indicators of impairment exist, and, in any case, at least annually.
The value of recorded goodwill is supported by revenue that is driven by the volume of business transacted and Peoples' ability to provide quality, cost-effective services in a competitive market place. A decline in earnings as a result of a lack of growth or the inability to deliver cost-effective services over sustained periods can lead to impairment of goodwill that could adversely impact earnings in future periods. Goodwill impairment exists when the carrying value of the reporting unit (as defined by US GAAP) exceeds its fair value value and an impairment loss is recognized in earnings in an amount equal to that excess, limited to the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit.
The process of evaluating goodwill for impairment involves highly subjective and complex judgments, estimates and assumptions regarding the fair value of Peoples' reporting unit and, in some cases, goodwill itself. As a result, changes to these judgments, estimates and assumptions in future periods could result in materially different results.
Peoples currently maintains a single reporting unit for goodwill impairment testing. While quoted market prices exist for Peoples' common shares since they are publicly traded, these market prices do not necessarily reflect the value
associated with gaining control of an entity. Thus, management takes into account all appropriate fair value measurements in determining the estimated fair value of the reporting unit.
Peoples elected to early adopt Accounting Standards Update (ASU) 2017-04 "Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (Topic 350): Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment" as of January 1, 2019. The amendments in this ASU simplify how an entity is required to test goodwill for impairment by eliminating the requirement to calculate the implied fair value of goodwill to measure a goodwill impairment charge. Instead, entities will record an impairment charge based on the excess of a reporting unit’s carrying amount over its fair value.
Peoples performs its required annual impairment test as of October 1st each year. Peoples first assesses qualitative factors to determine whether it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, including goodwill. In this evaluation, Peoples assesses relevant events and circumstances, which may include macroeconomic conditions, industry and market conditions, cost factors, overall financial performance, events specific to Peoples, significant changes in the reporting unit, or a sustained decrease in stock price. If Peoples determines that it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of the reporting unit is greater than its carrying amount, then performing the quantitative impairment test is unnecessary. However, Peoples has the option to complete the quantitative impairment test to corroborate the findings of its qualitative analysis. If Peoples determines that it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, Peoples must complete the quantitative impairment test.
At October 1, 2020, management elected to bypass the qualitative assessment and completed a quantitative impairment test due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and its related impact on stock prices during 2020. This test resulted in management concluding that the fair value of the reporting unit exceeded its carrying value.
Peoples is required to perform interim tests for goodwill impairment in subsequent quarters if events occur or circumstances change that indicate potential goodwill impairment exists, such as adverse changes to Peoples' business or a significant decline in Peoples' market capitalization. For further information regarding goodwill, refer to "Note 6 Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are recorded based on the liability method of accounting, which includes the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the temporary differences between carrying amounts and tax bases of assets and liabilities, computed using enacted tax rates. In general, Peoples records deferred tax assets when the event giving rise to the tax benefit has been recognized in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
A valuation allowance is recognized to reduce any deferred tax asset when, based upon available information, it is more-likely-than-not all, or any portion, of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. Assessing the need for, and amount of, a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets requires significant judgment and analysis of evidence regarding realization of the deferred tax assets. In most cases, the realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon Peoples generating a sufficient level of taxable income in future periods, which can be difficult to predict. Peoples' largest deferred tax assets involve differences related to Peoples' allowance for credit losses, available-for-sale securities, and accrued employee benefits. Management determined a valuation allowance of $805,000 at December 31, 2017, to be recorded against the deferred tax assets associated with its investment in a partnership investment. In 2018, Peoples released the valuation allowance, which reduced income tax expense by $805,000. Peoples sold $6.7 million of equity investment securities in the second quarter of 2018, which resulted in a capital gain for tax purposes. This capital gain was large enough to offset an anticipated future capital loss, which was expected to be recognized due to the structure of the historical tax credit investment, resulting in the release of the valuation allowance. There were no valuation allowances recorded at December 31, 2020 or 2019.
The calculation of tax liabilities is complex and requires the use of estimates and judgment since it involves the application of complex tax laws that are subject to different interpretations by Peoples and the various tax authorities. Peoples' interpretations are subject to challenge by the tax authorities upon audit or to reinterpretation based on management's ongoing assessment of facts and evolving case law.
From time-to-time and in the ordinary course of business, Peoples is involved in inquiries and reviews by tax authorities that normally require management to provide supplemental information to support certain tax positions taken by Peoples in its tax returns. Uncertain tax positions are initially recognized in the Consolidated Financial Statements when it is more-likely-than-not the position will be sustained upon examination by the tax authorities. Such tax positions are initially and subsequently measured as the largest amount of tax benefit that is greater than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement with the tax authority assuming full knowledge of the position and all relevant facts. The amount of unrecognized tax benefits was immaterial at both December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Management believes it has taken appropriate positions on its tax returns, although the ultimate outcome of any tax review cannot be predicted with certainty. Consequently, no assurance can be given that the final outcome of these matters will not be different than what is reflected in the current and historical financial statements.
Fair Value Measurements
As a financial services company, the carrying value of certain financial assets and liabilities is impacted by the application of fair value measurements, either directly or indirectly. In certain cases, an asset or liability is measured and reported at fair value on a recurring basis, such as available-for-sale investment securities. In other cases, management must rely on estimates or judgments to determine if an asset or liability not measured at fair value warrants an impairment write-down or whether a valuation reserve should be established. Given the inherent volatility, the use of fair value measurements may have a significant impact on the carrying value of assets or liabilities, or result in material changes to the consolidated financial statements, from period to period.
Detailed information regarding fair value measurements can be found in "Note 2 Fair Value of Financial Instruments" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $34.8 million, compared to $53.7 million in 2019 and $46.3 million in 2018, representing earnings per diluted common share of $1.73, $2.63 and $2.41, respectively. The decline in earnings compared to 2019 was driven by a higher provision for credit losses, which was impacted by the new CECL accounting methodology implemented on January 1, 2020, coupled with the effect that COVID-19 had on the economic assumptions used within the CECL model. Non-core items contained in net income included net gains and losses, COVID-19-related expenses, severance expenses, pension settlement charges and acquisition-related costs. These non-core items negatively impacted earnings per diluted common share by $0.22 for 2020 compared to $0.30 for 2019 and $0.13 for 2018.
Net interest income declined 1% to $138.9 million for 2020, compared to $140.8 million for 2019, and totaled $129.6 million for 2018. The decrease compared to 2019 was largely due to the low interest rate environment that began in early 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, which had a negative impact on interest income from loans and investment securities, and was partially offset by lower interest expense as Peoples closely managed funding costs. Net interest margin was 3.24% in 2020, compared to 3.69% in 2019 and 3.71% in 2018. Net interest margin compressed during 2020 as loan yields declined due to the low interest rate environment and investment securities yields decreased as premium amortization increased due to higher refinancing activity. Included in net interest income during 2020 was the impact of the PPP loans, which added $10.7 million in interest income and 2 basis points to net interest margin. Funding costs were controlled during 2020, and declined 36 basis points compared to 2019. Net interest income grew during 2019, compared to 2018, largely due to loan growth, which was positively impacted by the First Prestonsburg and ASB acquisitions, and higher loan yields. Accretion income, net of amortization expense, from acquisitions totaled $2.8 million for 2020, $4.9 million for 2019 and $2.2 million for 2018, adding 7 basis points, 12 basis points and 6 basis points, respectively, to the net interest margin. During 2018, proceeds of $0.9 million were received on an investment security that, in prior years, had been written down due to an other-than-temporary impairment, which added 3 basis points to net interest margin.
Provision for credit losses grew to $26.3 million for 2020, compared to $2.5 million for 2019. This growth was due to the combination of the implementation of the CECL model at the beginning of 2020, and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economic forecasts utilized within the model. Provision for credit losses declined during 2019 compared to 2018, reflecting lower net charge-offs, which included a $1.8 million recovery on a previously charged-off loan, and reduced loan growth compared to the prior year. Net charge-offs as a percent of average total loans were 0.05% for 2020, 0.04% for 2019 and 0.15% for 2018.
Total non-interest income declined 1% compared to 2019, and was largely due to a $2.3 million reduction in deposit account service charges, which was driven by the COVID-19 pandemic and the higher balances being maintained by customers throughout 2020. The decline in deposit account service charges was partially offset by higher mortgage banking income, as a result of higher refinancing activity due to the low interest rate environment during 2020. Increases in trust and investment income and electronic banking income were more than offset by decreases in insurance income, commercial loan swap fee income and bank owned life insurance income. Compared to 2018, total non-interest income during 2019 increased 13%, and was mostly due to higher electronic banking income, deposit account service charges and swap fee income. Total non-interest income was positively impacted during 2019 due to the additional deposit accounts and cardholders associated with the acquisitions of First Prestonsburg and ASB.
Total non-interest expense decreased $3.6 million, or 3%, from 2019 and was driven by a reduction in acquisition-related expenses. Declines in salaries and employee benefit costs, which were mostly due to increased deferred personnel costs associated with the origination of PPP loans, were partially offset by higher data processing and software expense that was largely a result of implementation of new software, coupled with higher core processing costs. Peoples also recorded higher FDIC insurance expense during 2020 compared to the prior year, as credits had been received and recognized during 2019, and were fully utilized during the second quarter of 2020. Included in total non-interest expense during 2020 were certain non-core expenses which included COVID-19-related expenses of $1.3 million, severance expenses and pension settlement charges that totaled $1.1 million each, and acquisition-related expenses of $0.5 million. During 2019, non-core expenses included $7.3 million of acquisition-related expenses. Compared to 2018, total non-interest expense during 2019 grew $11.3 million, or 9%. This was mostly related to increases in salaries and employee benefit costs, net occupancy and equipment expense, electronic banking expense and data processing and software expense, which were partially offset by lower FDIC insurance expense and professional fees. The growth in salaries and employee benefit costs compared to 2018 was primarily due to higher base salaries, which were impacted by merit increases, including
continued movement towards a $15 per hour minimum wage throughout Peoples' organization, and the employees added from the acquisitions in 2019 and 2018.
Peoples' efficiency ratio, which is calculated as total non-interest expense less amortization of other intangible assets divided by fully tax-equivalent ("FTE") net interest income, plus total non-interest income, excluding all gains and losses, was 63.9% for 2020, compared to 64.7% for 2019 and 65.3% for 2018. The improvement in the efficiency ratio during 2020 was mostly due to a reduction in total non-interest expense, which more than offset declines in revenue. The decline in the efficiency ratio during 2019 was primarily related to higher total revenue, which outpaced increases in total non-interest expense. The efficiency ratio, when adjusted for non-core items, was 61.9% for 2020, 61.1% for 2019 and 61.3% for 2018. The increase in the adjusted efficiency ratio for 2020 was mostly due to lower revenue, as a result of the low interest rate environment.
Income tax expense totaled $7.9 million for 2020, compared to $11.7 million for 2019 and $8.7 million for 2018. The effective tax rate for 2020 was 18.5%, an increase from 17.8% for 2019 and 15.9% for 2018. Included in income tax expense during 2020 was $863,000 related to a correction for the prior year.
Total assets increased 9% to $4.76 billion at December 31, 2020, compared to $4.35 billion at year-end 2019. The key contributor to the increase was loan growth, which added $500.6 million, and was primarily related to the PPP loans and the premium finance acquisition. The allowance for credit losses increased to $50.4 million or 1.48% of total loans, net of deferred fees and costs, compared to $21.6 million and 0.75%, respectively, at December 31, 2019. The increase in the allowance for credit losses compared to December 31, 2019 was due to the implementation of ASU 2016-13 on January 1, 2020, coupled with the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the underlying assumptions within the CECL model.
Total liabilities were $4.19 billion at December 31, 2020, an increase of $425.3 million since December 31, 2019. Total deposits increased $619.0 million, to $3.91 billion at December 31, 2020. The significant growth in deposits compared to December 31, 2019 was largely due to the COVID-19 pandemic, resulting in customers maintaining higher balances due to changed customer habits, coupled with the influx of fiscal stimulus funds and proceeds from PPP loans. Total demand deposits comprised 43% of total deposits at December 31, 2020 and were 40% of total deposits at December 31, 2019.
Total stockholders' equity was $575.7 million at December 31, 2020, a decline of 3% from December 31, 2019. The decrease compared to 2019 was due to combination of the repurchase of common shares in the amount of $29.3 million and dividends paid of $27.5 million, which were partially offset by net income of $34.8 million. Peoples also had a $3.7 million reduction to retained earnings related to the adoption of the CECL accounting standard on January 1, 2020.
Peoples continued to exceed the capital required by the Federal Reserve Board to be deemed "well capitalized." Peoples' tier 1 capital ratio was 13.25% at December 31, 2020, versus 14.84% at December 31, 2019, while the total capital ratio was 14.50% at December 31, 2020, versus 15.58% at December 31, 2019. The common equity tier 1 risk-based capital ratio was 13.01% at December 31, 2020 compared to 14.59% at December 31, 2019. Regulatory capital declined compared to 2019, mostly due to the impact of the repurchase of common shares during 2020. Peoples' book value and tangible book value per share were $29.43 and $19.99, respectively, at December 31, 2020, compared to $28.72 and $20.14, respectively, at December 31, 2019. Additional information regarding capital requirements can be found in "Note 16 Regulatory Matters" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Net Interest Income
Peoples earns interest income on loans and investments, and incurs interest expense on interest-bearing deposits and borrowed funds. Net interest income, the amount by which interest income exceeds interest expense, remains Peoples' largest source of revenue and was 69% of total revenue during 2020. The amount of net interest income earned by Peoples is affected by various factors, including changes in market interest rates due to the Federal Reserve Board's monetary policy, the level and degree of pricing competition for both loans and deposits in Peoples' markets, and the amount and composition of Peoples' earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities.
Peoples monitors net interest income performance and manages its balance sheet composition through regular ALCO meetings. The asset-liability management process employed by the ALCO is intended to mitigate the impact of future interest rate changes on Peoples' net interest income and earnings. However, the frequency and/or magnitude of changes in market interest rates are difficult to predict, and may have a greater impact on net interest income than adjustments management is able to make.
As part of the analysis of net interest income, management converts tax-exempt income earned on obligations of states and political subdivisions to the pre-tax equivalent of taxable income using a statutory federal corporate income tax rate of 21% for 2020, 2019 and 2018. Management believes the resulting FTE net interest income allows for a more meaningful comparison of tax-exempt income and yields to their taxable equivalents. Net interest margin, which is calculated by dividing FTE net interest income by average interest-earning assets, serves as an important measurement of the net revenue stream generated by the volume, mix and pricing of earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities.
The following table details the calculation of FTE net interest income for the years ended December 31:
The following table details Peoples’ average balance sheets, with corresponding income/expense and yield/cost, for the years ended December 31:
(a) Average balances are based on carrying value.
(b) Interest income and yields are presented on an fully-tax-equivalent basis using a 21% statutory federal corporate income tax rate.
(c) On January 1, 2020, Peoples adopted ASU 2016-13 and adopted the CECL model, which resulted in the establishment of a $7,000 allowance for credit losses for held-to-maturity investment securities; an increase in loan balances of $2.6 million to establish the allowance for credit losses for purchased credit deteriorated loans; an increase to the allowance for credit losses (which was the "allowance for loan losses" prior to January 1, 2020) of $5.8 million; the addition of $1.5 million
unfunded commitment liability included in accrued expense and other liabilities; and a reduction to retained earnings of $3.7 million, net of statutory federal corporate income tax.
(d) Interest income and yield presented for 2018 includes $0.9 million of proceeds on an investment security for which an other-than-temporary-impairment had been recorded in previous years. There was no proceeds recorded in 2020 and 2019.
(e) Average balances include nonaccrual, impaired loans, and loans held for sale. Interest income includes interest earned and received on nonaccrual loans prior to the loans being placed on nonaccrual status. Loan fees included in interest income were immaterial for all periods presented.
(f) Loans held for sale are included in the average loan balances listed. Related interest income on loans originated for sale prior to the loan being sold is included in loan interest income.
The following table provides an analysis of the changes in FTE net interest income:
(a)The change in interest due to both rate and volume has been allocated to rate and volume changes in proportion to the relationship of the dollar amounts of the changes in each.
(b)Interest income and yields are presented on a fully-tax-equivalent basis using a 21% statutory federal corporate income tax rate.
Net interest income decreased $1.9 million, or 1% compared to 2019, and net interest margin declined to 3.24%, compared to 3.69% for 2019. Net interest income and net interest margin were negatively impacted by the low interest rate environment during 2020, which also led to a $5.0 million increase in premium amortization on Peoples' investment securities portfolio during 2020, compared to 2019. Peoples recorded $10.7 million in interest income on PPP loans during 2020, which included the impact of accretion of net deferred loan fees and costs, which added 2 basis points to net interest margin. Premium finance loans added
$2.9 million of interest income during 2020, and 2 basis points to net interest margin. Funding costs declined to 58 basis points compared to 99 basis points for 2019, which was driven by reductions in interest rates on deposits, coupled with controlled borrowing costs.
During 2020, Peoples recognized accretion income, net of amortization expense, from acquisitions of $2.8 million, which added 7 basis points to net interest margin, compared to $4.9 million and 12 basis points in 2019, and $2.2 million and 6 basis points in 2018. Accretion income during 2020 was impacted by increased prepayment activity. During 2018, proceeds of $894,000 were received on an investment security that had been, in previous years, written-down due to an other-than-temporary impairment, which added 3 basis points to the net interest margin, while there were no similar proceeds in 2019 and 2020. Additional interest income in 2020 from prepayment fees and interest recovered on nonaccrual loans was $738,000, compared to $564,000 in 2019 and $420,000 in 2018.
Net interest income grew 9% during 2019, compared to 2018. The primary driver of the increase in net interest income was higher interest income on loans due to a combination of loan growth, which was boosted by the acquisitions of ASB in 2018 and First Prestonsburg in 2019, and higher yields on loans. Net interest margin was relatively stable during 2019, compared to 2018, as the increase in loan yields nearly outpaced the reduction in investment yields and higher funding costs.
Detailed information regarding changes in the Consolidated Balance Sheets can be found under appropriate captions of the "FINANCIAL CONDITION" section of this discussion. Additional information regarding Peoples' interest rate risk and the potential impact of interest rate changes on Peoples' results of operations and financial condition can be found later in this discussion under the caption "Interest Rate Sensitivity and Liquidity."
Provision for Credit Losses
On January 1, 2020, Peoples adopted the provisions of ASU 2016-13 "Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments", commonly referred to as the CECL model. Prior to the adoption of the CECL methodology, the provision for credit losses was the "provision for loan losses." The following table details Peoples’ provision for credit losses recognized for the years ended December 31:
The provision for credit losses represents the amount needed to maintain the appropriate level of the allowance for credit losses based on management’s formal quarterly analysis of the loan portfolio and procedural methodology that estimates the amount of probable credit losses. The CECL methodology utilized by Peoples relies on economic forecasts, as well as other key assumptions including prepayments, probability of default and loss given default. Under the incurred loss model (the accounting methodology prior to 2020), the process for estimating allowance for loan losses considered various factors that affect losses, such as changes in Peoples’ loan quality and historical loss experience. Given the relatively low recent loss history, the incurred loss model was highly dependent on qualitative factors to arrive at an appropriate allowance for loan losses in periods prior to 2020. These qualitative factors included current economic conditions, and other environmental factors such as changes in real estate market conditions, unemployment, and the economic impact of tariffs.
During 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic caused the economic outlook and assumptions used in the CECL model to be unfavorable, and as a result, caused the need for additional provision for credit losses to be recorded resulting in higher allowance for credit losses for the year, compared to prior years.
The lower provision for loan losses for 2019 compared to 2018 was due to lower charge-offs and less loan growth compared to 2018. Net charge-offs in 2019 included a recovery of $1.8 million recorded on a previously charged-off commercial loan.
Additional information regarding changes in the allowance for credit losses and loan credit quality can be found later in this discussion under the caption "Allowance for Credit Losses."
Net (Losses) Gains Included in Total Non-Interest Income
Net (losses) gains include gains and losses on investment securities, asset disposals and other transactions, which are recognized in total non-interest income.
The following table details the net (losses)gains for the years ended December 31 recognized by Peoples:
The net loss on other assets during 2020 was primarily due to the loss of $145,000 on the sale of a closed branch from the ASB acquisition, and market value write-down of $108,000 related to closed offices that were held for sale. The net gain on other transactions during 2020 was due to receiving $197,000 in funds from a limited partnership investment.
The net loss on other assets during 2019 was driven by net losses on repossessed assets of $320,000, the write-offs of fixed assets acquired from First Prestonsburg of $243,000 and market value write-downs related to closed offices that were held for sale.
The net loss on other assets during 2018 was primarily due to the disposal of $190,000 of ASB fixed assets acquired coupled with $198,000 of market value write-downs related to closed offices that were held for sale. The net loss on other transactions during 2018 was due to the write-down of a limited partnership investment.
Total Non-Interest Income, Excluding Net Gains and Losses
Peoples generates total non-interest income excluding net gains and losses from four primary sources: electronic banking income ("e-banking"); insurance income; trust and investment income; and deposit account service charges. Peoples continues to focus on revenue growth from non-interest income sources in order to maintain a diversified revenue stream through greater reliance on total non-interest income excluding net gains and losses. As a result, total non-interest income excluding net gains and losses accounted for 31.7% of Peoples' total revenues (defined as net interest income plus total non-interest income excluding net gains and losses) in 2020, compared to 31.5% in 2019 and 30.6% in 2018.
The increase in Peoples' total non-interest income excluding net gains and losses as a percent of total revenue during 2019 from 2018 was due to increases in nearly all non-interest income categories, combined with the interest rate environment and a high amount of loan payoffs constraining net interest income in the latter half of 2019.
E-banking income comprised the largest portion of Peoples' total non-interest income, excluding net gains and losses, for 2020. The following table shows Peoples' e-banking income for the years ended December 31:
Peoples' e-banking services include ATM and debit cards, direct deposit services, Internet and mobile banking, and remote deposit capture, and serve as alternative delivery channels to traditional sales offices for providing services to clients. Revenue is derived largely from ATM and debit cards, as other services are mainly provided at no charge to the customers. The amount of e-banking income is largely dependent on the timing and volume of customer activity. During 2020, e-banking income increased $566,000, or 4%, largely due to increased usage of debit cards, coupled with the full year impact of the First Prestonsburg acquired accounts. The growth in e-banking income in 2019, compared to 2018, was the result of the increased volume of customers and usage of debit cards, which includes the impact of additional customers and accounts added in the acquisition of First Prestonsburg in 2019 and of ASB in 2018. In 2020, Peoples' customers used their debit cards to complete $1.0 billion of transactions, versus $913.7 million in 2019 and $801.2 million in 2018.
The following table details Peoples’ insurance income for the years ended December 31:
Insurance income declined 5% during 2020, compared to 2019, and decreased across each category of insurance income. The decrease compared to 2019 was mostly due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Compared to 2018, insurance income was relatively flat for 2019. The majority of performance-based commissions typically is recorded annually in the first quarter and is
based on a combination of factors, such as loss experience of insurance policies sold, production volumes and overall financial performance of the individual insurance carriers.
Peoples' fiduciary and brokerage revenues continue to be based primarily upon the value of assets under administration and management. The following table details Peoples’ trust and investment income for the years ended December 31:
The following table details Peoples’ assets under administration and management at year-end December 31:
Trust and investment income increased $503,000, or 4%, compared to 2019. Peoples grew assets under management by 15% during 2020, driving the increase in both fiduciary and brokerage income compared to the prior year. This increase was partially due to new assets under management, coupled with the improvement in market values of assets under management at December 31, 2020. Employee benefits fees for 2020 were relatively flat compared to 2019.
During 2019, the increases in fiduciary and brokerage revenues compared to 2018 were due to a combination of an increase in the market value of accounts during the latter part of 2019 and new assets under administration and management. Average assets under administration and management during 2019 were impacted by the lower balance at the beginning of 2019 as a result of the downward shift in U.S. financial markets at the end of 2018 and in early 2019. Income from employee benefit plans in 2019 increased compared to 2018 due to the continued growth in administration of 401(k) plans for businesses. Peoples has added experienced financial advisors in previously underserved market areas, and generated new business and revenue related to retirement plans for which it manages the assets and provides services.
Deposit account service charges are based on the costs associated with services provided by Peoples. The following table details deposit account service charges for the years ended December 31:
The amount of deposit account service charges, particularly fees for overdrafts and non-sufficient funds, is largely dependent on the timing and volume of customer activity. Management periodically evaluates its fees to ensure they are reasonable based on operational costs and similar to fees charged in Peoples' markets by competitors. During 2020, deposit account service charges declined 20% as customer habits changed as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic resulting in customers maintaining higher balances, coupled with fiscal stimulus funds provided by the government to individuals and proceeds from PPP loans to businesses. Income from deposit account service charges increased in 2019 compared to 2018 primarily due to the First Prestonsburg and ASB acquisitions, respectively, coupled with changes in fee schedules. Peoples implemented a new deposit account fee schedule in March 2019, which also positively impacted deposit account service charges compared to 2018.
The following table details the other items included within Peoples' total non-interest income for the years ended December 31:
(a) As of January 1, 2018, Peoples adopted ASU 2016-01, resulting in a gain in income of $660,000 for 2020, $831,000 for 2019, and $207,000 for 2018.
Mortgage banking income is comprised mostly of net gains from the origination and sale of long-term, fixed rate real estate loans in the secondary market, as well as servicing income for sold loans. As a result, the amount of income recognized by Peoples is largely dependent on customer demand and long-term interest rates for residential real estate loans offered in the secondary market.
Mortgage banking income increased significantly during 2020, by 50% compared to 2019, as the low interest rate environment during the year resulted in heavy refinance activity. Mortgage banking income also increased in 2019, compared to 2018, due to higher customer demand, which was driven by the decline in mortgage interest rates during second half of 2019. In 2020, Peoples sold approximately $111.9 million of loans to the secondary market with servicing retained and sold approximately $150.9 million in loans with servicing released, compared to approximately $98.2 million and $55.4 million, respectively, in 2019. Peoples sold $66.3 million of loans to the secondary market with servicing retained and $56.4 million of loans with servicing released during 2018. The volume of sales has a direct impact on the amount of mortgage banking income.
BOLI income declined $453,000 compared to 2019, and the reduction was largely driven by the recognition of $482,000 of tax-free death benefits that exceeded the cash surrender value of the insurance policies during 2019. These proceeds were also the contributor to the increase in BOLI income during 2019 compared to 2018. Peoples purchased no additional BOLI policies during 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Commercial loan swap fees are largely dependent on the timing and volume of customer activity. During 2020, the low interest rate environment resulted in the $487,000 decrease in commercial loan swap fee income, as customer demand lessened. Compared to 2018, commercial loan swap fees in 2019 more than tripled, and were also driven by an increase in customer demand as a result of the interest rate declines in the latter half of 2019.
Other non-interest income during 2020 and 2019 included additional income related to gains recorded on the sale of restricted Class B Visa stock of $680,000 and $787,000, respectively. Other non-interest income in 2019 also included a decline in SBA income of $559,000, or 80%, compared to 2018 as a result of lower volume of loan originations and sales. During 2018, other non-interest income also included $207,000 recorded in connection with the implementation of a new accounting standard, which modified how the change in the fair value of equity investment securities was recorded beginning on January 1, 2018.
Total Non-Interest Expense
Salaries and employee benefit costs remain Peoples’ largest non-interest expense, accounting for over half of the total non-interest expense. The following table details Peoples’ salaries and employee benefit costs for the years ended December 31:
Base salaries and wages in 2020 were relatively flat compared to 2019. Both 2019 and 2018 included $2.2 million of one-time expenses associated with acquisitions, whereas Peoples incurred $1.1 million in severance expenses in 2020, due primarily to a management restructuring that occurred in the latter half of 2020. Base salaries and wages were impacted by merit increases, as well as continued movement towards a $15 per hour minimum wage throughout Peoples' organization. The $15 per hour minimum wage was phased in beginning in 2018 and was largely implemented as of January 1, 2020. Base salaries and wages were also impacted by the addition of employees, primarily as a result of the First Prestonsburg acquisition in 2019 and the ASB acquisition in 2018.
Sales-based and incentive compensation increased in 2020 and 2019 largely due to higher incentive compensation related to the overall company performance measures combined with mortgage banking income growth of real estate loans sold in the secondary market. Peoples' sales-based and incentive compensation plans are designed to grow core earnings while managing risk, and do not encourage unnecessary and excessive risk-taking that could threaten the value of Peoples. The sales-based and incentive compensation plans reward employees for appropriate behaviors and include provisions addressing inappropriate practices with respect to Peoples and its customers, including clawbacks for executives.
During 2020, employee benefit costs were relatively flat compared to 2019. The increase in employee benefits in 2019 compared to 2018 was impacted by the First Prestonsburg and ASB acquisitions, and included an increase in medical insurance costs of $1.8 million due primarily to higher medical claims, which was impacted by an increase in the number of participants in the insurance plan.
Stock-based compensation is generally recognized over the vesting period, which generally ranges from immediate vesting to vesting at the end of three years, and an adjustment is made at the vesting date to reverse expense for non-vested awards. The majority of Peoples' stock-based compensation is attributable to annual equity-based incentive awards to employees, which are awarded in the first quarter and based upon Peoples achieving certain performance goals during the prior year. During the years presented in the table
above, Peoples granted restricted common shares to officers and key employees with performance-based vesting periods and time-based vesting periods, generally with a three-year cliff vesting. Stock-based compensation was relatively flat for 2020, compared to 2019. The increase in stock-based compensation during 2019, compared to 2018, correlates to Peoples' improved performance, and was also driven by higher expense related to stock grants made to retirement eligible grantees. Stock grants to retirement eligible grantees are expensed either immediately or over a shorter period than the vesting period. Additional information regarding Peoples' stock-based compensation plans and awards can be found in "Note 17 Stock-Based Compensation" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Deferred personnel costs represent the portion of current period salaries and employee benefit costs considered to be direct loan origination costs. These costs are capitalized and recognized over the life of the loan as a yield adjustment in interest income. As a result, the amount of deferred personnel costs for each period corresponds directly with the volume of loan originations, coupled with the average deferred costs per loan that are updated annually at the beginning of each year, which increased in 2020 compared to 2019. Materially impacting the comparison was the recognition of $921,000 in deferred personnel costs during 2020 related to the origination of PPP loans. Increased production in residential real estate and indirect consumer loans resulted in higher deferred personnel costs in 2020 compared to 2019. Additional information regarding Peoples' loan activity can be found later in this discussion under the caption "Loans."
Payroll taxes and other employee costs decreased during 2020 due to $454,000 in dividends received from Ohio Bureau of Workers' Compensation in an effort to ease the impact of COVID-19 on the state's business community and workforce. Payroll taxes and other employee costs increased during 2019 as a result of higher base salaries and wages, sales-based and incentive compensation, and employee benefits.
Peoples’ net occupancy and equipment expense for the years ended December 31 was comprised of the following:
During 2020, net occupancy and equipment expense increased primarily due to increased depreciation expense and net rent expense. Depreciation expense increased due to a full year of depreciation related to the First Prestonsburg acquisition in 2019. Net rent expense increased due to the addition of new leases for the recent insurance acquisition and premium finance acquisition, as well as a full year of rent expense for the First Prestonsburg branches. Net occupancy and equipment expense increased during 2019 primarily due to the increased maintenance costs, property taxes, utilities and other costs related to the addition of nine full-service bank branches from the First Prestonsburg acquisition; a full year of expenses related to the additional locations from the ASB acquisitions in 2018; and ongoing increased operating costs associated with the expanded footprint. These increases were partially offset by a reduction in ATM repairs and maintenance costs resulting from a new vendor servicing agreement.
The following table details the other items included within Peoples' total non-interest expense for the years ended December 31:
Peoples' e-banking expense is comprised of costs associated with debit and ATM cards, as well as Internet and mobile banking costs. E-banking expense was up for 2020, compared to 2019, due to an increased usage by customers as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, which in turn increased the volume of transactions involving debit cards and Peoples' internet and mobile banking service. The increase in 2019, compared to 2018, was due to customers completing a higher volume of transactions using their debit cards, and Peoples' Internet and mobile banking service. Also contributing to the increase was the addition of accounts related to the acquisitions of First Prestonsburg in 2019 and ASB in 2018, as well as the annual increase in the cost of each unit of service in internet and mobile banking. The increased volume of customers and usage of debit cards also produced a greater increase in the corresponding e-banking revenues over the same period.
Data processing and software expense includes software support, maintenance and depreciation expense. The increase in data processing and software expense for 2020 was driven by systems and software upgrades, annual contractual increases and overall growth, which included: the implementation of enhanced functionalities for Peoples' core banking system, including making certain mobile banking tools available to customers; software upgrades; and additional network capacity and security features. The increase in these costs during 2019 was driven by systems and software upgrades and overall growth, which included: the implementation of enhanced functionalities for Peoples' core banking system, including making certain mobile banking tools available to customers; increases in customer accounts and customer usage of mobile and online banking tools; software upgrades; and additional network capacity and security features.
Professional fees were down compared to 2019, mainly due to lower consulting fees and legal expenses. Professional fees were lower in 2019 compared to 2018 mainly due to lower legal expenses and consulting work performed during 2018, which was not duplicated in 2019, combined with a decline in acquisition-related expenses of $481,000 compared to 2018.
Peoples is subject to state franchise taxes, which are based largely on Peoples' equity at year-end, in the states where Peoples has a physical presence. Expenses related to state franchise taxes increased in 2020 due to higher equity as of December 31, 2019 compared to December 31, 2018, coupled with additional taxes in Kentucky as a result of the First Prestonsburg acquisition in 2019. Franchise tax expense also includes the Ohio Financial Institution Tax ("FIT"), which is a business privilege tax that is imposed on financial institutions organized for profit and doing business in Ohio. The Ohio FIT is based on the total equity capital in proportion to the taxpayer's gross receipts in Ohio.
Peoples' amortization of other intangible assets is driven by acquisition-related activity. Amortization of other intangible assets declined in 2020 due to the reduced amortization from previous acquisitions. Amortization of other intangible assets increased slightly during 2019 as a result of additional amortization related to the acquisition of First Prestonsburg.
Marketing expense, which includes advertising, donations, marketing campaigns, including the premium finance line of business and other public relations costs, decreased slightly in 2020 due to declines in electronic and print media, ad agency fees and other public relations expenses. Marketing expense was higher during 2019, compared to 2018, due to overall increases in spending on brand awareness, donations to Peoples Bank Foundation, Inc., and product marketing campaigns. Peoples Bank Foundation, Inc. was formed by Peoples in 2004 as a private foundation to make charitable contributions to organizations within Peoples' primary market area. The increases in marketing expense were also impacted by Peoples' expanded footprint due to the First Prestonsburg acquisition in 2019 and the ASB acquisition in 2018.
Other loan expenses declined during 2020, primarily due to higher deferral of costs associated with increased origination volume of consumer indirect loans. Other loan expenses increased during 2019 due to higher real estate loan expense, which was driven by the mortgage banking demand due to interest rate declines in the latter half of 2019. Other loan expenses increased during 2018 due to higher real estate loan expense and collection expenses. The increase in collection expenses was related to the growth in indirect consumer lending.
Peoples recorded higher FDIC insurance expense during 2020 compared to the prior year, as credits were received and recognized during 2019, and were fully utilized during the second quarter of 2020. Peoples' FDIC insurance expense declined in 2019 due to two credits received related to its quarterly assessments as a result of the deposit insurance fund reaching its target threshold for smaller banks (banks with total consolidated assets of less than $10 billion) to recognize a credit to their insurance expense. Peoples cannot reasonably anticipate any future recognition of credits, as the deposit insurance fund is analyzed on a quarterly basis, and is the premise for receiving credits. The FDIC quarterly assessment rate is applied to average total assets less average tangible equity, and is based on the leverage ratio, net income before taxes, nonperforming loans as a percent of total assets, OREO, loan mix and asset growth. Peoples experienced improvements in each of these categories during 2018, leading to a reduction in the quarterly FDIC assessment rate in 2018, which offset increases in the expense that were attributable to the asset growth experienced during 2018. Additional information regarding Peoples' FDIC insurance assessments may be found in "ITEM 1 BUSINESS" of this Form 10-K in the section captioned "Supervision and Regulation."
The decrease in communication expense during 2019 and 2018 was attributable to the re-negotiation of contracts with vendors, as well as the elimination of analog circuits that have been replaced with newer more efficient technology.
Other non-interest expense decreased $4.3 million in 2020 compared to 2019, and increased $140,000 in 2019 compared to 2018. The decrease during 2020 compared to 2019, and increase during 2019 compared to 2018, were driven by $3.9 million of one-time acquisition-related expenses in 2019 and $3.6 million in 2018. The 2019 and 2018 acquisition-related expenses related mainly to contract termination fees and other costs related to the system conversion.
Income Tax Expense
A key driver for the amount of income tax expense or benefit recognized by Peoples each year is the amount of pre-tax income. In addition to the expense recognized, Peoples receives tax benefits from tax-exempt investments and loans, BOLI, stock awards that settled or vested during the year, and investments in tax credit funds, which reduce Peoples' effective tax rate. A reconciliation of Peoples' recorded income tax expense/benefit and effective tax rate to the statutory tax rate can be found in "Note 12 Income Taxes" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
For the full year of 2020, income tax expense totaled $7.9 million, compared to $11.7 million in 2019, and $8.7 million in 2018, and the effective tax rate for 2020 was 18.5%, compared to 17.8% for 2019, and 15.9% for 2018. The decrease in income tax expense in 2020 compared to 2019 was the result of lower pre-tax income in 2020 related to the increase in the provision for credit losses recorded during 2020.
During 2020, income tax expense and the effective tax rate were positively impacted by tax exempt interest income, non-taxable BOLI income and the full-year impact of the investment in Peoples Risk Management, Inc., which reduced income tax expense by $412,000. Income tax expense for 2020 was also impacted by additional income tax expense related to an adjustment from the prior year of $863,000.
During 2019, income tax expense and the effective tax rate were positively impacted by a tax benefit of $508,000 related to non-taxable BOLI income. In 2018, Peoples released a valuation allowance, which reduced income tax expense by $805,000. The valuation allowance was related to a historic tax credit that Peoples had invested in during 2015. Peoples sold $6.7 million of equity investment securities in 2018, which resulted in a capital gain for tax purposes. This capital gain was large enough to offset an anticipated future capital loss which is expected to be recognized due to the structure of the historic tax credit investment, resulting in the release of the valuation allowance.
During 2018, the final remeasurement of deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities at the changed statutory federal corporate income tax rate from the Tax Cuts and Jobs ("TCJ") Act resulted in a reduction to income tax expense of $705,000. The initial remeasurement at the statutory federal corporate income tax rate resulted in write-down of $897,000 of Peoples' net deferred tax assets, which increased income tax expense recorded during 2017. Additionally, as of December 31, 2017, Peoples early adopted ASU 2018-02 - Income Statement - Reporting Comprehensive Income (Topic 220): Reclassification of Certain Tax Effects from Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income and elected to reclassify, from accumulated other comprehensive income to retained earnings, the stranded income tax effects in accumulated other comprehensive loss resulting from the TCJ Act.
Peoples also recorded tax benefits of $5,000 in 2020, $195,000 in 2019, and $332,000 in 2018 related to stock awards that settled or vested during the year, with the majority recorded in the first quarter of each year.
Pre-Provision Net Revenue (non-US GAAP)
Pre-provision net revenue ("PPNR") has become a key financial measure used by state and federal bank regulatory agencies when assessing the capital adequacy of financial institutions. PPNR is defined as net interest income plus total non-interest income, excluding all gains and losses, minus total non-interest expense. PPNR excludes income tax expense. As a result, PPNR represents the earnings capacity that can be either retained in order to build capital or used to absorb unexpected losses and preserve existing capital. This ratio represents a non-US GAAP financial measure since it excludes the provision for credit losses and all gains and losses included in earnings.
The following table provides a reconciliation of this non-US GAAP financial measure to the amounts of income before income taxes reported in Peoples' Consolidated Financial Statements for the periods presented:
(a)On January 1, 2020, Peoples adopted ASU 2016-13 and implemented the CECL model. Prior to the adoption of CECL, the provision for credit losses was the "provision for loan losses." The provision for credit losses includes changes related to the allowance for credit losses on loans, which includes purchased credit deteriorated loans, held-to-maturity investment securities, and the unfunded commitment liability.
PPNR increased in 2020 mostly due to the reduction in acquisition-related expenses incurred during 2020, compared to 2019, offset by a decrease in net interest income due to the low interest rate environment. The continued increase in PPNR in recent years has been driven by acquisitions, coupled with the focus of growing revenues at a higher rate than expenses on a percentage basis. The ratio of PPNR to total average assets for 2018 declined compared to 2017 due to $7.3 million of acquisition-related expenses during 2018, mitigating the increase in PPNR, combined with the growth of average assets during the year, which was partially attributable to the ASB acquisition.
Core Non-Interest Income and Expense (non-US GAAP)
Core non-interest income and core non-interest expense are financial measures used to evaluate Peoples' recurring revenue and expense streams. These measures are non-US GAAP since they exclude the impact of all gains and/or losses, core banking system conversion revenue and expenses, acquisition-related expenses, pension settlement charges, severance expenses, and COVID-19-related non-recurring expenses.
The following tables provide reconciliations of these non-US GAAP measures to the amounts of total non-interest income and total non-interest expense reported in Peoples' Consolidated Financial Statements for the periods presented:
Efficiency Ratio (non-US GAAP)
The efficiency ratio is a key financial measure used to monitor performance. The efficiency ratio is calculated as total non-interest expense (less amortization of other intangible assets) as a percentage of FTE net interest income plus total non-interest income excluding net gains and losses. This measure is non-US GAAP since it excludes amortization of other intangible assets and all gains and/or losses included in earnings, and uses FTE net interest income.
The following table provides a reconciliation of this non-US GAAP financial measure to the amounts of total non-interest income and total non-interest expense reported in Peoples' Consolidated Financial Statements for the periods presented:
(a) Based on a 21% statutory federal corporate income tax rate for 2020, 2019 and 2018 and a 35% statutory federal corporate income tax rate for 2017 and 2016.
The efficiency ratio for 2020 improved due to a decrease in non-interest expense. The higher efficiency ratio adjusted for non-core items for 2020, compared to 2019, was driven by lower revenue, while adjusted core non-interest expense was relatively flat. The decline in the efficiency ratio for 2019 from 2018 was mostly due to higher revenues, which grew at a faster pace than non-interest expense. The increase in the efficiency ratio between 2018 and 2017 was driven by acquisition-related expenses of $7.3
million in 2018, compared to $341,000 in 2017. The improvement in the efficiency ratio adjusted for non-core items in 2017 through 2019 was driven by acquisitions, coupled with the focus of growing revenues at a higher rate than expenses on a percentage basis. Furthermore, managing expenses has been a major focus over recent years; however, during this time Peoples has continued to make meaningful investments in its infrastructure and systems.
Return on Average Assets Adjusted for Non-Core Items (non-US GAAP)
In addition to return on average assets, management uses return on average assets adjusted for non-core items to monitor performance. The return on average assets ratio adjusted for non-core items represents a non-US GAAP financial measure since it excludes the release of the deferred tax asset valuation allowance, the impact of the TCJ Act on the remeasurement of deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities, and the after-tax impact of all gains and losses, core banking system conversion revenue and expenses, acquisition-related expenses, pension settlement charges, severance expenses, and COVID-19-related non-recurring expenses in earnings.
The following table provides a reconciliation of this non-US GAAP financial measure to the amount of net income reported in Peoples' Consolidated Financial Statements for the periods presented:
(a) Based on a 21% statutory federal corporate income tax rate for 2020, 2019 and 2018 and a 35% statutory federal corporate income tax rate for 2017 and 2016.
The decreases in return on average assets and return on average assets, adjusted for non-core items for 2020 were driven by a reduction in income due to the implementation of CECL, which was impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. The increases in return on average assets and return on average assets adjusted for non-core items from 2016 through 2019 has been driven by the acquisitions in 2019 and 2018, coupled with the focus of growing revenues at a higher rate than expenses on a percentage basis. Managing expenses has been a major focus over the last four years; however, during this time Peoples has continued to make meaningful investments in its infrastructure and systems. The ratios in 2019 and 2018 were also positively impacted by the lower statutory federal corporate income tax rate compared to 2017.
Return on Average Tangible Equity (non-US GAAP)
The return on average tangible equity ratio is a key financial measure used to monitor performance. The return on tangible equity is calculated as net income (less after-tax impact of amortization of other intangible assets) divided by tangible equity. This measure is non-US GAAP since it excludes amortization of other intangible assets from earnings and the impact of goodwill and other intangible assets acquired through acquisitions on total stockholders' equity.
(a) Based on a 21% statutory federal corporate income tax rate for 2020, 2019 and 2018 and a 35% statutory federal corporate income tax rate for 2017 and 2016.
The decrease in return on average tangible equity for 2020 was driven by a reduction in net income due to the implementation of CECL, which was negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. The decline in return on average tangible equity ratio in 2019 compared to 2018, was impacted by the First Prestonsburg acquisition, which increased capital. The return on average stockholders' equity and average tangible equity ratios increased in 2018 compared to 2017, reflecting the increase in net income which outpaced the increases in average stockholders' equity and average tangible equity. Average stockholders' equity and average tangible equity increased due mainly to net income and the ASB acquisition, partially offset by dividends declared.
FINANCIAL CONDITION
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Peoples considers cash and cash equivalents to consist of federal funds sold, cash and balances due from banks, interest-bearing balances in other institutions and other short-term investments that are readily liquid. The amount of cash and cash equivalents fluctuates on a daily basis due to customer activity and Peoples' liquidity needs. At December 31, 2020, excess cash reserves at the FRB of Cleveland were $25.1 million, compared to $15.6 million at December 31, 2019. The amount of excess cash reserves maintained is dependent upon Peoples' daily liquidity position, which is driven primarily by changes in deposit and loan balances.
In 2020, Peoples' total cash and cash equivalents increased $36.9 million, as cash provided by operating activities and financing activities of $85.5 million and $345.3 million, respectively, were partially offset by cash used in investing activities of $393.9 million. Peoples' investing activities reflected a net increase of $444.1 million in loans and $261.4 million in purchases of available-for-sale investment securities, which were partially offset by $444.6 million in net proceeds from sales, principal payments, calls and
prepayments on available-for-sale and held-to-maturity investment securities. Financing activities included a $618.9 million net increase in deposits and $50.0 million of proceeds from long-term borrowings, offset partially by a decrease of $263.7 million in short-term borrowings, as well as the purchase of $29.3 million of treasury stock under the share repurchase program and $27.1 million of cash dividends paid.
In 2019, Peoples' total cash and cash equivalents increased $37.6 million, as cash provided by operating activities and financing activities of $67.2 million and $1.1 million, respectively, were largely offset by cash used in financing activities of $30.6 million. Cash used in financing activities was primarily due to a reduction in short-term borrowings of $76.9 million and dividends paid of $25.9 million, partially offset by the growth in deposit balances of $77.7 million. The increase in cash provided by operating activities was due primarily to $53.7 million of net income.
Further information regarding the management of Peoples' liquidity position can be found later in this discussion under "Interest Rate Sensitivity and Liquidity."
Investment Securities
The following table provides information regarding Peoples’ investment portfolio at December 31:
(a)As of January 1, 2018, Peoples adopted ASU 2016-01, resulting in the reclassification of equity investment securities from available-for-sale investment securities to other investment securities. At December 31, 2018, $277,000 of equity investment securities were included in other investment securities compared to $7.8 million of equity investment securities included in available-for-sale investment securities at December 31, 2017.
(b)Amortized cost is presented net of the allowance for credit losses of $60,000 at December 31, 2020.
At December 31, 2020, Peoples' investment securities represented approximately 18.0% of total assets, compared to 23.2% at December 31, 2019. Investment securities decreased $153.4 million compared to 2019 due to the acceleration of paydowns and maturities. During 2020, Peoples sold $82.6 million of available-for-sale securities and reinvested the majority of the proceeds in held-to-maturity investment securities to minimize the volatility in the securities portfolio, should interest rates begin to rise.
During 2019, Peoples acquired, in the First Prestonsburg acquisition, investment securities totaling $139.7 million and subsequently sold $65.1 million of acquired available-for-sale investment securities. In April and May of 2019, $53.7 million of the proceeds were reinvested. Additionally, the fair value of investment securities increased, driven by overall declines in market interest rates during the latter half of 2019.
During 2018, Peoples acquired, in the ASB acquisition, investment securities totaling $18.8 million and subsequently sold $14.6 million of acquired available-for-sale investment securities. Proceeds from the sale of investment securities were used to reduce overnight borrowing at the FHLB.
Peoples designates certain securities as "held-to-maturity" at the time of their purchase if management determines Peoples would have the intent and ability to hold the purchased securities until maturity. The unrealized gain or loss related to held-to-maturity
investment securities does not directly impact total stockholders' equity, in contrast to the impact from the available-for-sale investment securities portfolio.
Additional information regarding Peoples' investment portfolio can be found in "Note 3 Investment Securities" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Loans
The following table provides information regarding outstanding loan balances at or for the year ended December 31:
(a)Includes all loans acquired, and related loan discount recorded as part of acquisition accounting, in 2012 and thereafter. Loans that were acquired and subsequently re-underwritten are reported as originated upon execution of such credit actions (for example, renewals and increases in lines of credit).
(b)NM = not meaningful.
As of December 31, 2020, total loans increased $529.4 million, or 18%, compared to December 31, 2019. The growth compared to December 31, 2019 was mostly driven by PPP loans added during 2020, which are included in commercial and industrial loan balances, and the new loans being originated through the acquired premium finance sector. At December 31, 2020, PPP loan balances totaled $366.9 million, while the premium finance loans totaled $114.8 million. Consumer indirect loans also contributed to the growth during 2020, and were up $86.3 million, or 21%.
During 2019, total loans grew 5%, or $144.7 million. Total originated loans (excluding acquired loans) grew 5%, or $117.8 million due to an increase in commercial and industrial loans of $92.0 million, or 17%. The increase in total acquired loans during 2019 was due to the First Prestonsburg acquisition, partially offset by the decline in the loan balances acquired in previous acquisitions.
During 2018, total loans grew 16%, or $371.6 million. Total originated loans (excluding acquired loans) grew 11%, or $213.7 million, due to increases in all categories except residential real estate and deposit account overdrafts. The increase in total acquired loans during 2018 was due to the ASB acquisition, partially offset by the decline in the loan balances acquired in previous acquisitions.
During 2017, total loans grew 6%, or $132.2 million. The increase was primarily the result of commercial loan growth of $95.5 million, or 8%, which includes commercial real estate, and commercial and industrial loan balances. Additionally, continued emphasis on growing indirect consumer lending led to growth of $87.9 million, or 35%, compared to December 31, 2016, and was partially offset by reductions in residential real estate loans.
The following table details the maturities of Peoples' commercial real estate and commercial and industrial loans at December 31, 2020:
Loan Concentration
Peoples categorizes its commercial loans according to standard industry classifications and monitors for concentrations in a single industry or multiple industries that could be impacted by changes in economic conditions in a similar manner. Peoples' commercial lending activities continue to be spread over a diverse range of businesses from all sectors of the economy, with no single industry comprising over 10% of Peoples' total loan portfolio.
Loans secured by commercial real estate, including commercial construction loans, continue to comprise the largest portion of Peoples' loan portfolio.
The following table provides information regarding the largest concentrations of commercial real estate loans within the loan portfolio at December 31, 2020:
(a)All other outstanding balances are less than 2% of the total loan portfolio.
(a)All other outstanding balances are less than 2% of the total loan portfolio.
Peoples' commercial lending activities continue to focus on lending opportunities inside its primary and secondary market areas within Ohio, Kentucky and West Virginia. In all other states, the aggregate outstanding balances of commercial loans in each state were not material at either December 31, 2020 or December 31, 2019.
Additional information regarding Peoples' loan portfolio can be found in "Note 4 Loans" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
COVID-19 Loan Impacts
Small Business Administration Paycheck Protection Program
In March 2020, the CARES Act created a new loan guarantee program called the PPP targeted to provide small businesses with support to cover payroll and certain other expenses. Loans made under the PPP are fully guaranteed by the SBA. The PPP loans also afford borrowers forgiveness up to the principal amount of the PPP covered loan, plus accrued interest, if the loan proceeds are used to retain workers and maintain payroll and/or to make certain mortgage interest, lease and utility payments, and certain other criteria are satisfied. The SBA will reimburse PPP lenders for any amount of a PPP covered loan that is forgiven, and PPP lenders will not be held liable for any representations made by PPP borrowers in connection with their requests for loan forgiveness.
Peoples is a PPP participating lender, and as of December 31, 2020, Peoples had aggregate principal balances of PPP loans of $374.8 million, net of payoffs during the year, included in commercial and industrial loans. Peoples also recorded deferred loan origination fees related to the PPP loans, net of deferred loan origination costs, which totaled $7.9 million at December 31, 2020. Peoples recorded accretion of net deferred loan origination fees of $7.5 million on PPP loans as of December 31, 2020. The net deferred loan origination fees will be accreted over the life of the respective loans, or until forgiven by the SBA, and will be recognized in net interest income.
JobsOhio Partnership
Peoples has also been selected to partner with JobsOhio, a private nonprofit organization charged with economic development. JobsOhio will provide a 90% guarantee on the first $25 million of increased exposure to small businesses, where customers may obtain up to $200,000 of additional financing, subject to certain eligibility requirements. Through December 31, 2020, Peoples had assisted 176 Ohio small businesses with approximately $10.0 million in loans.
Payment Relief and Loan Modifications
Peoples is also providing relief solutions to consumer and commercial borrowers. For consumer borrowers, Peoples is providing interest-only payment options to customers for a period of up to 90 days, with the ability to extend if needed. Peoples is also providing forbearance to its consumer borrowers which allows them to defer their principal and interest payments for up to 90 days for non-residential real estate consumer loans and up to 180 days for residential real estate consumer loans. In addition, for commercial borrowers who meet certain criteria, Peoples is providing interest-only payment options, principal and interest deferrals, and increased financing. Peoples continues to prudently work with borrowers and review any additional requests for deferment more closely. These requests are maintained within the CARES Act guidance and have not exceeded twelve consecutive months of deferred payment.
At December 31, 2020, Peoples had $17.0 million of commercial loans on deferment, and $4.0 million of consumer loan deferments. Borrowers within the lodging industry account for nearly two-thirds of the deferments at December 31, 2020. The lodging industry continues to be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, with a negative outlook for travel demand among both business and leisure customers.
Portfolio Exposure
Peoples has evaluated its portfolio exposure to certain industries most impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, which includes restaurants, lodging and lodging related businesses, floorplans, office and retail facilities, as well as daycare facilities. Peoples has been proactive in working with clients within these industries, and is keeping in close communication with them. Peoples has made loan modifications, when it is prudent to do so, and is monitoring early warnings signs of risk within these industry segments. These segments comprise approximately 61% of the total commercial loan modifications approved in response to COVID-19.
Below is a table detailing Peoples' outstanding balance of loans as of December 31, 2020, within certain industries that have been impacted:
(a)Restaurants outstanding balance included $55.3 million in PPP loans.
(b)Individual units financed under dealer floor plan agreements are generally financed in line with industry standards at 100% of manufacturer invoice, auction cost, or wholesale value.
(c)Assisted living facilities and nursing homes outstanding balance included $13.6 million in PPP loans.
(d)Lodging and lodging related outstanding balance included $2.1 million in PPP loans.
Approximately 73% of Peoples' outstanding balance to restaurants was to McDonald's franchise operators, which have additional guarantor support, as well as McDonald's corporate assistance with rent and service fee deferments. At its peak of deferrals during the second quarter of 2020, Peoples had $116.3 million of deferments to restaurant operators granted due to the pandemic. Of the $116.3 million of deferments granted, $1.5 million of the deferments remained at December 31, 2020.
The total restaurant portfolio outstanding balance of non-McDonald’s operators was $56.6 million at December 31, 2020, which included $24.9 million of PPP loans. The loans to non-McDonald's operators included $4.2 million of loans for which there is a government guarantee enhancement through the CARES Act.
In addition, for multifamily loans, Peoples has sponsors with extensive experience and substantial liquidity. The top five relationships, in terms of aggregate credit exposures, accounted for 47% of the portfolio balances. The top five relationships consist of five properties with an average loan-to-value of 72%. Peoples' commercial loan policy for this specific property type is a maximum loan-to-value of 80%. Additional support is provided by guarantor strength on the majority of these relationships. One of the largest loans in the portfolio accounts for 13% of the portfolio balances. The loan has notable guarantor support, with a reported unencumbered liquidity level of more than $400 million.
For floorplan loans, Peoples has a detailed monitoring and audit process, and performs collateral audits frequently.
Approximately 80% of the assisted living facilities and nursing homes are private pay and are not dependent upon Medicare, and as of December 31, 2020, Peoples had no requests from these customers for relief.
The majority of Peoples' lodging and lodging related outstanding balances is represented by loans to larger established franchises. At December 31, 2020, this portfolio included $2.1 million of PPP loans. The top three relationships, in terms of aggregate credit exposures, account for 46% of the portfolio balance. Peoples has provided payment relief to 80% of the lodging and lodging related portfolio since the start of the pandemic, which consists of primarily 13 properties, which have an average loan-to-value ratio of 64%. Peoples' commercial loan policy for this specific property type is a maximum loan-to-value of 65%. These properties include ten nationally franchised locations, while two of the remaining properties are cabin rentals, which have not been as heavily impacted by the pandemic. The guarantor liquidity is strong on half of the properties securing the lodging and lodging related portfolio.
Peoples' exposure to energy loans was not material at December 31, 2020. Energy loan balances were $4.8 million, or less than 1% of total loans, as of December 31, 2020, with a total commitment of $8.2 million. Peoples' energy loans are mostly to operators who provide support services for oil and gas companies.
Allowance for Credit Losses
On January 1, 2020, Peoples adopted the provisions of ASU 2016-13 "Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments", commonly referred to as the CECL model. Prior to the adoption of the CECL model, the allowance for credit losses was the "allowance for loan losses." The amount of the allowance for credit losses at the end of each period represents management's estimate of expected credit losses from existing loans based upon its formal quarterly analysis of the loan portfolio described in the "Critical Accounting Policies" section of this discussion. While this process involves allocations being made to specific loans and pools of loans, the entire allowance is available for all losses incurred within the loan portfolio.
The following details management's allocation of the allowance for credit losses at December 31:
(a)Beginning on January 1, 2020, the amounts previously included in "acquired allowance for credit losses" were included in the "originated allowance for credit losses" under the CECL model.
(b)Beginning on January 1, 2020, Peoples calculated the allowance for credit losses using the CECL model, while previous periods used the incurred loss model.
Peoples implemented ASU 2016-13 on January 1, 2020, which resulted in an increase of $5.8 million in the allowance for credit losses. The remaining significant increase in the allowance for credit losses at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019 was mostly due to the recent COVID-19 pandemic, and the resulting impact on economic forecasts utilized in the CECL model. Peoples calculates its allowance for credit losses using a discounted cash flow model, and incorporates economic forecasts, including U.S. unemployment, Ohio unemployment, Ohio Gross Domestic Product, and the Ohio Case Shiller Home Price Indices as economic factors.
During 2019, the increase in allowance for loan losses was primarily related to continued loan growth in most of the originated loan portfolios. The allowance for loan losses as a percent of total loans was relatively flat in 2019 compared to 2018 as a result of relatively stable asset quality metrics and trends, combined with loan growth during 2019. The ratio included all acquired loans, from both First Prestonsburg and previous acquisitions, of $599.7 million and allowance for acquired loan losses of $729,000 at the end of 2019.
During 2018, the increase in allowance for loan losses was primarily related to continued loan growth in most of the originated loan portfolios. The allowance for loan losses as a percent of total loans decreased six basis points in 2018 compared to 2017 as a result of relatively stable asset quality metrics and trends, and the loans acquired in the ASB acquisition. During 2017, the increase in allowance for loan losses related primarily to growth in consumer indirect loan balances. During 2016, the increase of 9% in the allowance for loan losses related to total commercial and consumer indirect balance growth.
Additional information regarding Peoples' allowance for credit losses can be found in "Note 1 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" and "Note 4 Loans" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The following table summarizes the changes in the allowance for credit losses for the years ended December 31:
(a)Includes purchased credit impaired loan charge-offs of $0 in 2019, $0 in 2018, $0 in 2017, and $44,000 in 2016.
(b)Includes nonimpaired loan charge-offs of $2,000 in 2019 and $0 in 2018, 2017, and 2016.
(c)Includes purchased credit impaired loan charge-offs of $0 in 2019, $2,000 in 2018, $0 in 2017, and $23,000 in 2016
(d)Includes purchased credit impaired loan charge-offs of $0 in 2019, $0 in 2018, $7,000 in 2017, and $23,000 in 2016
(e)Includes purchased credit impaired loan provision for credit losses of $19,000 in 2019, $0 in 2018, $117,000 in 2017, and $66,000 in 2016.
(f)Includes nonimpaired loan provision for credit losses of $215,000 in 2019, $383,000 in 2018 and $0 in 2017 and 2016.
(g)Beginning on January 1, 2020, the amounts previously included in "acquired allowance for credit losses" were included in the "originated allowance for credit losses" under the CECL model.
Net charge-offs for 2020 were $1.8 million, or 0.05% of average total loans, an increase of $0.6 million compared to $1.1 million, or 0.04% of average total loans, for 2019. Net charge-offs in 2020 included a recovery of $2.5 million on a single commercial loan relationship that was previously charged-off; while in 2019, a $2.4 million recovery occurred on the same relationship. The increase in commercial real estate net charge-offs in 2020 compared to 2019 was due to an increase in charge-off activity in 2020. This activity consisted of two larger commercial real estate loans with a total of $200,000 in charge-offs coupled with other smaller commercial real estate charge-offs.
Net charge-offs for 2018 increased $638,000 compared to 2017, driven by a charge-off of $827,000 related to one acquired commercial loan relationship. Indirect consumer lending provided significant growth during 2018, resulting in the growth in the allowance for loan losses and net charge-offs within that category.
The increase in net charge-offs from 2016 to 2017 was primarily related to a decline in recoveries of commercial loans and an increase in net charge-offs of consumer indirect loans due to higher balances from recent loan growth.
During 2016, net charge-offs were nominal at 0.09% of average total loans and were positively impacted by a $1.0 million recovery of a prior period commercial real estate loan charge-off. Gross charge-offs totaled $5.2 million in 2016, and were largely associated with the growth in the consumer loan portfolio.
The following table details Peoples’ nonperforming assets at December 31:
(a)The new accounting for purchased credit deteriorated loans under ASU 2016-13 resulted in the movement of $3.9 million of loans from the 90+ days past due and accruing category to the nonaccrual category as of January 1, 2020. As of December 31, 2019, these loans were presented as 90+ days past due and accruing. Although they were not accruing contractual interest income, they were accreting income from the discount that was recognized due to acquisition accounting.
(b)Includes loans categorized as special mention, substandard or doubtful.
(c)Includes loans categorized as substandard or doubtful.
(d)Data presented as of the end of the year indicated.
(e)Nonperforming loans include loans 90+ days past due and accruing, troubled debt restructured loans and nonaccrual loans. Nonperforming assets include nonperforming loans and OREO.
The increase in nonperforming assets during 2020 was due to two commercial relationships aggregating $3.2 million and several smaller commercial relationships being placed on nonaccrual.
The new accounting for purchased credit deteriorated loans under ASU 2016-13 resulted in the movement of $3.9 million of loans from the 90+ days past due and accruing category to the nonaccrual category as of January 1, 2020. As of December 31, 2019, these loans were presented as 90+ days past due and accruing. Although they were not accruing contractual interest income, they were accreting income from the discount that was recognized due to acquisition accounting.
Criticized loans, which are those categorized as special mention, substandard or doubtful, increased $29.8 million, or 31%, compared to December 31, 2019. Classified loans, which are those categorized as substandard or doubtful, grew $6.4 million, or 10%, compared to December 31, 2019. During 2020, Peoples downgraded several relationships due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The COVID-related downgrades contributed $29.8 million of additional criticized loans and $9.4 million of additional classified loans compared to balances at December 31, 2019.
Based on the provisions provided by the CARES Act, on March 22, 2020, federal and state government banking regulators issued a joint statement, with which the FASB concurred as to the approach, regarding accounting for loan modifications for borrowers affected by COVID-19. In this guidance, short-term modifications, made on a good faith basis in response to COVID-19, to borrowers who were current prior to any relief, are not considered TDRs. This includes short-term modifications such as payment deferrals, fee waivers, extensions of repayment terms, or other delays in payment which are insignificant. Under the guidance, borrowers that are considered current are those that are less than 30 days past due on their contractual payments at the time a modification program is implemented. In addition, modification or deferral programs mandated by the U.S. federal government or any state government related to COVID-19 are not in the scope of ASC 310-40.
On August 3, 2020, federal and state banking regulators issued a joint statement, encouraging financial institutions to consider prudent accommodation options to mitigate losses for the borrower and financial institution beyond the initial accommodation period. In this guidance, institutions should also provide consumers with available options for repaying missed payments at the end of their accommodation to avoid delinquencies, as well as options for changes to terms to support sustainable and affordable payments for the long term. These considerations should also include prudent risk management practices at the financial institution based on the credit risk of the borrower. Peoples is actively working with its customers to address any further accommodation needs while carefully evaluating the associated credit risk of the borrowers.
Nonperforming loans increased in 2019 due to acquired loans from First Prestonsburg, which comprised of $1.9 million of nonperforming assets during 2019.
The increase in loans 90+ days past due and accruing during 2018 was driven primarily by one commercial loan, which was in the process of renewal at December 31, 2018. During 2018, the growth in nonaccrual loans was driven primarily by one commercial loan that was over 90 days past due.
Nonperforming loans decreased in 2017, largely due to a decrease in nonaccrual loans, coupled with a decline in loans 90+ days past due and accruing. The decrease in nonaccrual loans was driven by several commercial real estate relationships that were paid off in 2017.
The majority of Peoples' nonaccrual commercial real estate loans consists primarily of owner occupied commercial properties. In general, management believes repayment of these loans is dependent on the sale of the underlying collateral. As such, the carrying values of these loans are ultimately supported by management's estimate of the net proceeds Peoples would receive upon the sale of the collateral. These estimates are based in part on market values provided by independent, licensed or certified appraisers periodically, but no less frequently than annually. Given the volatility in commercial real estate values, management continues to monitor changes in real estate values from quarter-to-quarter and updates its estimates as needed based on observable changes in market prices and/or updated appraisals for similar properties.
Peoples discontinues the accrual of interest on a loan when conditions cause management to believe collection of all or any portion of the loan's contractual interest is doubtful. Such conditions may include the borrower being 90 days or more past due on any contractual payments or the availability of updated information regarding the borrower's financial condition and repayment ability. All unpaid accrued interest deemed uncollectable is reversed, which would reduce Peoples' net interest income. Interest received on nonaccrual loans is included in income only if principal recovery is reasonably assured. Interest income on loans classified as nonaccrual and renegotiated at each year-end that would have been recorded under the original terms of the loans was $1.6 million for 2020, $1.4 million for 2019 and $1.3 million for 2018. No portion of these amounts were recorded during 2020, 2019 or 2018.
Overall, management believes the allowance for credit losses was appropriate at December 31, 2020, based on all significant information currently available. Still, there can be no assurance that the allowance for credit losses will be adequate to cover future losses in Peoples’ loan portfolio.
Additional information regarding Peoples' allowance for credit losses can be found in "Note 4 Loans" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Deposits
The following table details Peoples’ deposit balances at December 31:
(a) The sum of amounts presented are considered total demand deposits.
At December 31, 2020, the period-end deposit increase of $619.0 million, or 19%, compared to December 31, 2019, was primarily due to an increase of $326.1 million in non-interest-bearing deposits. The growth in non-interest-bearing deposits was related to customers maintaining higher balances due to changes in customer habits in light of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as fiscal stimulus funds and PPP loan proceeds. During 2020, Peoples had reduced its reliance on higher-rate brokered deposits, which included one-way buy Certificate of Deposit Account Registry Services. This was partially offset by the issuance of 90-day brokered
demand and savings deposits to fund interest rate swaps. As of December 31, 2020, Peoples had seventeen effective interest rate swaps, with an aggregate notional value of $160.0 million, which were funded by $50.0 million in 90-day brokered CDs and $110.0 million in overnight brokered deposits, which are expected to be extended every 90 days through the maturity dates of the swaps.
The increase in total deposits between December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018 was largely due to deposits of $194.2 million acquired in the First Prestonsburg acquisition. During 2019, Peoples issued $50.0 million of 90-day brokered CDs to fund five $10.0 million interest rate swaps with a notional value in the aggregate of $50.0 million. The swaps will pay a fixed rate of interest while receiving three-month LIBOR, which offsets the rate on the brokered CDs. The brokered CDs are expected to be extended every 90 days through the maturity dates of the swaps.
The increase in total deposits between December 31, 2018 and December 31, 2017 was largely due to $198.6 million of balances in deposit accounts acquired from ASB on April 13, 2018, coupled with higher one-way buy CDARS deposits, which are included in brokered CD balances.
The increase in total deposit balances at December 31, 2017 compared to December 31, 2016 was primarily due to increases of $314.4 million in interest-bearing demand deposits and $120.8 million in brokered CDs, partially offset by a decrease of $178.4 million in non-interest-bearing demand deposits. Shifts in balances occurred between non-interest-bearing deposits and interest-bearing demand account balances as Peoples migrated consumers to new products during the second half of 2017. During this migration, customer accounts were evaluated based on certain characteristics, and some accounts that were traditionally non-interest-bearing deposits were converted to interest-bearing demand accounts as Peoples moved to a relationship-based deposit product. The increase in brokered CDs in 2017 was the result of adding relatively shorter term funding on the balance sheet to secure fixed rate funding in a rising rate environment.
Peoples' governmental deposit accounts represent savings and interest-bearing transaction accounts from state and local governmental entities. These funds are subject to periodic fluctuations based on the timing of tax collections and subsequent expenditures or disbursements. Peoples normally experiences an increase in balances annually during the first and third quarter, corresponding with tax collections, with declines normally in the second and fourth quarter of each year, corresponding with expenditures by the governmental entities. Peoples continues to emphasize growth of low-cost deposits that do not require Peoples to pledge assets as collateral, which is required in the case of governmental deposit accounts.
The maturities of retail CDs with total balances of $100,000 or more at December 31 were as follows:
Additional information regarding Peoples' deposits can be found in "Note 7 Deposits" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Borrowed Funds
The following table details Peoples’ short-term and long-term borrowings at December 31:
(a) Unamortized debt issuance costs are related to the costs associated with the Credit Agreement with Raymond James Bank, N.A. which Peoples terminated as of April 3, 2019.
Total borrowed funds, which include overnight borrowings, are mainly a function of loan growth and changes in total deposit balances. Peoples continually evaluates the overall balance sheet position given the interest rate environment. Long-term FHLB advances increased due to a borrowing of a $50.0 million long-term FHLB putable, non-amortizing fixed rate advance and the reclassification of $20.0 million to short-term borrowings as the time to maturity of these advances had become less than one year.
In years prior to 2020, Peoples' short-term FHLB advances generally consisted of overnight borrowings maintained in connection with the management of Peoples' daily liquidity position.
During 2019, Peoples had seventeen effective interest rate swaps with an aggregate notional value of $160.0 million, of which $110.0 million were funded by FHLB 90 day advances. The remaining $50.0 million were funded by 90-day brokered CDs. Long-term FHLB advances declined by $26.7 million due to the reclassification to short-term borrowings as the time to maturity of these advances had become less than one year.
During 2018, Peoples entered into twelve effective interest rate swaps with an aggregate notional value of $110.0 million, all of which were funded by FHLB 90-day advances. Long-term FHLB advances declined by $30 million due to the reclassification to short-term borrowings as the time to maturity of these advances had become less than one year.
During 2017, $50.6 million of long-term FHLB advances were reclassified to short-term borrowings due to the time to maturity of these advances becoming less than one year. Of these reclassified borrowings, $30.6 million remained outstanding as of December 31, 2017. Short-term retail repurchase agreements increased due to the reclassification of these repurchase agreements from long-term borrowings, as the time to maturity had become less than one year.
Effective April 3, 2019, Peoples terminated the Credit Agreement, dated as of March 4, 2016 between Peoples, as Borrower, and Raymond James Bank, N.A., as Lender (the "RJB Credit Agreement"), which provided for a revolving line of credit in the maximum aggregate principal amount of $15.0 million. On April 3, 2019, Peoples entered into a Loan Agreement (the “U.S. Bank Loan Agreement”) with U.S. Bank National Association, the term of which has been extended to April 1, 2021 through an amendment in April 2020. The U.S. Bank Loan Agreement provides Peoples with a revolving line of credit in the maximum aggregate principal amount of $20.0 million.
Additional information regarding Peoples' borrowed funds can be found in "Note 8 Short-Term Borrowings" and "Note 9 Long-Term Borrowings" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Capital/Stockholders’ Equity
During 2020, Peoples' total stockholders' equity declined $18.7 million, or 3%. This reduction was driven by repurchases of shares of $29.3 million and dividends paid to shareholders of $27.5 million, which were partially offset by net income of $34.8 million. Also contributing to the decline was the implementation of ASU 2016-13 on January 1, 2020, in which Peoples recorded a one-time transition adjustment to reduce retained earnings by $3.7 million. This adjustment reflected the increase in the allowance for credit losses for loans (excluding the gross up of loan balances related to the establishment of an allowance for credit losses for purchased credit deteriorated loans), the allowance for credit losses for held-to-maturity investment securities and the addition of an
unfunded commitment liability, net of statutory federal corporate income taxes. Based on current accounting guidance, Peoples is electing to utilize the five-year phase-in period for the transition adjustment due to the implementation of ASU 2016-13. This phase-in period also includes a 25% deferment of the impact on regulatory capital of the estimated increase in the allowance for credit losses related to the CECL model, which is applied during the first two years of application. For the first two years of the phase-in period, 100% of the transition adjustment due to ASU 2016-13 is excluded for regulatory capital purposes, along with 25% of the increase in the allowance for credit losses compared to the January 1, 2020 allowance for credit losses. In year three of the phase-in, 75% of the transition adjustment, and the cumulative 25% increase in the allowance for credit losses compared to January 1, 2020, are excluded from regulatory capital, while 50% and 25% of these amounts are excluded in years four and five, respectively, under this phase-in period.
At December 31, 2020, capital levels for both Peoples and Peoples Bank remained substantially higher than the minimum amounts needed to be considered "well capitalized" under banking regulations. These higher capital levels reflect Peoples' desire to maintain a strong capital position.
During 2019, total stockholders' equity increased compared to 2018 mainly due to net income of $53.7 million, $32.4 million of common shares issued in connection with the acquisition of First Prestonsburg, and an increase in the market value of available-for-sale investment securities, partially offset by dividends paid of $26.9 million.
During 2018, Peoples' total stockholders' equity increased compared to 2017 mainly due to $40.9 million of common shares issued in connection with the acquisition of ASB. Also contributing to the increase in total stockholders' equity was net income of $46.3 million, partially offset by dividends paid of $21.6 million and declines in the market value of available-for-sale investment securities.
In 2017, Peoples' total stockholders' equity increased compared to 2016 due to higher retained earnings offset slightly by declines in the market value of available-for-sale investment securities.
Under the risk-based capital rules, in order to avoid limitations on dividends, equity repurchases and compensation, Peoples must exceed the three minimum required ratios by at least the capital conservation buffer. These three minimum required ratios are the common equity tier 1 capital ratio, tier 1 risk-based capital ratio and total risk-based capital ratio. Peoples had a capital conservation buffer of 6.50% at December 31, 2020, 7.58% at December 31, 2019, 6.43% at December 31, 2017, and 6.11% at December 31, 2016. As such, Peoples exceeded the minimum ratios, including the capital conservation buffer, at December 31, 2020.
The following table details Peoples' actual risk-based capital levels and corresponding ratios at December 31:
In addition to traditional capital measurements, management uses tangible capital measures to evaluate the adequacy of Peoples' total stockholders' equity. Such financial measures represent non-US GAAP financial information since they exclude the impact of goodwill and other intangible assets acquired through acquisitions on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Peoples' management believes this information is useful to investors since it facilitates the comparison of Peoples' operating performance, financial condition and trends to peers, especially those without a level of intangible assets similar to that of Peoples. Further, intangible assets generally are difficult to convert into cash, especially during a financial crisis, and could decrease substantially in value should there be deterioration in the overall franchise value. As a result, tangible equity represents a conservative measure of the capacity for Peoples to incur losses but remain solvent.
The following table reconciles the calculation of these non-US GAAP financial measures to amounts reported in Peoples' Consolidated Financial Statements at December 31:
The decline in tangible equity to tangible assets at December 31, 2020, compared to 2019, was partially due to the origination of PPP loans during 2020, coupled with the repurchase of common shares completed during the year and dividends paid to shareholders, which exceeded net income for the year. The increase in the tangible equity to tangible assets ratio for 2019 was the result of higher retained earnings, combined with common shares issued in connection with the First Prestonsburg acquisition and an increase in the market value of available-for-sale investment securities. The increase in the tangible equity to tangible assets ratio for each of 2018 and 2017 was the result of higher retained earnings, partially offset by the decline in the market value of available-for-sale investment securities. Also contributing to the increase in 2019 and 2018 was the issuance of common shares in connection with the First Prestonsburg and ASB acquisition, respectively.
Future Outlook
The COVID-19 pandemic had a significant impact on Peoples' business and financial performance during 2020. The pandemic caused a sudden shift in interest rates to near zero, which negatively impacted net interest income, while increasing expected credit losses under the CECL model, in turn, increasing provision for credit losses during the year. As a result, Peoples closely monitored its expenses, including deposit and borrowing costs, coupled with non-interest expense. During 2020, Peoples completed its premium finance acquisition, further diversifying its loan portfolio and future opportunities for growth. Peoples also participated in the SBA PPP during 2020, originating $489.0 million of loans under the program, which resulted in an additional $10.7 million of interest income.
Peoples spent much of the year supporting its associates and communities during the pandemic, and will continue to do so in the coming periods. While the future is unpredictable as the pandemic continues, and uncertainty around timing of vaccination of the majority of individuals is still evolving, Peoples is committed to managing through the process with its clients and associates as a priority, in addition to improving shareholder value.
For more information regarding risks and uncertainties that could impact the projections described, please refer to "ITEM 1A RISK FACTORS" of this Form 10-K.
Interest Rate Sensitivity and Liquidity
While Peoples is exposed to various business risks, the risks relating to interest rate sensitivity and liquidity are major risks that can materially impact future results of operations and financial condition due to their complexity and dynamic nature. The objective of Peoples' asset-liability management function is to measure and manage these risks in order to optimize net interest income within the constraints of prudent capital adequacy, liquidity and safety. This objective requires Peoples to focus on interest rate risk exposure and adequate liquidity through its management of the mix of assets and liabilities, their related cash flows and the rates earned and paid on those assets and liabilities. Ultimately, the asset-liability management function is intended to guide management in the acquisition and disposition of earning assets and selection of appropriate funding sources.
Interest Rate Risk
Interest rate risk ("IRR") is one of the most significant risks arising in the normal course of business of financial services companies like Peoples. IRR is the potential for economic loss due to future interest rate changes that can impact the earnings stream, as well as market values, of financial assets and financial liabilities. Peoples' exposure to IRR is due primarily to differences in the maturity or repricing of earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. In addition, other factors, such as prepayments of loans and investment securities, or early withdrawal of deposits, can affect Peoples' exposure to IRR and increase interest costs or reduce revenue streams.
Peoples has assigned overall management of IRR to the ALCO, which has established an IRR management policy that sets minimum requirements and guidelines for monitoring and managing the level of IRR. The objective of Peoples' IRR management policy is to assist the ALCO in its evaluation of the impact of changing interest rate conditions on earnings and the economic value of equity, as well as assist with the implementation of strategies intended to reduce Peoples' IRR. The management of IRR involves either maintaining or changing the level of risk exposure by changing the repricing and maturity characteristics of the cash flows for specific assets or liabilities. Additional oversight of Peoples' IRR is provided by the Board of Directors of Peoples Bank, who reviews and approves Peoples' IRR management policy at least annually.
The ALCO uses various methods to assess and monitor the current level of Peoples' IRR and the impact of potential strategies or other changes. However, the ALCO predominantly relies on simulation modeling in its overall management of IRR since it is a dynamic measure. Simulation modeling also estimates the impact of potential changes in interest rates and balance sheet structures on future earnings and projected economic value of equity. The methods used by ALCO to assess IRR remain largely unchanged from those disclosed at December 31, 2019.
The modeling process starts with a base case simulation using the current balance sheet and current interest rates held constant for the next twenty-four months. Alternate scenarios are prepared which simulate the impact of increasing and decreasing market interest rates, assuming parallel yield curve shifts. Comparisons produced from the simulation data, showing the changes in net interest income from the base interest rate scenario, illustrate the risks associated with the current balance sheet structure. Additional simulations, when deemed appropriate or necessary, are prepared using different interest rate scenarios from those used with the base case simulation and/or possible changes in balance sheet composition. The additional simulations include non-parallel shifts in interest rates whereby the direction and/or magnitude of changes in short-term interest rates is different from the changes applied to longer-term interest rates. Comparisons showing the net interest income and economic value of equity variances from the base case are provided to the ALCO for review and discussion.
The ALCO has established limits on changes in the twelve-month net interest income forecast and the economic value of equity from the base case. The ALCO may establish risk tolerances for other parallel and non-parallel rate movements, as deemed necessary. The following table details the current policy limits used to manage the level of Peoples' IRR:
The following table shows the estimated changes in net interest income and the economic value of equity based upon a standard, parallel shock analysis with balances held constant (dollars in thousands):
This table uses a standard, parallel shock analysis for assessing the IRR to net interest income and the economic value of equity. A parallel shock means all points on the yield curve (one year, two year, three year, etc.) are directionally changed the same amount of basis points. Management regularly assesses the impact of both increasing and decreasing interest rates. The table above shows the impact of upward parallel shocks and a downward parallel shock of 100 basis points. Downward parallel shocks of 300 and 200 basis points are excluded from the table as they are not probable given the current interest rate environment. For the full year 2020, the weighted average rate on Peoples' non-maturity deposits was roughly 14 basis points. In the event of a parallel downward shift of 100 basis points, the expense on Peoples' non-maturity deposits would reach a floor at
zero, unable to experience the full benefit of falling rates. This floor at zero is consistent with an assumption of non-negative deposit rates. On the asset side of the balance sheet, a significant majority of the floating rate loans (primarily tied to LIBOR and prime) would be impacted by the downward 100 basis point shock.
Estimated changes in net interest income and economic value of equity are partially driven by assumptions regarding the rate at which non-maturity deposits will reprice given a move in short-term interest rates. These assumptions are monitored closely by Peoples and are reviewed at least semi-annually. As of December 31, 2020, the actual deposit betas experienced by Peoples in the repricing of non-maturity deposits were lower than those used in Peoples’ interest rate risk modeling.
While parallel interest rate shock scenarios are useful in assessing the level of IRR inherent in the balance sheet, interest rates typically move in a nonparallel manner with differences in the timing, direction and magnitude of changes in short-term and long-term interest rates. Thus, any benefit that might occur as a result of the Federal Reserve Board increasing short-term interest rates in the future could be offset by an inverse movement in long-term rates, and vice versa. For this reason, Peoples considers other interest rate scenarios in addition to analyzing the impact of parallel yield curve shifts. These include various flattening and steepening scenarios in which short-term and long-term rates move in different directions with varying magnitude. Peoples believes these scenarios to be more reflective of how interest rates change versus the severe parallel rate shocks described above. Given the shape of market yield curves at December 31, 2020, consideration of the bull flattener scenario provides insights which were not captured by parallel shifts. The key insight presented by the bull flattener scenario highlights the risk to net interest income when long-term rates fall while short-term rates remain constant. In such a scenario, Peoples’ deposit costs, which are correlated with short-term rates, remain constant while asset yields, which are correlated with long-term rates, fall. Asset yields being reduced through increased premium amortization of investment securities and lower rates on re-investment would not be offset by reductions in deposit or funding costs, resulting in a decreased amount of net interest income.
During 2020, Peoples' Consolidated Balance Sheet was positioned to benefit from rising interest rates in terms of the potential impact on net interest income. The table illustrates this point as changes to net interest income increase in the rising rate scenarios. While the heavy concentration of floating rate loans remains the largest contributor to the level of asset sensitivity, the increase in asset sensitivity from December 31, 2019 was largely attributable to greater forecasted impacts of interest rate movements on the amount of premium amortization in the investment portfolio.
Peoples has entered into interest rate swaps as part of its interest rate risk management strategy. These interest rate swaps are designated as cash flow hedges and involve the receipt of variable rate amounts from a counterparty in exchange for Peoples making fixed payments. As of December 31, 2020, Peoples had seventeen interest rate swap contracts, with an aggregate notional value of $160.0 million. Additional information regarding Peoples' interest rate swaps can be found in "Note 14 Derivative Financial Instruments" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
An asset/liability model used to produce the analysis above requires assumptions to be made such as prepayment rates on interest-earning assets and repricing impact on non-maturity deposits. These business assumptions are based on business plans, economic and market trends, and available industry data. Management believes that its methodology for developing such assumptions is reasonable; however, there can be no assurance that modeled results will be achieved.
Liquidity
In addition to IRR management, another major objective of the ALCO is to ensure sufficient levels of liquidity are maintained. The ALCO defines liquidity as the ability to meet anticipated and unanticipated operating cash needs, loan demand and deposit withdrawals without incurring a sustained negative impact on profitability.
A primary source of liquidity for Peoples is deposits. Liquidity is also provided by cash generated from earning assets such as loans and investment securities. Peoples also uses various wholesale funding sources to supplement funding from customer deposits. These external sources provide Peoples with the ability to obtain large quantities of funds in a relatively short time period in the event of sudden unanticipated cash needs. However, an over-utilization of external funding sources can expose Peoples to greater liquidity risk, as these external sources may not be accessible during times of market stress. Additionally, Peoples may be exposed to the risk associated with providing excess collateral to external funding providers, commonly referred to as counterparty risk. As a result, the ALCO's liquidity management policy sets limits on the net liquidity position and the concentration of non-core funding sources, which includes wholesale funding and brokered deposits.
In addition to external sources of funding, Peoples considers certain types of deposits to be less stable or "volatile funding." These deposits include special money market products, large CDs and public funds. Peoples has established volatility factors for these various deposit products, and the liquidity management policy establishes a limit on the total level of volatile funding. Additionally, Peoples measures the maturities of external sources of funding for periods of one month, three months, six months and twelve months, and has established policy limits for the amounts maturing in each of these periods. The purpose of these limits is to minimize exposure to what is commonly termed rollover risk.
An additional strategy used by Peoples in the management of liquidity risk is maintaining a targeted level of liquid assets. These are assets that can be converted into cash in a relatively short period of time. Management defines liquid assets as unencumbered cash (including cash on deposit at the FRB of Cleveland), and the market value of U.S. government and agency
securities that are not pledged. Excluded from this definition are pledged securities, non-government securities, non-agency securities, municipal securities and loans. Management has established a minimum level of liquid assets in the liquidity management policy, which is expressed as a percentage of total loans and unfunded loan commitments. Peoples has also established a policy limit around the level of liquefiable assets expressed as a percentage of total loans and unfunded loan commitments. Liquefiable assets are defined as liquid assets plus the market value of unpledged securities not included in the liquid asset measurement.
An essential element in the management of liquidity risk is a forecast of the sources and uses of anticipated cash flows. On a monthly basis, Peoples forecasts sources and uses of cash for the next twelve months. To assist in the management of liquidity, management has established a liquidity coverage ratio, which is defined as the total sources of cash divided by the total uses of cash. A ratio of greater than 1.0 times indicates that forecasted sources of cash are adequate to fund forecasted uses of cash. The liquidity management policy establishes a minimum limit of 1.0 times. As of December 31, 2020, Peoples had a ratio of 11.22 times, which was within policy limits. Peoples also forecasts secondary or contingent sources of cash, and this includes external sources of funding and liquid assets. These sources of cash would be required if and when the forecasted liquidity coverage ratio dropped below the policy limit of 1.0 times. An additional liquidity measurement used by management includes the total forecasted sources of cash and the contingent sources of cash divided by the forecasted uses of cash. Management has established a minimum ratio of 3.0 times for this liquidity management policy limit. As of December 31, 2020, Peoples had a ratio of 12.51 times, which was within policy limits.
Disruptions in the sources and uses of cash can occur which can drastically alter the actual cash flows and negatively impact Peoples' ability to access internal and external sources of cash. Such disruptions might occur due to increased withdrawals of deposits, increases in the funding required for loan commitments, a decrease in the ability to access external funding sources and other factors that would increase the need for funding and limit Peoples' ability to access needed funds. As a result, Peoples maintains a liquidity contingency funding plan ("LCFP") that considers various degrees of disruptions and develops action plans around these scenarios.
Peoples' LCFP identifies scenarios where funding disruptions might occur and creates scenarios of varying degrees of severity. The disruptions considered include an increase in funding of unfunded loan commitments, unanticipated withdrawals of deposits, decreases in the renewal of maturing CDs and reductions in cash earnings. Additionally, the LCFP creates stress scenarios where access to external funding sources, or contingency funding, is suddenly limited, which includes a significant increase in the margin requirements where securities or loans are pledged, limited access to funding from other banks and limited access to funding from the FHLB of Cincinnati and the FRB of Cleveland. Peoples' LCFP scenarios include a base scenario, a mild stress scenario, a moderate stress scenario and a severe stress scenario. Each of these is defined as to the related severity and action plans are developed around each.
Liquidity management also requires the monitoring of risk indicators that may alert the ALCO to a developing liquidity situation or crisis. Early detection of stress scenarios allows Peoples to take actions to help mitigate the impact to Peoples Bank's business operations. The LCFP contains various indicators, termed key risk indicators ("KRIs") that are monitored on a monthly basis, at a minimum. The KRIs include both internal and external indicators and include loan delinquency levels, criticized and classified loan levels, non-performing loans to loans and to total assets, the total loan to total deposit ratio, the level of net non-core funding dependence, the level of contingency funding sources, the liquidity coverage ratio, changes in regulatory capital levels, forecasted operating loss and negative media concerning Peoples, irrational competitor pricing that persists, and an increase in rates for external funding sources. The LCFP establishes levels that define each of these KRIs under base, mild, moderate and severe scenarios.
The LCFP is reviewed and updated at least on an annual basis by the ALCO and Peoples Bank's Board of Directors. Additionally, testing of the LCFP is required on an annual basis. Various stress scenarios and the related actions are simulated according to the LCFP. The results are reviewed and discussed, and changes or revisions are made to the LCFP accordingly. Additionally, every two years, the LCFP is subjected to a third-party review for effectiveness and regulatory compliance.
Overall, management believes the current balance of cash and cash equivalents, and anticipated cash flows from the investment portfolio, along with the availability of other funding sources, will allow Peoples to meet anticipated cash obligations, as well as special needs and off-balance sheet commitments.
Off-Balance Sheet Activities and Contractual Obligations
Peoples routinely engages in activities that involve, to varying degrees, elements of risk that are not reflected in whole or in part in the Consolidated Financial Statements. These activities are part of Peoples' normal course of business and include traditional off-balance sheet credit-related financial instruments, interest rate contracts and commitments to make additional capital contributions in low-income housing tax credit investments.
The following is a summary of Peoples’ significant off-balance sheet activities and contractual obligations. Detailed information regarding these activities and obligations can be found in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as follows:
Traditional off-balance sheet credit-related financial instruments are primarily commitments to extend credit and standby letters of credit. These activities are necessary to meet the financing needs of customers and could require Peoples to make cash payments to third parties in the event certain specified future events occur. The contractual amounts represent the extent of Peoples’ exposure in these off-balance sheet activities. However, since certain off-balance sheet commitments, particularly standby letters of credit, are expected to expire or be only partially used, the total amount of commitments does not necessarily represent future cash requirements.
Peoples continues to lease certain facilities and equipment under noncancellable operating leases with terms providing for fixed monthly payments over periods generally ranging from two to thirty years. Several of Peoples’ leased facilities are inside retail shopping centers or office buildings and, as a result, are not available for purchase. Management believes these leased facilities increase Peoples’ visibility within its markets and afford sales associates additional access to current and potential clients.
For certain acquisitions, often those involving insurance businesses and wealth management books of business, a portion of the consideration is contingent upon revenue metrics being achieved. US GAAP requires that the amounts be recorded upon acquisition based on the best estimate of the future amounts to be paid at the time of acquisition. Any subsequent adjustment to the estimate is recorded in earnings. Based on the acquisitions completed to date, management does not expect contingent consideration to have a material impact on Peoples' future performance.
The following table details the aggregate amount of future payments Peoples is required to make under certain contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
(a) Amounts reflect solely the minimum required principal payments, and do not include interest.
(b) Amounts assume projected revenue metrics are achieved.
Management does not anticipate that Peoples’ current off-balance sheet activities will have a material impact on its future results of operations and financial condition based on historical experience and recent trends.
Effects of Inflation on Financial Statements
Substantially all of Peoples’ assets relate to banking and are monetary in nature. As a result, inflation does not impact Peoples to the same degree as companies in capital-intensive industries in a replacement cost environment. During a period of rising prices, a net monetary asset position results in a loss in purchasing power and conversely a net monetary liability position results in an increase in purchasing power. The opposite would be true during a period of decreasing prices. In the banking industry, monetary assets typically exceed monetary liabilities. The current monetary policy targeting low levels of inflation has resulted in relatively stable price levels. Therefore, inflation has had little impact on Peoples’ net assets.