ITEM 7.MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and capital resources should be read in conjunction with, and is qualified in its entirety by, our Consolidated Financial Statements and the notes thereto, included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and other filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. This management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations includes discussion as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019. Discussion of our financial condition and results of operations as of and for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to December 31, 2018 can be found in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on February 27, 2020.
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
Our Business
Penn National Gaming, Inc., together with its subsidiaries (“Penn National,” the “Company,” “we,” “our,” or “us”), is a leading, diversified, multi-jurisdictional owner and manager of gaming and racing properties, retail and online sports betting operations, and video gaming terminal (“VGT”) operations. Our wholly-owned interactive division, Penn Interactive Ventures, LLC (“Penn Interactive”), operates retail sports betting across the Company’s portfolio, as well as online sports betting, online social casino, bingo and online casinos (“iGaming”). In February 2020, the Company acquired 36% (inclusive of 1% on a delayed basis) equity interest in Barstool Sports, Inc. (“Barstool Sports”), a leading digital sports, entertainment, lifestyle and media company, and entered into a strategic relationship with Barstool Sports, whereby Barstool Sports will exclusively promote the Company's land-based retail sportsbooks, iGaming products and online sports betting products, including the Barstool Sportsbook mobile app, to its national audience. We launched an online sports betting app called Barstool Sports in Pennsylvania in September 2020 and in Michigan in January 2021. We also operate iGaming in Pennsylvania and Michigan. Our mychoice program currently has over 20 million members and provides such members with various benefits, including complimentary goods and/or services. The Company’s strategy has continued to evolve from an owner and manager of gaming and racing properties into an omni-channel provider of retail and online gaming, live racing and sports betting entertainment. We believe our continued evolution into a best-in-class omni-channel provider of retail and online gaming and sports betting entertainment will be a catalyst for our core land-based business, while also providing a platform for significant long-term shareholder value.
As of December 31, 2020, we owned, managed, or had ownership interests in 41 gaming and racing properties in 19 states and were licensed to offer live sports betting at our properties in Colorado, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Michigan, Mississippi, Nevada, Pennsylvania and West Virginia. The majority of the real estate assets (i.e., land and buildings) used in our operations are subject to triple net master leases; the most significant of which are the Penn Master Lease and the Pinnacle Master Lease (as such terms are defined in “Liquidity and Capital Resources” and collectively referred to as the “Master Leases”), with Gaming and Leisure Properties, Inc. (Nasdaq: GLPI) (“GLPI”), a real estate investment trust (“REIT”). In addition, we are currently developing two Category 4 satellite gaming casinos in Pennsylvania: Hollywood Casino York and Hollywood Casino Morgantown, both of which are expected to commence operations by the end of 2021.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic and Company Response
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the novel coronavirus (known as “COVID-19”) outbreak to be a global pandemic. We began temporarily suspending the operations of all of our properties between March 13, 2020 and March 19, 2020 pursuant to various orders from state gaming regulatory bodies or governmental authorities to combat the rapid spread of COVID-19. We began reopening our properties on May 18, 2020 with reduced gaming and hotel capacity and limited food and beverage offerings in order to accommodate comprehensive social distancing and health and safety protocols.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, our properties temporarily suspended operations in Pennsylvania, Michigan and Illinois and were subject to increased operational restrictions in Ohio and Massachusetts (among other states). Our Michigan property was temporarily closed on November 17, 2020 and reopened December 23, 2020. Our Pennsylvania properties were temporarily closed on December 12, 2020 and reopened on January 4, 2021. Our Illinois properties were temporarily closed on November 20, 2020 and began reopening with limited hours of operations beginning January 16, 2021 and throughout the week. The property closures were pursuant to various orders from state gaming regulatory bodies or governmental authorities to combat the rapid spread of COVID-19. As of February 26, 2021, all of our properties were open to the public with the
exception of Zia Park and Valley Race Park, which remain closed. For a thorough discussion of the operating performance of our properties, see “Results of Operations” below.
Between March 13, 2020 and December 31, 2020, we entered into a series of transactions to improve our financial position and liquidity in light of the COVID-19 pandemic, including: (i) on March 13, 2020, we provided notice to our lenders to borrow the remaining available amount of $430.0 million under our Revolving Credit Facility; (ii) on March 27, 2020, we entered into a binding term sheet with GLPI (the “Term Sheet”) whereby GLPI agreed to (a) purchase the real estate assets associated with Tropicana Las Vegas (“Tropicana”) in exchange for rent credits of $307.5 million, which closed on April 16, 2020, and (b) a sale-leaseback of the land underlying our Hollywood Casino Morgantown (“Morgantown”) development project in Morgantown, Pennsylvania, in exchange for rent credits of $30.0 million, which closed on October 1, 2020; (iii) on May 14, 2020 (May 19, 2020 with respect to the underwriters’ exercising their options to acquire additional 2.75% Convertible Notes), we completed a public offering of $330.5 million aggregate principal amount of 2.75% Convertible Notes; (iv) on May 14, 2020 (May 19, 2020 with respect to the underwriters’ exercising their options to purchase additional shares), we completed a public offering of 19,166,667 aggregate shares of common stock, par value of $0.01 per share, of the Company (“Penn Common Stock”) for gross proceeds of $345.0 million; and (v) on September 24, 2020 (September 25, 2020 with respect to the underwriters’ exercising their options to purchase additional shares), we completed a public offering of 16,100,000 aggregate shares of Penn Common Stock for gross proceeds of $982.1 million. In addition, on April 14, 2020, the Company entered into an amendment to its Credit Agreement, which, among other things, provides it with relief from its financial covenants for a period of up to one year. On September 30, 2020, the Company fully repaid $670.0 million of outstanding borrowings under its Revolving Credit Facility. Further, on November 12, 2020 the Company prepaid $115.0 million of outstanding borrowings on its Term Loan B-1 Facility. The terms “Revolving Credit Facility,” “Convertible Notes,” “Credit Agreement” and "Term Loan B-1" are defined in “Liquidity and Capital Resources”.
The COVID-19 pandemic caused significant disruptions to our business and had a material adverse impact on our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows, the magnitude of which continues to develop based on (i) the timing and extent of the recovery in visitation and consumer spending at our properties; (ii) the continued impact of implementing social distancing and health and safety guidelines at our properties, including reductions in gaming, hotel capacity, limiting the number of food and beverage options and limiting other amenities; and (iii) whether any of our properties will be required to again temporarily suspend operations in the event that the pandemic significantly worsens. We are currently unable to determine whether, when or how the conditions surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic will change or whether the recovery in visitation and consumer spending is sustainable.
The Company could experience other potential adverse impacts as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, including, but not limited to, further charges from adjustments to the carrying amount of goodwill and other intangible assets, long-lived asset impairment charges, or impairments of investments in joint ventures. In addition, the negative impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic may result in further changes in the amount of valuation allowance required. Actual results may differ materially from the Company’s current estimates as the scope of the COVID-19 pandemic evolves, depending largely, though not exclusively, on the impact of required capacity reductions, social distancing and health and safety guidelines, and the sustainability of current trends in recovery at our reopened properties.
Recent Acquisitions, Development Projects and Other
In February 2020, we closed on our investment in Barstool Sports pursuant to a stock purchase agreement with Barstool Sports and certain stockholders of Barstool Sports, in which we purchased 36% (inclusive of 1% on a delayed basis) of the common stock of Barstool Sports for a purchase price of $161.2 million. Within three years after the closing of the transaction (or earlier at our election), we will increase our ownership in Barstool Sports to approximately 50% by purchasing approximately $62 million worth of additional shares of Barstool Sports common stock, consistent with the implied valuation at the time of the initial investment, which was $450.0 million. With respect to the remaining Barstool Sports shares, we have immediately exercisable call rights, and the existing Barstool Sports stockholders have put rights exercisable beginning three years after closing, all based on a fair market value calculation at the time of exercise (subject to a cap of $650.0 million and a floor of 2.25 times the annualized revenue of Barstool Sports, all subject to various adjustments). Upon closing, we became Barstool Sports’ exclusive gaming partner for up to 40 years and have the sole right to utilize the Barstool Sports brand for all of our online and retail sports betting and iGaming products.
As noted above, Penn Interactive launched the Barstool Sports online sports betting app in Pennsylvania in September 2020 and in Michigan in January 2021. In addition, Penn Interactive has entered into multi-year agreements with leading sports betting operators for online sports betting and iGaming market access across our portfolio of properties.
In December 2020, the Company entered into a definitive agreement to purchase from GLPI the operations of Hollywood Casino Perryville for $31.1 million. The transaction is expected to close during the second or third quarter of 2021, subject to approval of the Maryland Lottery and Gaming Control Commission and other customary closing conditions. Simultaneous with the closing of the transaction, we would lease the real estate assets associated with Hollywood Casino Perryville from GLPI with initial annual rent of $7.8 million per year subject to escalation.
In May 2019, we acquired Greektown Casino-Hotel (“Greektown”) in Detroit, Michigan, subject to a triple net lease with VICI Properties Inc. (NYSE: VICI) (“VICI”, a REIT and collectively with GLPI, our “REIT Landlords”) (the “Greektown Lease”) and in January 2019, we acquired Margaritaville Casino Resort (“Margaritaville”) in Bossier City, Louisiana, subject to a triple net lease with VICI (the “Margaritaville Lease”). In March 2020, in light of the COVID-19 pandemic, we temporarily suspended construction of our development of two Category 4 satellite gaming casinos in Pennsylvania: Hollywood Casino York and Morgantown. We have since restarted construction and expect both casinos to open in late 2021, subject to regulatory approval.
In October 2018, the Company completed the acquisition of Pinnacle Entertainment, Inc. (“Pinnacle”), a leading regional gaming operator (the “Pinnacle Acquisition”). In connection with the Pinnacle Acquisition, we added 12 gaming properties to our portfolio, providing us with greater operational scale and geographic diversity. We assumed the Pinnacle Master Lease concurrently with the closing of the Pinnacle Acquisition to our holdings and has provided us with greater operational scale and geographic diversity.
We believe that our portfolio of assets provides us the benefit of geographically-diversified cash flow from operations. We expect to continue to expand our gaming operations through the implementation and execution of a disciplined capital expenditure program at our existing properties, the pursuit of strategic acquisitions and investments, and the development of new gaming properties. In addition, the partnership with Barstool Sports reflects our strategy to continue evolving from the nation’s largest regional gaming operator to a best-in-class omni-channel provider of retail and online gaming and sports betting entertainment.
Operating and Competitive Environment
Most of our properties operate in mature, competitive markets. We expect that the majority of our future growth will come from new business lines or distribution channels, such as retail and online gaming and sports betting; entrance into new jurisdictions; expansions of gaming in existing jurisdictions; and, to a lesser extent, improvements/expansions of our existing properties and strategic acquisitions of gaming properties. Our portfolio is comprised largely of well-maintained regional gaming facilities, which has allowed us to develop what we believe to be a solid base for future growth opportunities. We have also made investments in joint ventures that we believe will allow us to capitalize on additional gaming opportunities in certain states if legislation or referenda are passed that permit and/or expand gaming in these jurisdictions and we are selected as a licensee.
As reported by most jurisdictions, regional gaming industry trends have shown little revenue growth the last several years as numerous jurisdictions now permit gaming or have expanded their gaming offerings. In recent years, the proliferation of new gaming properties has impacted the overall domestic gaming industry as well as our results of operations in certain markets. Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, the economic environment, specifically historically low levels of unemployment, strength in residential real estate prices, and high levels of consumer confidence, had resulted in a stable operating environment in recent years. The COVID-19 pandemic has increased the level of unemployment and decreased the level of consumer confidence. Our ability to succeed in this new environment will be predicated on our ability to adjust operations and cost structures at our reopened properties to reflect the new economic and health and safety conditions, operating our properties efficiently, realizing revenue and cost synergies from recent acquisitions, and offering our customers additional gaming experiences through our omni-channel distribution strategy. We seek to continue to expand our customer database through accretive acquisitions or investments, such as Barstool Sports, capitalize on organic growth opportunities from the development of new properties or the expansion of recently-developed business lines, and develop partnerships that allow us to enter new jurisdictions for iGaming and sports betting.
The gaming industry is characterized by an increasingly high degree of competition among a large number of participants, including riverboat casinos; dockside casinos; land-based casinos; video lottery; iGaming; online and retail sports betting; gaming at taverns; gaming at truck stop establishments; sweepstakes and poker machines not located in casinos; the potential for increased fantasy sports, significant growth of Native American gaming tribes, historic racing or state-sponsored i-lottery products in or adjacent to states we operate in; and other forms of gaming in the U.S. See the “Segment comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019” section below for discussions of the impact of competition on our results of operations by reportable segment.
Key Performance Indicators
In our business, revenue is driven by discretionary consumer spending. We have no certain mechanism for determining why consumers choose to spend more or less money at our properties from period-to-period; therefore, we are unable to quantify a dollar amount for each factor that impacts our customers’ spending behaviors. However, based on our experience, we can generally offer some insight into the factors that we believe are likely to account for such changes and which factors may have a greater impact than others. For example, decreases in discretionary consumer spending have historically been brought about by weakened general economic conditions, such as lackluster recoveries from recessions, high unemployment levels, higher income taxes, low levels of consumer confidence, weakness in the housing market, and high fuel or other transportation costs. We believe that the COVID-19 pandemic has led to and will continue to lead to meaningful decreases in discretionary consumer spending and will continue to negatively impact visitation at our properties and the volume of play for the foreseeable future. In addition, visitation and the volume of play have historically been negatively impacted by significant construction surrounding our properties, adverse regional weather conditions and natural disasters. In all instances, such insights are based solely on our judgment and professional experience, and no assurance can be given as to the accuracy of our judgments.
The vast majority of our revenues is gaming revenue, which is highly dependent upon the volume and spending levels of customers at our properties. Our gaming revenue is derived primarily from slot machines (which represented approximately 87%, 92% and 92% of our gaming revenue in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively) and, to a lesser extent, table games and sports betting. Aside from gaming revenue, our revenues are derived from our hotel, dining, retail, commissions, program sales, admissions, concessions and certain other ancillary activities, and our racing operations.
Key performance indicators related to gaming revenue are slot handle and table game drop, which are volume indicators, and “win” or “hold” percentage. Our typical property slot win percentage is in the range of approximately 7% to 10% of slot handle, and our typical table game hold percentage is in the range of approximately 14% to 27% of table game drop.
Slot handle is the gross amount wagered during a given period. The win or hold percentage is the net amount of gaming wins and losses, with liabilities recognized for accruals related to the anticipated payout of progressive jackpots. Given the stability in our slot hold percentages on a historical basis, we have not experienced significant impacts to net income from changes in these percentages. For table games, customers usually purchase chips at the gaming tables. The cash and markers (extensions of credit granted to certain credit-worthy customers) are deposited in the gaming table’s drop box. Table game hold is the amount of drop that is retained and recorded as gaming revenue, with liabilities recognized for funds deposited by customers before gaming play occurs and for unredeemed gaming chips. As we are primarily focused on regional gaming markets, our table game hold percentages are fairly stable as the majority of these markets do not regularly experience high-end play, which can lead to volatility in hold percentages. Therefore, changes in table game hold percentages do not typically have a material impact to our results of operations and cash flows.
Under normal operating conditions, our properties generate significant operating cash flow since most of our revenue is cash-based from slot machines, table games, and pari-mutuel wagering. Our business is capital intensive, and we rely on cash flow from our properties to generate sufficient cash to satisfy our obligations under the Triple Net Leases (as defined in "Liquidity and Capital Resources”), repay debt, fund maintenance capital expenditures, fund new capital projects at existing properties and provide excess cash for future development and acquisitions. Additional information regarding our capital projects is discussed in “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below.
Reportable Segments
We view each of our gaming and racing properties as an operating segment with the exception of our two properties in Jackpot, Nevada, which we view as one operating segment. We consider our combined VGT operations, by state, to be separate operating segments. We aggregate our operating segments into four reportable segments: Northeast, South, West and Midwest. For a listing of our gaming properties and VGT operations included in each reportable segment, see Note 2, “Significant Accounting Policies,” in the notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table highlights our revenues, net income (loss), and Adjusted EBITDA, on a consolidated basis, as well as our revenues and Adjusted EBITDAR by reportable segment. Such segment reporting is on a basis consistent with how we measure our business and allocate resources internally. We consider net income (loss) to be the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“GAAP”) to Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDAR, which are non-GAAP financial measures. Refer to “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below for the definitions of Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDAR, and Adjusted EBITDAR margin; as well as a reconciliation of net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDAR and Adjusted EBITDAR margin.
(1)The Other category consists of the Company’s stand-alone racing operations, namely Sanford-Orlando Kennel Club and the Company’s joint venture interests in Sam Houston Race Park, Valley Race Park, and Freehold Raceway; our management contract for Retama Park Racetrack and our live and televised poker tournament series that operates under the trade name, Heartland Poker Tour ("HPT"). The Other category also includes Penn Interactive, which operates our social gaming, internally-branded retail sportsbooks, iGaming and our Barstool Sports online sports betting app. Expenses incurred for corporate and shared services activities that are directly attributable to a property or are otherwise incurred to support a property are allocated to each property. The Other category also includes corporate overhead costs, which consist of certain expenses, such as: payroll, professional fees, travel expenses and other general and administrative expenses that do not directly relate to or have not otherwise been allocated to a property. In addition, Adjusted EBITDAR of the Other category includes our proportionate share of the net income or loss of Barstool Sports after adding back our share of non-operating items (such as interest expense, net; income taxes; depreciation and amortization; and stock-based compensation expense).
(2)Represents the elimination of intersegment revenues associated with Penn Interactive and HPT.
(3)The total is a mathematical calculation derived from the sum of reportable segments (as well as the Other category). As noted within “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below, Adjusted EBITDAR, and the related margin, is presented on a consolidated basis outside the financial statements solely as a valuation metric.
(4)Solely comprised of rent expense associated with the operating lease components contained within the Master Leases (primarily land), the Tropicana Lease, the Meadows Lease, the Margaritaville Lease and the Greektown Lease (of which the Tropicana Lease, Meadows Lease, Margaritaville Lease and the Greektown Lease as defined in “Liquidity and Capital Resources” and are referred to collectively as our “triple net operating leases”). The finance lease components contained within the Master Leases (primarily buildings) and the financing obligation associated with the Morgantown Lease (as defined in “Liquidity and Capital Resources”) result in interest expense, as opposed to rent expense.
During the year ended December 31, 2020 and as of February 26, 2021, our properties temporary closure dates pursuant to various orders from state gaming regulatory bodies or governmental authorities to combat the rapid spread of COVID-19 are shown below:
(1)VGT route operations
Consolidated comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues
The following table presents our consolidated revenues:
Gaming revenues and food, beverage, hotel and other revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased compared to the prior year primarily as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, which caused temporary closures of all of our properties during the year, and upon subsequent property reopenings, our operations were impacted by operating restrictions. Our properties are subject to restrictions on gaming capacity, which depending on the jurisdiction, are generally 50% less gaming devices. Furthermore, due primarily to the implementation of social distancing and health and safety protocols, our properties are subject to reduced hotel capacity, limitations on the number of food and beverage offerings and limitations on other amenities. As a result, upon reopening our properties, gaming revenue now represents a larger portion of our total revenues, which we expect to continue until at least such time that social distancing and health and safety protocols are relaxed or no longer necessary.
Since reopening, our properties have generally experienced reduced visitation and higher spend per trip, as compared to pre-closure levels. We largely attribute the higher spend per trip to pent-up demand, visitation from our higher worth customers, and customers’ propensity to spend after a prolonged period of limited domestic commerce and upon receipt of government stimulus payments. In addition, in many of the states in which we operate, leisure alternatives remain partially limited (e.g., bars, concerts, entertainment events, etc.), which may have impacted our operating results upon reopening our properties. See “Segment comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019” below for more detailed explanations of the fluctuations in revenues.
Operating expenses
The following table presents our consolidated operating expenses:
Gaming expenses consist primarily of salaries and wages associated with our gaming operations and gaming taxes. Food, beverage, hotel and other expenses consist principally of salaries and wages and costs of goods sold associated with our food, beverage, hotel, retail, racing, and other operations. Gaming, food, beverage, hotel and other expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased year over year primarily as a result of the temporary closures of all of our properties due to the
COVID-19 pandemic, which reduced our salaries and wages, gaming taxes, costs of goods sold, and other expenses. As discussed above, our reopened properties are operating with reduced gaming, hotel capacity, limited food and beverage and limited other amenity offerings. As such, our properties are operating with a reduced workforce, which reduced our salaries and wages. In addition, our properties have reduced marketing costs, which reduces gaming expenses.
General and administrative expenses include items such as compliance, facility maintenance, utilities, property and liability insurance, surveillance and security, lobbying expenses, and certain housekeeping services, as well as all expenses for administrative departments such as accounting, purchasing, human resources, legal and internal audit. General and administrative expenses also include stock-based compensation expense; pre-opening and acquisition costs; gains and losses on disposal of assets; changes in the fair value of our contingent purchase price obligations; expense associated with cash-settled stock-based awards (including changes in fair value thereto); restructuring costs (primarily severance) associated with a company-wide initiative triggered by the COVID-19 pandemic; and rent expense associated with our triple net operating leases.
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased year over year primarily as a result of the actions taken to reduce our cost structure while our properties were temporarily closed, which included: (i) furloughing the vast majority of our employees and operating with a minimum staffing of less than 850 employees company-wide during the temporary closures; (ii) enacting meaningful compensation reductions to our remaining property and corporate leadership teams effective April 1, 2020 and through September 30, 2020 (compensation was fully restored effective October 1, 2020); and (iii) executing substantial reductions in operating expenses. In addition, we recognized a gain on disposal of assets of $29.2 million, which reduced general and administrative expenses in the current year. Additionally, the expense associated with the Company’s contingent purchase price obligations and preopening expenses decreased by $8.1 million and $10.5 million, respectively, as compared to the prior year period. Offsetting these decreases for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year, was an increase in expense associated with the Company’s cash-settled stock-based awards expense of $66.4 million, due to the increase in our stock price, and an increase in rent expense of $53.4 million, which principally relates to the Greektown Lease. Additionally, we incurred $13.4 million of restructuring costs, primarily related to employee severance as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic as described above.
Depreciation and amortization for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased year over year primarily due to fixed assets becoming fully depreciated since December 31, 2019, a reduction in capital spend in 2020 due to the casino closures and a $2.7 million decrease in amortization expense at Penn Interactive. These were offset for the year ended December 31, 2020 by an increase of $3.2 million at Greektown, which was acquired in May 2019.
Impairment losses for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily relate to impairments taken on our goodwill and other intangible assets of $113.0 million and $498.5 million, respectively, as a result of an interim impairment assessment during the first quarter of 2020. During the first quarter of 2020, we identified an indicator of impairment triggered by the COVID-19 pandemic, which caused all of our gaming properties to temporarily close. At the time of the interim impairment assessment, we revised our cash flow projections to reflect the current economic environment, including the uncertainty of the nature, timing and extent of reopening our gaming properties. Additionally, we recorded an impairment charge of $7.3 million resulting from an impairment analysis of the long-lived assets at the Tropicana Las Vegas and an impairment charge of $4.6 million on our investment in the Texas Joint Venture.
Other income (expenses)
The following table presents our consolidated other income (expenses):
N/M - Not meaningful
Interest expense, net increased for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year, due primarily to increases in interest expense related to our Master Leases of $8.8 million partially offset by an increase in capitalized interest of
$1.9 million. Additionally, the interest expense associated with our long-term debt increased $1.8 million, as compared to the prior year, due primarily to the issuance of our 2.75% Convertible Notes, which offset the reduction in interest expense incurred on the Senior Secured Credit Facilities (as defined in “ Note 11, “Long-term Debt,”) from a decrease in the London Interbank Offered Rate (referred to as "LIBOR") during the corresponding periods.
Income from unconsolidated affiliates relates principally to our Kansas Entertainment joint venture. The decrease for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year, was primarily due to a decrease in the results of operations of Hollywood Casino at Kansas Speedway, which temporarily closed on March 17, 2020 and reopened on May 25, 2020 and continues to be impacted by COVID-19 capacity restrictions. This decrease was partially offset by income earned from Barstool Sports.
Loss on early extinguishment of debt for the year December 31, 2020 related to the write-offs of previously unamortized debt issuance costs and debt discounts in connection with the prepayment of Term Loan B-1 Facility, (as defined in Note 11, “Long-term Debt,”). There were no principal prepayments of our long-term debt during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Income tax benefit (expense) for the year ended December 31, 2020, was a benefit of $165.1 million compared to income tax expense of $43.0 million in the prior year. Our effective tax rate was 19.8% for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 49.9% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The Company’s effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was lower than the federal statutory tax rate of 21% primarily driven by the increase in the valuation allowance (see Note 14, “Income Taxes”, in the notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements). The Company’s effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2019 was higher than the federal statutory tax rate of 21% primarily driven by the effect of the non-deductible goodwill impairment charge, non-deductible officers’ compensation, and higher state taxable income from operations.
Our effective income tax rate can vary each reporting period depending on, among other factors, the geographic and business mix of our earnings, changes to our valuation allowance, and the level of our tax credits. Certain of these and other factors, including our history and projections of pre-tax earnings, are considered in assessing our ability to realize our net deferred tax assets.
Other includes miscellaneous income and expense items. The amount for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 relates primarily to unrealized holding gains of $106.7 million and $19.9 million, respectively, on equity securities (including warrants), which were acquired during the third quarter of 2019 in connection with Penn Interactive entering into multi-year agreements with sports betting operators for online sports betting and related iGaming market access across our portfolio.
Segment comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Northeast Segment
The Northeast segment’s results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 were primarily impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. During the year ended December 31, 2020, our properties had temporary closures pursuant to various orders from state gaming regulatory bodies or governmental authorities to combat the rapid spread of COVID-19. All of our properties within the Northeast segment reopened and continue to operate with reduced gaming and hotel (if applicable) capacity, limited food and beverage and other amenity offerings. In response to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations, we implemented cost saving initiatives to offset inevitable revenue degradation, such as: operating with a reduced
workforce, focusing on higher margin gaming offerings, reducing marketing costs, and limiting certain lower margin food and beverage offerings.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 the Northeast segment’s total revenues, Adjusted EBITDAR and Adjusted EBITDAR margin decreased, as compared to the prior year, due to the temporary closures described above. While revenues and Adjusted EBITDAR decreased 31.7% and 33.6% compared to the prior year, Adjusted EBITDAR margin decreased 80 basis points primarily as a result of cost cutting measures and other structural changes put in place in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
South Segment
The South segment’s results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 were primarily impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and Hurricane Laura (described below). During the year ended December 31, 2020 our properties had temporary closures pursuant to various orders from state gaming regulatory bodies or governmental authorities to combat the rapid spread of COVID-19. All of our properties within the South segment reopened and continue to operate with reduced gaming, hotel (if applicable) capacity, limited food and beverage and other amenity offerings. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations, we implemented cost saving initiatives to offset inevitable revenue degradation, such as: operating with a reduced workforce, focusing on higher margin gaming offerings, reducing marketing costs, and limiting certain lower margin food and beverage offerings.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the South segment’s total revenues and Adjusted EBITDAR decreased, as compared to the prior year, due to the temporary closures, operational restrictions, and social distancing measures described above. The Souths segment’s Adjusted EBITDAR margin increased 440 basis points for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year due to our cost structure savings initiatives described above.
On August 27, 2020, Hurricane Laura made landfall in Lake Charles, Louisiana and caused significant damage to L’Auberge Lake Charles, forcing it to close for approximately two weeks. The Company maintains insurance, subject to certain deductibles and coinsurance, for the repair or replacement of assets that suffered loss and provides coverage for interruption to our business, including lost profits. The Company received upfront prepayments of $47.5 million from our insurers related to our anticipated policy claim (i.e. an advance) for the year ended December 31, 2020. The insurance proceeds were recorded as an offset to recovery costs incurred (i.e. Receivables within our Consolidated Balance Sheets) and we did not recognize any gain or loss as a result of this event.
West Segment
The West segment’s results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 were primarily impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. During the year ended December 31, 2020 our properties had temporary closures pursuant to various orders from state gaming regulatory bodies or governmental authorities to combat the rapid spread of COVID-19. All of our properties within the West segment reopened and continue to operate with reduced gaming, hotel (if applicable) capacity, limited food and beverage and other amenity offerings, with the exception of Zia Park which remains closed. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations, we implemented cost saving initiatives to offset inevitable revenue degradation, such as: operating with a reduced workforce, focusing on higher margin gaming offerings, reducing marketing costs, and limiting certain lower margin food and beverage offerings.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the West segment’s total revenues, Adjusted EBITDAR and Adjusted EBITDAR margin decreased, as compared to the prior year, due to the temporary closures, operational restrictions, and social distancing measures described above.
Midwest Segment
The Midwest segment’s results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 were primarily impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. During the year ended December 31, 2020 our properties had temporary closures pursuant to various orders from state gaming regulatory bodies or governmental authorities to combat the rapid spread of COVID-19. All of our properties within the Midwest segment reopened and continue to operate with reduced gaming, hotel (if applicable) capacity, limited food and beverage and other amenity offerings. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations, we implemented cost saving initiatives to offset inevitable revenue degradation, such as: operating with a reduced workforce, focusing on higher margin gaming offerings, reducing marketing costs, and limiting certain lower margin food and beverage offerings.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Midwest segment’s total revenues and Adjusted EBITDAR decreased, as compared to the prior year, due to the temporary closures, operational restrictions, and social distancing measures described above. The Midwest segment’s Adjusted EBITDAR margin increased 100 basis points for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year due to our cost structure savings initiatives described above.
Other
Total revenues and Adjusted EBITDAR of the Other category increased for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year, primarily as a result of Penn Interactive. Penn Interactive's operations benefited from the launch of the online Barstool Sportsbook in Pennsylvania in September 2020 and increases in online social and real-money gaming revenue. Real-money online gaming revenue benefited from an improved conversion of the mychoice database to our real-money gaming platform, and was also positively impacted by the temporary closures of Pennsylvania casinos throughout portions of 2020.
In addition to benefiting from Penn Interactive's operating results, the increase in Adjusted EBITDAR is driven by decreases in corporate overhead costs of $20.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, principally driven by furloughs to team members, compensation reductions effective April 1, 2020 through September 30, 2020, and the overall reduction of expenses due to the temporary closures, as well as an overall permanent reduction to our workforce as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, offset by increased expenses related to the ramp up of the Penn Interactive online sportsbook operations.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Use and Definitions
In addition to GAAP financial measures, management uses Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDAR and Adjusted EBITDAR margin as non-GAAP financial measures. These non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered a substitute for, nor superior to, financial results and measures determined or calculated in accordance with GAAP. Each of these non-GAAP financial measures is not calculated in the same manner by all companies and, accordingly, may not be an appropriate measure of comparing performance among different companies.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as earnings before interest expense, net; income taxes; depreciation and amortization; stock-based compensation; debt extinguishment and financing charges; impairment losses; insurance recoveries and deductible charges; changes in the estimated fair value of our contingent purchase price obligations; gain or loss on disposal of assets, the difference between budget and actual expense for cash-settled stock-based awards; pre-opening and acquisition costs; and other income or expenses. Adjusted EBITDA is inclusive of income or loss from unconsolidated affiliates, with our share of non-operating items (such as interest expense, net; income taxes; depreciation and amortization; and stock-based compensation expense) added back for Barstool Sports and our Kansas Entertainment joint venture. Adjusted EBITDA is inclusive of rent expense associated with our triple net operating leases (the operating lease components contained within the Penn Master Lease and Pinnacle Master Lease (primarily land), the Meadows Lease, the Margaritaville Lease, the Greektown Lease and the Tropicana Lease). Although Adjusted EBITDA includes rent expense associated with our triple net operating leases, we believe Adjusted EBITDA is useful as a supplemental measure in evaluating the performance of our consolidated results of operations.
Adjusted EBITDA has economic substance because it is used by management as a performance measure to analyze the performance of our business, and is especially relevant in evaluating large, long-lived casino-hotel projects because it provides a perspective on the current effects of operating decisions separated from the substantial non-operational depreciation charges and financing costs of such projects. We present Adjusted EBITDA because it is used by some investors and creditors as an indicator of the strength and performance of ongoing business operations, including our ability to service debt, and to fund capital expenditures, acquisitions and operations. These calculations are commonly used as a basis for investors, analysts and credit rating agencies to evaluate and compare operating performance and value companies within our industry. In order to view the operations of their casinos on a more stand-alone basis, gaming companies, including us, have historically excluded from their Adjusted EBITDA calculations certain corporate expenses that do not relate to the management of specific casino
properties. However, Adjusted EBITDA is not a measure of performance or liquidity calculated in accordance with GAAP. Adjusted EBITDA information is presented as a supplemental disclosure, as management believes that it is a commonly used measure of performance in the gaming industry and that it is considered by many to be a key indicator of the Company’s operating results.
We define Adjusted EBITDAR as Adjusted EBITDA (as defined above) plus rent expense associated with triple net operating leases (which is a normal, recurring cash operating expense necessary to operate our business). Adjusted EBITDAR is presented on a consolidated basis outside the financial statements solely as a valuation metric. Management believes that Adjusted EBITDAR is an additional metric traditionally used by analysts in valuing gaming companies subject to triple net leases since it eliminates the effects of variability in leasing methods and capital structures. This metric is included as supplemental disclosure because (i) we believe Adjusted EBITDAR is traditionally used by gaming operator analysts and investors to determine the equity value of gaming operators and (ii) Adjusted EBITDAR is one of the metrics used by other financial analysts in valuing our business. We believe Adjusted EBITDAR is useful for equity valuation purposes because (i) its calculation isolates the effects of financing real estate; and (ii) using a multiple of Adjusted EBITDAR to calculate enterprise value allows for an adjustment to the balance sheet to recognize estimated liabilities arising from operating leases related to real estate. However, Adjusted EBITDAR when presented on a consolidated basis is not a financial measure in accordance with GAAP and should not be viewed as a measure of overall operating performance or considered in isolation or as an alternative to net income because it excludes the rent expense associated with our triple net operating leases and is provided for the limited purposes referenced herein.
Adjusted EBITDAR margin is defined as Adjusted EBITDAR on a consolidated basis (as defined above) divided by revenues on a consolidated basis. Adjusted EBITDAR margin is presented on a consolidated basis outside the financial statements solely as a valuation metric. We further define Adjusted EBITDAR margin by reportable segment as Adjusted EBITDAR for each segment divided by segment revenues.
Reconciliation of GAAP Financial Measures to Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The following table includes a reconciliation of net income (loss), which is determined in accordance with GAAP, to Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDAR and Adjusted EBITDAR margin, which are non-GAAP financial measures:
(1) These items are included in “General and administrative” within the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss).
(2) Our cash-settled stock-based awards are adjusted to fair value each reporting period based primarily on the price of the Company’s common stock. As such, significant fluctuations in the price of the Company’s common stock during any reporting period could cause significant variances to budget on cash-settled stock-based awards. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the price of the Company’s common stock increased significantly, which resulted in unfavorable variances to budget.
(3) Consists principally of interest expense, net; income taxes; depreciation and amortization; and stock-based compensation expense associated with Barstool Sports and our Kansas Entertainment joint venture.
(4) Consists of non-recurring restructuring charges (primarily severance) associated with a company-wide initiative, triggered by the COVID-19 pandemic, designed to (i) improve the operational effectiveness across our property portfolio; and (ii) improve the effectiveness and efficiency of our Corporate functional support areas.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our primary sources of liquidity and capital resources have been and will continue to be cash flow from operations, borrowings from banks and proceeds from the issuance of debt and equity securities. Our ongoing liquidity will depend on a number of factors, including available cash resources, cash flow from operations, acquisitions or investments, funding of construction for development projects, and our compliance with covenants contained under our debt agreements.
N/M - Not meaningful
Operating Cash Flow
The decrease in net cash provided by operating activities of $365.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, is due to the temporary closures of our properties due to the COVID-19 pandemic, which significantly decreased cash receipts from customers. Offsetting this decrease was a $316.2 million decrease in cash paid for rent and interest payments, in total, under our Triple Net Leases, due primarily to utilizing rent credits to pay rent in the current year under the Master Leases, the Meadows Lease and the Morgantown Lease (offset by the increase in payments under the Greektown Lease due to the timing of the acquisition in the second quarter of 2019).
Investing Cash Flow
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased compared to the prior year primarily due to decrease in capital expenditures of $53.6 million in the current year and the 2019 acquisitions of the operations of Margaritaville and Greektown for $109.1 million and $289.2 million, respectively, both net of cash. As a part of the acquisitions of Margaritaville and Greektown, the Company entered into sale-leaseback transactions with VICI in the amounts of $261.1 million and $700.0 million, respectively, which had no net impact on net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019. In addition, during the year ended December 31, 2019, we paid $10.0 million for online and retail sports betting licenses in Pennsylvania. The decrease in capital expenditures in the current year primarily reflects our efforts to reduce or defer our planned Category 4 project capital expenditures as we mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. These decreases were partially offset by our $135.0 million investment in Barstool Sports made during the first quarter of 2020.
Capital Expenditures
Capital expenditures are accounted for as either project capital (new facilities or expansions) or maintenance (replacement) capital expenditures. Cash provided by operating activities as well as cash available under our Revolving Credit Facility funded our capital expenditures for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we had capital expenditures of $137.0 million primarily related to our maintenance projects and our Category 4 development projects. For the year ending December 31, 2021, our expected capital expenditures are $296.8 million of which $98.9 million relates our Category 4 projects and $197.9 million relates to our maintenance projects. Our Category 4 projects are Hollywood Casino York and Hollywood Casino Morgantown. Hollywood Casino York, which is located in the York Galleria Mall in York County, will represent an overall capital investment of approximately $120.0 million inclusive of the gaming license. Hollywood Casino Morgantown is being built on a previously vacant 36-acre site in Berks County with a capital investment of approximately $111.0 million inclusive of the gaming license. We anticipate that both of these projects will be completed by the end of 2021.
Financing Cash Flow
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1,310.1 million compared to net cash used in financing activities of $122.4 million in the prior year. The change is driven primarily by the separate public offerings of Penn Common Stock on May 14, 2020 and September 24, 2020, in which we received net proceeds of $331.2 million and $957.6 million, respectively. Additionally, we received $322.2 million of net proceeds from the issuance of the Convertible Notes. These proceeds were partially offset by net repayments under our Senior Secured Credit Facilities of $301.7 million. In the current year we fully repaid $670.0 million of outstanding borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility and a $115.0
million prepayment of outstanding borrowings on our Term Loan B-1 Facility. In comparison, in the prior year net cash used by financing activities consisted principally of net repayments of long-term debt of $18.6 million despite the borrowing associated with the acquisition of Greektown, $51.6 million of principal payments on our financing obligations, $6.2 million of principal payments on our finance leases, and $24.9 million in payments related to the repurchase of common stock.
Debt Issuances, Redemptions and Other Long-term Obligations
On March 13, 2020, we borrowed the remaining available amount of $430.0 million under our Revolving Credit Facility. The Company elected to draw down the remaining available funds from its Revolving Credit Facility in order to maintain maximum financial flexibility in light of the COVID-19 pandemic. Through the use of our September 2020 equity raise proceeds, we fully repaid $670.0 million outstanding borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility. Additionally, on November 12, 2020 the Company prepaid $115.0 million of outstanding borrowings on its Term Loan B-1 Facility.
On April 14, 2020, the Company entered into a second amendment to its Credit Agreement with its various lenders (the “Second Amendment”) to provide for certain modifications. During the period beginning on April 14, 2020 and ending on the earlier of (x) the date that is two business days after the date on which the Company delivers a covenant relief period termination notice to the administrative agent and (y) the date on which the administrative agent receives a compliance certificate for the quarter ending March 31, 2021 (the “Covenant Relief Period”), the Company will not have to comply with any Maximum Leverage Ratio or Minimum Interest Coverage Ratio (as such terms are defined in the Credit Agreement that was amended on January 19, 2017, the "Amended 2017 Credit Agreement"). During the Covenant Relief Period, the Company will be subject to a minimum liquidity covenant that requires cash and cash equivalents and availability under its Revolving Credit Facility to be (i) at least $400.0 million through April 30, 2020; (ii) $350.0 million during the period from May 1, 2020 through May 31, 2020; (iii) $300.0 million during the period from June 1, 2020 through June 30, 2020; and (iv) $225.0 million during the period from July 1, 2020 through March 31, 2021.
The Second Amendment also amended the financial covenants that are applicable after the Covenant Relief Period to permit the Company to (i) maintain a maximum consolidated total net leverage ratio of up to a ratio that varies by quarter, ranging between 5.50:1.00 and 4.50:1.00 in 2021 and 4.25:1.00 thereafter, tested quarterly on a pro forma trailing twelve month (“PF TTM”) basis; (ii) maintain a maximum senior secured net leverage ratio of up to a ratio that varies by quarter, ranging between 4.50:1.00 and 3.50:1.00 in 2021 and 3.00:1.00 thereafter, tested quarterly on a PF TTM basis; and (iii) maintain an interest coverage ratio of 2.50:1.00, tested quarterly on a PF TTM basis.
In addition, the Second Amendment (i) provides that, during the Covenant Relief Period, loans under the Revolving Credit Facility and the Term Loan A Facility shall bear interest at either a base rate or an adjusted LIBOR rate, in each case, plus an applicable margin, in the case of base rate loans, of 2.00%, and in the case of adjusted LIBOR rate loans, of 3.00%; (ii) provides that, during the Covenant Relief Period, the Company shall pay a commitment fee on the unused portion of the commitments under the Revolving Credit Facility at a rate of 0.50% per annum; (iii) provides for a 0.75% LIBOR floor applicable to all LIBOR loans under the Senior Secured Credit Facilities; (iv) carves out COVID-19 related effects from certain terms of the Senior Secured Credit Facilities during the Covenant Relief Period; and (v) makes certain other changes to the covenants and other provisions of the Credit Agreement.
In May 2020, the Company completed a public offering of $330.5 million aggregate principal amount of 2.75% unsecured convertible notes that mature, unless earlier converted, redeemed or repurchased, on May 15, 2026 (the “Convertible Notes”) at a price of par. After lender fees and discounts, net proceeds received by the Company were $322.2 million. Interest on the Convertible Notes is payable on May 15th and November 15th of each year, beginning on November 15, 2020.
The Convertible Notes are convertible into shares of the Company’s common stock at an initial conversion price of $23.40 per share, or 42.7350 shares, per $1,000 principal amount of notes, subject to adjustment if certain corporate events occur. However, in no event will the conversion exceed 55.5555 shares of common stock per $1,000 principal amount of notes. As of December 31, 2020, the maximum number of shares that could be issued to satisfy the conversion feature of the Convertible Notes is 18,360,815 and the amount by which the Convertible Notes if-converted value exceeded its principal amount was $1,255.3 million.
Prior to February 15, 2026, at their election, holders of the Convertible Notes may convert outstanding notes starting in the fourth quarter of 2020 if the trading price of the Company’s common stock exceeds 130% of the conversion price or, starting shortly after the issuance of the Convertible Notes, if the trading price per $1,000 principal amount of notes is less than 98% of the product of the trading price of the Company’s common stock and the conversion rate then in effect. The Convertible Notes may, at the Company’s election, be settled in cash, shares of common stock of the Company, or a combination thereof. The Company has the option to redeem the Convertible Notes, in whole or in part, beginning November 20, 2023.
In addition, the Convertible Notes convert into shares of the Company’s common stock upon the occurrence of certain corporate events that constitute a fundamental change under the indenture governing the Convertible Notes at a purchase price equal to 100% of the principal amount thereof, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the date of repurchase. In connection with certain corporate events or if the Company issues a notice of redemption, it will, under certain circumstances, increase the conversion rate for holders who elect to convert their Convertible Notes in connection with such corporate events or during the relevant redemption period for such Convertible Notes.
At December 31, 2020, we had $2,431.6 million in aggregate principal amount of indebtedness, including $1,628.1 million outstanding under our Senior Secured Credit Facilities, $330.5 million outstanding under our Convertible Notes, $400.0 million outstanding under our 5.625% senior unsecured notes, and $73.0 million outstanding in other long-term obligations. No amounts were drawn on our Revolving Credit Facility. We have no debt maturing prior to 2023. As of December 31, 2020 we had conditional obligations under letters of credit issued pursuant to the Senior Secured Credit Facilities with face amounts aggregating to $28.2 million resulting in $671.8 million available borrowing capacity under our Revolving Credit Facility.
Covenants
Our Senior Secured Credit Facilities and 5.625% Notes require us, among other obligations, to maintain specified financial ratios and to satisfy certain financial tests, including the Maximum Consolidated Total Net Leverage Ratio, Maximum Consolidated Senior Secured Net Leverage Ratio and Minimum Interest Coverage Ratio (as such terms are defined in our Amended 2017 Credit Agreement) as well as the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio (as defined in the indenture governing our 5.625% Notes). In addition, our Senior Secured Credit Facilities and 5.625% Notes restrict, among other things, our ability to incur additional indebtedness, incur guarantee obligations, amend debt instruments, pay dividends, create liens on assets, make investments, engage in mergers or consolidations, and otherwise restrict corporate activities. As of December 31, 2020, the Company was in compliance with all required financial covenants. When our covenant relief period ends, the Company is subject to and expects to be in compliance with all required financial covenants including (i) Maximum Consolidated Total Net Leverage Ratio; (ii) Maximum Consolidated Senior Secured Net Leverage Ratio; and (iii) Minimum Interest Coverage Ratio (as discussed above) with the Company's submission of its compliance certificate for the quarter ending March 31, 2021.
See Note 11, “Long-term Debt,” in the notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information of the Company's debt and other long-term obligations.
Common Stock Offering
On May 14, 2020, the Company completed a public offering of 16,666,667 shares of Penn Common Stock and on May 19, 2020, the underwriters exercised their right to purchase an additional 2,500,000 shares of Penn Common Stock, resulting in an aggregate public offering of 19,166,667 shares of Penn Common Stock. All of the shares were issued at a public offering price of $18.00 per share, resulting in gross proceeds of $345.0 million, and net proceeds of $331.2 million after underwriter fees and discounts of $13.8 million.
On September 24, 2020, the Company completed a public offering of 14,000,000 shares of Penn Common Stock and on September 25, 2020, the underwriters exercised their right to purchase an additional 2,100,000 shares of Penn Common Stock, resulting in an aggregate public offering of 16,100,000 shares of Penn Common Stock. All of the shares were issued at a public offering price of $61.00 per share, resulting in gross proceeds of $982.1 million, and net proceeds of $957.6 million after underwriter fees and discounts of $24.5 million.
Triple Net Leases
The majority of the real estate assets used in the Company’s operations are subject to triple net master leases; the most significant of which are the Penn Master Lease and the Pinnacle Master Lease. Subsequent to the adoption of ASC 842, the Company’s Master Leases are accounted for as either operating leases, finance leases, or determined to continue to be financing obligations. Prior to the adoption of ASC 842, all components contained within the Master Leases were accounted for as financing obligations. In addition, five of the gaming facilities used in our operations are subject to individual triple net leases. As previously mentioned, we refer to the Penn Master Lease, the Pinnacle Master Lease, the Meadows Lease, the Margaritaville Lease, the Greektown Lease, the Tropicana Lease and the Morgantown Lease, collectively, as our Triple Net Leases.
Under our Triple Net Leases, in addition to lease payments for the real estate assets, we are required to pay the following, among other things: (1) all facility maintenance; (2) all insurance required in connection with the leased properties and the business conducted on the leased properties; (3) taxes levied on or with respect to the leased properties (other than taxes on the income of the lessor); (4) all tenant capital improvements; and (5) all utilities and other services necessary or appropriate for the
leased properties and the business conducted on the leased properties. As of December 31, 2020, we are required to make annual minimum rent payments of $814.6 million. Additionally, our Triple Net Leases are subject to annual escalators and periodic percentage rent resets, as applicable. See Note 12, “Leases,” in the notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion and disclosure related to the Company's leases.
Payments to our REIT Landlords under Triple Net Leases
Total payments made to our REIT Landlords, GLPI and VICI, inclusive of rent credits utilized, were as follows:
(1)During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 we utilized rent credits to pay $190.7 million, $135.5 million, $11.0 million and $0.3 million of rent under the Penn Master Lease, Pinnacle Master Lease, Meadows Lease and Morgantown Lease, respectively.
(2)Cash rent payable under the Tropicana Lease is nominal. Therefore, it has been excluded from the table above.
Share Repurchase Programs
In January 2019, the Company announced a share repurchase program pursuant to which the Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to $200.0 million of the Company’s common stock, which expired on December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company repurchased 1,271,823 shares of its common stock in open market transactions for $24.9 million at an average price of $19.55 per share. All of the repurchased shares were retired. There were no repurchases of the Company’s common stock for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Contractual Cash Obligations
The following table presents our other contractual cash obligations as of December 31, 2020:
(1)Excludes the liability for unrecognized tax benefits of $38.2 million, as we cannot reasonably estimate the period of cash settlement with the respective taxing authorities. Additionally, it does not include an estimate of the payments associated with our contingent purchase price obligations of $7.3 million as it is not a fixed obligation.
Outlook
Based on our current level of operations, we believe that cash generated from operations and cash on hand, together with amounts available under our Senior Secured Credit Facilities, will be adequate to meet our anticipated obligations under our Triple Net Leases, debt service requirements, capital expenditures and working capital needs for the foreseeable future. However, our ability to generate sufficient cash flow from operations will depend on a range of economic, competitive and business factors, many of which are outside our control, including the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. We cannot be certain: (i) of the impact of the operating restrictions to accommodate social distancing and health and safety guidelines on our properties; (ii) of the magnitude and duration of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic (including reoccurrences) on general economic conditions, capital markets, unemployment and our liquidity, operations, supply chain and personnel, including the potential that some or all of our properties may be forced to close or cease operations for a certain period of time; (iii) that the U.S. economy and our business will recover to levels that existed prior to the COVID-19 pandemic and on what time frame; (iv) that our anticipated earnings projections will be realized; (v) that we will achieve the expected synergies from our
acquisitions; (vi) that future borrowings will be available under our Senior Secured Credit Facilities or otherwise will be available in the credit markets to enable us to service our indebtedness or to make anticipated capital expenditures. We caution you that the trends seen at our reopened properties (e.g., higher spend per trip) may not continue. In addition, while we anticipated that a significant amount of our future growth would come through the pursuit of opportunities within other distribution channels, such as retail and online sports betting, social gaming, retail gaming, and iGaming; from acquisitions of gaming properties at reasonable valuations; greenfield projects; and jurisdictional expansions and property expansion in under-penetrated markets; there can be no assurance that this will be the case given the uncertainty arising from the COVID-19 pandemic. If we consummate significant acquisitions in the future or undertake any significant property expansions, our cash requirements may increase significantly and we may need to make additional borrowings or complete equity or debt financings to meet these requirements. See “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Indebtedness and Capital Structure” within “Item 1A. Risk Factors,” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of the risks related to our capital structure.
We have historically maintained a capital structure comprised of a mix of equity and debt financing. We vary our leverage to pursue opportunities in the marketplace in an effort to maximize our enterprise value for our shareholders. We expect to meet our debt obligations as they come due through internally-generated funds from operations and/or refinancing them through the debt or equity markets prior to their maturity.
RECENTLY ISSUED ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
For information on new accounting pronouncements and the impact of these pronouncements on our Consolidated Financial Statements, see Note 3, “New Accounting Pronouncements,” in the notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
The preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements in accordance with GAAP requires us to make estimates and judgments that are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. The nature of the estimates and assumptions are material due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment necessary to account for highly uncertain factors or the susceptibility of such factors to change. The development and selection of critical accounting estimates, and the related disclosures, have been reviewed with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors. We believe the current assumptions and other considerations used to estimate amounts reflected in our Consolidated Financial Statements are appropriate. However, if actual experience differs from the assumptions and other considerations used in estimating amounts reflected in our Consolidated Financial Statements, the resulting changes could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
Goodwill and other intangible assets
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had $1,157.1 million in goodwill and $1,513.5 million in other intangible assets within its Consolidated Balance Sheet, representing 7.9% and 10.3% of total assets, respectively. The Company’s goodwill and other intangible assets are primarily the result of acquisitions of businesses and payments for gaming licenses. These intangible assets require significant management estimates and judgment pertaining to: (i) the valuation in connection with initial purchase price allocations and (ii) the ongoing evaluation for impairment. During the fourth quarter we performed our annual impairment analysis and the fair value of goodwill for all reporting units exceeded the carrying value by a substantial margin. Therefore, none of our reporting units incurred any goodwill impairment charges as a result of the annual assessment.
In connection with the Company’s acquisitions, valuations are completed to determine the allocation of the purchase price. The factors considered in the valuations include data gathered as a result of the Company’s due diligence in connection with the acquisitions, projections for future operations, and data obtained from third-party valuation specialists, as deemed appropriate. Goodwill represents the future economic benefits of a business combination measured as the excess purchase price over the fair market value of net assets acquired. Goodwill is tested annually, or more frequently if indicators of impairment exist.
For the quantitative goodwill impairment test, an income approach, in which a discounted cash flow (“DCF”) model is utilized, and a market-based approach using guideline public company multiples of earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization from the Company’s peer group are utilized in order to estimate the fair market value of the Company’s reporting units. In determining the carrying amount of each reporting unit that utilizes real estate assets subject to the Triple Net Leases, if and as applicable, (i) the Company allocates each reporting unit their pro-rata portion of the right-of-use (“ROU”) assets, lease liabilities, and/or financing obligations, and (ii) pushes down the carrying amount of the property and equipment subject to such leases. In general, as it pertains to the Master Leases, such amounts are allocated based on the reporting unit’s projected Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of the aggregate estimated Adjusted EBITDA of all reporting units subject to either of the Master Leases, as applicable. The Company compares the fair value of its reporting units to the carrying amounts. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds the fair value, an impairment is recorded equal to the amount of the excess (not to exceed the amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit).
We consider our gaming licenses, trademarks, and certain other intangible assets as indefinite-lived intangible assets that do not require amortization based on our future expectations to operate our gaming properties indefinitely as well as our historical experience in renewing these intangible assets at minimal cost with various state commissions. Rather, these intangible assets are tested annually for impairment, or more frequently if indicators of impairment exist, by comparing the fair value of the recorded assets to their carrying amount. If the carrying amounts of the indefinite-lived intangible assets exceed their fair value, an impairment loss is recognized. We complete the testing of our indefinite-lived intangible assets prior to assessing our goodwill for impairment. Our annual goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets impairment test is performed on October 1st of each year.
We assess the fair value of our gaming licenses using the Greenfield Method under the income approach, which estimates the fair value of the gaming license using a DCF model assuming we built a new casino with similar utility to that of the existing casino. The method assumes a theoretical start-up company going into business without any assets other than the intangible asset being valued. As such, the value of the gaming license is a function of the following assumptions:
•Projected revenues and operating cash flows (including an allocation of the projected payments under any applicable Triple Net Lease);
•Estimated construction costs and duration;
•Pre-opening costs; and
•Discounting that reflects the level of risk associated with receiving future cash flows attributable to the license.
We assess the fair value of our trademarks using the relief-from-royalty method under the income approach. The principle behind this method is that the value of the trademark is equal to the present value of the after-tax royalty savings attributable to the owned trademark. As such, the value of the trademark is a function of the following assumptions:
•Projected revenues;
•Selection of an appropriate royalty rate to apply to projected revenues; and
•Discounting that reflects the level of risk associated with the after-tax revenue stream associated with the trademark.
The evaluation of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets requires the use of estimates about future operating results of each reporting unit to determine the estimated fair value of the reporting unit and the indefinite-lived intangible assets. The Company must make various assumptions and estimates in performing its impairment testing. The implied fair value includes estimates of future cash flows (including an allocation of the projected payments under any applicable Triple Net Lease) that are based on reasonable and supportable assumptions which represent the Company’s best estimates of the cash flows expected to result from the use of the assets including their eventual disposition. Changes in estimates, increases in the Company’s cost of capital, reductions in transaction multiples, changes in operating and capital expenditure assumptions or application of alternative assumptions and definitions could produce significantly different results. Future cash flow estimates are, by their nature, subjective and actual results may differ materially from the Company’s estimates. If our ongoing estimates of future cash flows are not met, we may have to record additional impairment charges in future periods. Our estimates of cash flows are based on the current regulatory and economic climates (including as a result of COVID-19), recent operating information and budgets of the various properties where it conducts operations. These estimates could be negatively impacted by changes in federal, state or local regulations, economic downturns, or other events affecting our properties.
Forecasted cash flows (based on our annual operating plan as determined in the fourth quarter) can be significantly impacted by the local economy in which our reporting units operate, as illustrated by the COVID-19 pandemic which caused temporary suspension of our operations pursuant to various orders from state gaming regulatory bodies or governmental authorities. Increases in unemployment rates can also result in decreased customer visitations and/or lower customer spend per visit. In addition, the impact of new legislation which approves gaming in nearby jurisdictions or further expands gaming in jurisdictions where our reporting units currently operate can result in opportunities for us to expand our operations. However, it also has the impact of increasing competition for our established properties which generally will have a negative effect on those locations’ profitability once competitors become established as a certain level of cannibalization occurs absent an overall increase in customer visitations. Additionally, increases in gaming taxes approved by state regulatory bodies can negatively impact forecasted cash flows.
Assumptions and estimates about future cash flow levels and multiples by individual reporting units are complex and subjective. They are sensitive to changes in underlying assumptions and can be affected by a variety of factors, including external factors, such as industry, geopolitical and economic trends, and internal factors, such as changes in the Company’s business strategy, which may re-allocate capital and resources to different or new opportunities which management believes will enhance its overall value but may be to the detriment of an individual reporting unit.
Once an impairment of goodwill or other intangible asset has been recorded, it cannot be reversed. Since the Company’s goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets are not amortized, there may be volatility in reported net income or loss because impairment losses, if any, are likely to occur irregularly and in varying amounts. Intangible assets that have a definite life are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives or related service contract. The Company reviews the carrying amount of its amortizing intangible assets for possible impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that their carrying amount may not be recoverable. If the carrying amount of the amortizing intangible assets exceed their fair value, an impairment loss is recognized.
Revenue and earnings streams within our industry can vary significantly based on various circumstances, which in many cases are outside of the Company’s control, and as such are difficult to predict and quantify. We have disclosed several of these circumstances in “Item 1A. Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Circumstances include, for instance, temporary property closures as a result of COVID-19, changes in legislation that approves gaming in nearby jurisdictions, further expansion of gaming in jurisdictions where we currently operate, new state legislation that requires the implementation of smoking restrictions at our casinos or any other events outside of our control that make the customer experience less desirable.
During the first quarter of 2020, we identified an indicator of impairment as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and recognized impairments on our goodwill, gaming licenses and trademarks, of $113.0 million, $437.0 million and $61.5 million, respectively. Upon reopening of our gaming facilities and throughout the fourth quarter of 2020 we undertook various initiatives to mitigate the impact of regulatory restrictions imposed as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. We completed our annual assessment for impairment as of October 1, 2020, which did not result in any impairment charges to goodwill, gaming licenses and trademarks. See Note 9, “Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets,” in the notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Income taxes
Under ASC Topic 740, “Income Taxes” (“ASC 740”), deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the differences between the financial statement carrying amounts and the tax bases of existing assets and liabilities and are measured at the prevailing enacted tax rates that will be in effect when these differences are settled or realized. ASC 740 also requires that deferred tax assets be reduced by a valuation allowance if it is more-likely-than-not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The realizability of the net deferred tax assets is evaluated each reporting period by assessing the valuation allowance and by adjusting the amount of the allowance, if necessary. Pursuant to ASC 740, in evaluating the more-likely-than-not standard, we consider all available positive and negative evidence including projected future taxable income and available tax planning strategies that could be implemented to realize the net deferred tax assets. In the event the Company determines that the deferred income tax assets would be realized in the future in excess of their net recorded amount, an adjustment to the valuation allowance would be recorded, which would reduce the provision for income taxes.
ASC 740 suggests that additional scrutiny should be given to deferred tax assets of an entity with cumulative pre-tax losses during the three most recent years and is widely considered significant negative evidence that is objective and verifiable and therefore, difficult to overcome. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we have cumulative pre-tax losses and considered this factor in our analysis of deferred taxes. Additionally, we expect to remain in a three year cumulative loss position in the near future. As a result, the Company has recorded a valuation allowance against its net deferred tax assets, excluding assets that can be realized based on our ability to carry back losses to recoup taxes previously paid and excluding the reversal of deferred tax liabilities related to indefinite-lived intangibles. We intend to continue to maintain a valuation allowance on our net deferred tax assets until there is sufficient positive evidence to support the reversal of all or some portion of these allowances.