Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
We conduct our business through PetIQ, LLC and its subsidiaries. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our financial statements and related notes and other financial information appearing elsewhere in this report. This section of the Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons of 2020 to 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons of 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 on our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.This discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, and beliefs and involve numerous risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Business Overview
PetIQ is a leading pet medication and wellness company delivering a smarter way for pet parents to help their pets live their best lives through convenient access to affordable veterinary products and services. We engage with customers through more than 60,000 points of distribution across retail channels with our branded distributed medications, which is further supported by our own world-class medication manufacturing facility in Omaha, Nebraska. Our national service platform, VIP, operates in over 2,900 retail partner locations in 41 states, providing cost effective and convenient veterinary wellness services. PetIQ believes that pets are an important part of the family and deserve the best products and care we can give them.
We have two reporting segments: (i) Products; and (ii) Services. The Products segment consists of our manufacturing and distribution business. The Services segments consists of veterinary services, and related product sales, provided by the Company directly to consumers.
We are the sole managing member of Holdco, which is the sole member of Opco and, through Holdco, operate and control all of the business and affairs of Opco.
Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Considerations
The global COVID-19 pandemic has created significant volatility, disruption and uncertainty. It has resulted in government restrictions, such as “stay-at-home” or “shelter-in-place” directives, quarantines, travel advisories and the implementation of social distancing measures, leading to the closure of businesses and causing weakened economic conditions and an economic slowdown and recession. There is significant uncertainty regarding the extent to which and how long COVID-19 and its related effects will impact the U.S. economy and related demand for our products and services. The extent to which COVID-19 will impact our business and operating results during 2021 will depend on future developments, including the duration and continued spread of COVID-19, the availability and effectiveness of vaccines, and the impact on our customers and employees, as well as the U.S. economy, all of which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted.
We made the strategic and difficult decision to temporarily close all of our veterinarian service clinics effective March 20, 2020 to protect the health and safety of our employees, customers and retail partners. We began to reopen veterinary service locations in May 2020 with 95% wellness centers and mobile clinics reopened by September 30, 2020. This effort required developing a number of protocols, including curbside service, development of a virtual line management process, procurement of personal protective equipment, training of team members, and more to facilitate our ability to re-open. Pursuant to various State and local executive orders and Public Health Departments, as well as the Department of Homeland Security and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines, it has determined that veterinary services are an essential business, and as such the Company does not expect an additional large scale disruption to its Services segment.
The amount of the decrease in business that we will ultimately experience remains uncertain. This is largely due to: (i) existing concerns that many non-essential businesses and employees face permanent closure or heavy reliance on newly-established federal government programs, such as the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act of 2020 (CARES Act), in order to remain in operation and the ultimate success of these programs remains unknown; (ii) uncertainty of consumer/pet owner response and more specifically, the timing of engaged demand as the public is reintroduced to our retail environments as government restrictions are lifted or reduced; and (iii) absenteeism as it relates to employee symptoms, illness, and or exposure to COVID-19.
Our Products segment has remained in operation at our main three facilities in Springville, Utah, Omaha, Nebraska, and Daytona Beach, Florida, as well as our contract manufacturing partner in Plano, Texas. We have implemented a variety of policies and procedures to ensure the health and safety of our workforce, including staggering break times, adding additional shifts to enhance social distancing, enhancing sanitation procedures, providing personal protective equipment to employees, and requiring social distancing. We also provided a $2 an hour temporary wage increase for our production employees during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020.
Our corporate and administrative personnel have been fully functional since we closed various administrative offices to employees and the general public, and implemented enhanced social distancing and work-from-home policies. A number of employees returned to these offices since we began re-opening, however a number of employees remain working remotely. We expect to continually review and adjust to local health conditions for the various jurisdictions in which we operate.
We are taking precautions to protect the safety and well-being of our employees while providing uninterrupted deliveries of products to our retailer partners. However, no assurance can be given that these actions will be sufficient, nor can we predict the level of disruption that will occur should the COVID-19 pandemic and its related macro-economic risks continue for an extended period of time. Additional information regarding risks and uncertainties to our business and results of operations related to the COVID-19 pandemic are set forth in Part I, Item 1A of this report.
Results of Operations
Components of our Results of Operations
Net Sales
Our Product Segment net sales consist of our total product sales net of product returns, allowances (discounts), trade promotions and incentives. We offer a variety of trade promotions and incentives to our customers, such as cooperative advertising programs and in-store displays. We recognize revenue when control transfers to our customers, in accordance with the terms of our contracts, which generally occurs upon shipment of product. Most contracts contain variable consideration, which is estimated at the time of sale and updated at each period end. Trade promotions are used to increase our aggregate net sales. Our net sales are periodically influenced by the timing, extent and amount of such trade promotions and incentives.
Key factors that may affect our future Product sales growth include: new product introductions; expansion into other customer bases; expansion of items sold to existing customers, addition of new retail customers and to maintain pricing levels necessary for profitability; aggressive pricing by our competitors; and whether we can maintain and develop positive relationships with key retail customers. In addition, our products are primarily consumables and, as such, they experience a replenishment cycle.
Our Service Segment revenue consists of providing veterinary services to consumers and selling products to the consumer in conjunction with those services. The customer generally renders payment at the time the service is rendered.
While many of our products are sold consistently throughout the year, we experience seasonality in the form of increased demand for our flea and tick product offerings in the first half of the year, both leading up to and throughout the spring and summer seasons. Additionally our veterinary services experience seasonality as consumers typically seek more services in the warmer months.
Gross Profit
Gross profit is our net product sales plus service revenue less cost of product sales and services. Our cost of product sales consists primarily of costs of raw goods, finished goods, packaging materials, manufacturing, shipping and handling costs and costs associated with our warehouses and distribution network. Cost of services are comprised of all service and product costs related to providing veterinary services, including but not limited to, salaries or contract costs of veterinarians, technicians and other clinic based personnel, transportation and delivery costs, facilities rent, occupancy costs, supply costs, depreciation and amortization of clinic assets, certain marketing and promotional expenses and costs of goods sold.
Gross margin measures our gross profit as a percentage of net sales. With respect to our proprietary products, we have a manufacturing network that includes leased and owned manufacturing facilities where we manufacture finished goods, as well as third-party contract manufacturing facilities from which we purchase finished products predominately on a dollar-per-unit basis. The gross margin on our proprietary value-branded products is higher than on our distributed products. For distributed products, our costs are driven by the extent of value-added products and services we render with the distributed product. Gross profit in the services segment is driven by the number of pets that seek services in the individual clinics and wellness centers due to the relatively fixed cost nature of providing the clinic or wellness center.
General and Administrative Expenses
Our general and administrative expenses primarily consist of employee compensation and benefits expenses, sales and merchandizing expenses, advertising and marketing expenses, rent and lease expenses, IT and utilities expenses, professional fees, insurance costs, R&D costs, host fees, banking charges, and consulting fees. General and administrative expenses as a percentage of net sales have increased to 17.7% in 2020 from 14.5% in 2019. The increase in general and administrative expenses in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily driven by integration costs related to centralization efforts, costs related to the addition of overhead to support the Omaha facilities, incremental amortization expense on the newly acquired intangible assets and general growth in corporate services to correspond with the growth in the Company, partially offset by a decrease in acquisition costs.
Our advertising and marketing expenses primarily consist of digital marketing (e.g. social, display and search, etc.), addressable TV, e-mail, in-store merchandising and trade shows in an effort to build awareness and drive demand for our products and services. These expenses may vary from quarter to quarter but typically they are higher in the second and third quarters. Our Product Segment focuses on promoting PetArmor direct-to-consumer, supported by trade promotions and merchandising. Our Services Segment focuses on promoting our veterinary services direct-to-consumer, geo-targeted around our retail locations, supported by in-store signage. We expect our marketing expenses to increase commensurate with increases in revenue and market share for both segments.
As noted above, we experience seasonality in the form of increased demand for our flea and tick product offerings in the first half of the year, both leading up to and throughout the spring and summer seasons and, as a result, the sales and merchandizing expenses component of our general and administrative expenses generally increases during this period due to promotional spending relating to our flea and tick product lines.
Contingent Note revaluations
A portion of the purchase price for the acquisition of Community Veterinary Clinics, LLC, d/b/a (“VIP” and such acquisition the “VIP Acquisition”), was structured in the form of Contingent Notes (the “Contingent Notes”) that vested based on the combined Company EBITDA targets for the years ending December 31, 2019 and 2018. The Contingent Notes were earned based on consolidated company EBITDA as discussed in the accompanying financial statements, and were revalued each period through earnings. The combined Company EBITDA targets were met for each year end, and as such the Contingent Notes became fixed as of December 31, 2019 and 2018. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recognized no additional expense due to the revaluation of the Contingent Notes, but recognized $7.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net (Loss) Income
Our net (loss) income for future periods will be affected by the various factors described above. In addition, our historical results are impacted by Opco’s status as a pass-through entity for U.S. federal income tax purposes and our ownership percentage of Holdco. During the current year, we recorded a valuation allowance which effectively removed our deferred tax assets based on the likelihood of realization. Improved profitability could reverse that allowance, resulting in significant swings in Net (loss) income. We anticipate future results will not be consistent as our net income will be subject to U.S. federal and state income taxes. Our tax expense is impacted by our structure and, as a result, we expect our tax expense to fluctuate on a quarterly basis depending on the number of Exchanges that occur during each period.
Non-Controlling Interest
We consolidate the financial position and results of operations of HoldCo. Our Continuing LLC Owners hold their equity investment in us primarily through LLC Interests in the Company’s subsidiary, HoldCo, and an equal number of shares of the Company’s Class B common stock. Our Class B Stock has voting, but no economic rights. Each LLC Interest, together with a share of Class B Stock held by the Continuing LLC, is exchangeable for a share of the Company’s Class A common stock (or at the option of the Company, the cash equivalent thereof). The Company is the managing member of HoldCo and owns a majority of the LLC Interests, and consolidates HoldCo in the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements. The interest of the Continuing LLC Owners in HoldCo is reflected in our Consolidated Financial Statements as a non-controlling interest.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations in dollars and as a percentage of net sales for the periods presented:
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared With Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net sales
Consolidated Net Sales
Consolidated net sales increased approximately $70.7 million, or 10%, to $780.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $709.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was driven by the expansion of manufactured items as a result of the Perrigo Animal Health Acquisition, other growth in the Products segment related to
distributed products led by the online channel, offset by declining sales in the Services segment due to COVID-19 related closures.
Products Segment
Product sales increased approximately $108.6 million, or 18%, to $725.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $617.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was driven by accelerated growth in manufactured products led by those produced in our Omaha facility and by velocity growth within current customers of distributed products, specifically the online channel.
Services Segment
Service revenue decreased approximately $38.0 million, or 41%, from $92.3 million to $54.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Same-store sales decreased approximately $38.8 million, or 46%, to $45.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $84.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in same-store sales was driven by COVID-19 related closures. Non same-store sales increased approximately $0.9 million, or 11%, to $9.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $8.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in non same-store sales was a result of opening 80 additional wellness centers in 2019 an additional 27 wellness centers in 2020, as well as the maturation of clinics opened in the past six trailing quarters, offset by wellness centers moving into the same store sales base and COVID-19 related closures. Services revenue has rebounded to nearly the same levels prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company is continuing to experience unplanned clinic closures due to absenteeism, which are expected to continue until the overall health situation improves.
Gross profit
Gross profit increased by approximately $27.8 million, or 26%, to $135.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $107.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase is due to the significant Product sales growth, and particularly in products manufactured in our Omaha, Nebraska facility as well as the Capstar assets acquired during 2020, which carry a higher margin than our distributed product sales, offset by a negative gross profit in services due to COVID-19 related closures.
General and administrative expenses
Consolidated general and administrative expenses (“G&A”) increased approximately $35.2 million, or 34%, to $138.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $103.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. As a percentage of net sales, G&A increased from approximately 15% in 2019 to 18% in 2020, driven by integration costs related to centralization efforts, costs related to the addition of overhead to support the Omaha facilities, incremental amortization expense on the newly acquired intangible assets and general growth in corporate services to correspond with the growth in the Company, partially offset by a decrease in acquisition costs.
Products Segment
Products segment G&A increased approximately $3.2 million or 11.7% to $30.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $27.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was driven by acquisitions, resulting in approximately $6.4 million in G&A costs related to the acquired Perrigo Animal Health business in the first six months of the year, primarily selling and distribution expenses. This was offset by a reduction in other costs, such as the centralization of certain functions like Company wide marketing to the corporate segment.
Services Segment
Services segment G&A increased approximately $0.8 million, or 5%, to $16.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $16.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily driven by higher
compensation and benefits costs as the Services segment continues to build the team, offset by declining variable selling costs, such as host fees and credit card service charges.
Unallocated Corporate
Unallocated corporate G&A increased $41.4 million, or 83.3%, to $91.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $49.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
◾ Increased corporate marketing efforts for approximately $6.7 million;
◾ Additional corporate compensation (both stock compensation and wages/bonus) of approximately $9.9 million, partially related to the severance accruals as part of integration activities;
◾ Increased professional fees and licensing costs, primarily related to the increased size of the Company, and fees for professional services provided to the Company in conjunction with new Sarbanes Oxley requirements as a result of losing Emerging Growth Company status during 2020.;
◾ Higher amortization on the inclusion of the Perrigo Animal Health Acquisition for the full year as well as new 2020 intangible asset acquisitions;
◾ A contract termination cost due to an alleged breach of contract related to the transition from the Perrigo Animal Health Acquisition of $7.8 million, and
◾ Other variable costs related to Company growth, such as insurance and information technology.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense, net, increased $11.8 million, to $26.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $14.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was driven by additional debt incurred to fund the Perrigo Animal Health Acquisition during 2019 being outstanding for the full year as well as the Convertible Notes entered into during May 2020 that were used to finance the Capstar Acquisition.
Pre-tax net loss
As a result of the factors above, pre-tax net loss increased $11.2 million to a pre-tax net loss of $28.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a pre-tax net loss of $17.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Tax (expense) benefit
As a result of continued exchanges by Continuing LLC Owners of LLC Interests and Class B common shares, offset by the use of LLC Interests as consideration in business combinations during 2018, the Company now owns approximately 89.4% of Holdco with the LLC Interests not held by the Company considered non-controlling interest. Holdco is treated as a partnership for income tax reporting. Holdco’s members, including the Company, are liable for federal, state, and local income taxes based on their share of Holdco’s taxable income.
Income tax (expense) benefit totaled (181.3%) and 18.8% of pretax earnings for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our tax rate is affected primarily by the recognition of a valuation allowance during the year ended December 31, 2020 and the portion of income and expense allocated to the noncontrolling interest. It is also affected by discrete items that may occur in any given year such as stock based compensation, but are not consistent from year to year. Our effective income tax rate prior to the IPO differed from statutory rates primarily due to our pass-through entity structure for U.S. income tax purposes.
Segment Adjusted EBITDA
Products Segment
Products segment Adjusted EBITDA increased approximately $43.7 million, or 59.4%, to $117.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $73.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Products segment Adjusted EBITDA fluctuates based on the quantity and mix of products sold, specifically whether the products are manufactured by
PetIQ or are distributed for other manufacturers. The significant growth in Products segment Adjusted EBITDA relates to significant sales growth of manufactured products, primarily produced at the Omaha facility with a minor contribution from the Capstar branded products in third and fourth quarters.
Services Segment
Services segment Adjusted EBITDA decreased approximately $16.7 million, or 83.1%, to $3.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $20.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Services segment Adjusted EBITDA can fluctuate considerably based on the volume of pets seen in clinics, due to the relatively fixed cost nature of a clinic. Additionally, Services segment earnings are impacted by the Company’s growth strategy of opening new wellness centers and the impact of the Company’s same store portfolio, discussed further below under “Consolidated Non-GAAP Financial Measures”. Services segment Adjusted EBITDA was significantly impacted by the COVID-19 closures, as well as converting some community clinics to wellness centers, which transitions operations into the non-same store category.
Unallocated Corporate
Unallocated corporate expenses consist of expenses incurred by centrally-managed departments, including accounting, legal, human resources information technology and headquarters expenses, as well as executive and incentive compensation expenses and other miscellaneous costs. Unallocated corporate costs have primarily grown due to the growth in the size of the Company, including adding to administrative headcount through acquisitions, as well as headquarters growth to support the larger Company. Adjustments to unallocated corporate include expenses related to specific events, such as acquisition expenses, integration costs, and the fair value adjustment to the contingent note. Adjustments also include non-cash expenses, such as depreciation, amortization, and stock based compensation.
The following tables reconcile segment pre-tax net income to Adjusted EBITDA for the periods presented.
(1) Acquisition costs include legal, accounting, banking, consulting, diligence, and other out-of-pocket costs related to completed and contemplated acquisitions.
(2) Non same-store revenue and costs relate to our Services Segment and are from wellness centers, host partners, and regions with less than six full trailing quarters of operating results.
(3) Integration costs and costs of discontinued clinics represent costs related to integrating the acquired businesses, such as personnel costs like severance and signing bonuses, consulting work, contract termination, and IT conversion costs. These costs are primarily in the Products segment and the corporate segment for personnel costs, legal and consulting expenses, and IT costs.
(4) Clinic launch expenses relate to our Services segment and represent the nonrecurring costs to open new veterinary wellness centers, primarily employee costs, training, marketing, and rent prior to opening for business.
(5) Costs related to maintaining service segment infrastructure, staffing, and overhead related to clinics and wellness centers closed due to COVID-19 related health and safety initiatives. Product segment and unallocated corporate costs related to incremental wages paid to essential workers and sanitation costs due to COVID.
(1) Acquisition costs include legal, accounting, banking, consulting, diligence, and other out-of-pocket costs related to completed and contemplated acquisitions.
(2) Non same-store revenue and costs relate to our Services Segment and are from wellness centers, host partners, and regions with less than six full trailing quarters of operating results.
(3) Fair value adjustment on the contingent note represents the non cash adjustment to mark the 2019 Contingent Note to fair value.
(4) Integration costs and costs of discontinued clinics represent costs related to integrating the acquired businesses, such as personnel costs like severance and signing bonuses, consulting work, contract termination, and IT conversion costs. These costs are primarily in the Products segment and the corporate segment for personnel costs, legal and consulting expenses, and IT costs.
(5) Clinic launch expenses relate to our Services segment and represent the nonrecurring costs to open new veterinary wellness centers, primarily employee costs, training, marketing, and rent prior to opening for business.
(6) SKU rationalization relates to the disposal of or reserve to estimated net realizable value for inventory that will either no longer be sold, or will be de-emphasized, as the Company aligns brands between Legacy PetIQ brands and brands acquired as part of the Perrigo Animal Health Acquisition. All costs are included in the Products segment gross margin.
Consolidated Non-GAAP Financial Measures
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are non-GAAP financial measures. EBITDA represents net income before interest, income taxes and depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA represents EBITDA plus adjustments for transactions that management does not believe are representative of our core ongoing business. Adjusted EBITDA is utilized by management: (i) as a factor in evaluating management’s performance when determining incentive compensation and (ii) to evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies.
The Company presents EBITDA because it is a necessary component for computing Adjusted EBITDA. We believe that the use of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA provides an additional tool for investors to use in evaluating ongoing operating
results and trends. In addition, you should be aware when evaluating EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA that in the future we may incur expenses similar to those excluded when calculating these measures. Our presentation of these measures should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by these or other unusual or non-recurring items. Our computation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures computed by other companies, because all companies do not calculate EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA in the same manner.
Our management does not, and you should not, consider EBITDA or Adjusted EBITDA in isolation or as an alternative to financial measures determined in accordance with GAAP. The principal limitation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA is that they exclude significant expenses and income that are required by GAAP to be recorded in our financial statements. Some of these limitations are:
● EBITDA does not reflect our cash expenditures, or future requirements, for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
● EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
● EBITDA does not reflect the interest expenses, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments, on our debts;
● although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements;
● Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the impact of certain cash charges resulting from matters we consider not to be indicative of our ongoing core operations; and
● Other companies in our industry may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently than we do, limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure.
Because of these limitations, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for performance measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA only supplementally. You should review the reconciliations of net loss to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA below and not rely on any single financial measure to evaluate our business.
The following table reconciles net loss to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for the periods presented.
(1) Acquisition costs include legal, accounting, banking, consulting, diligence, and other out-of-pocket costs related to completed and contemplated acquisitions.
(2) Integration costs and costs of discontinued clinics represent costs related to integrating the acquired businesses, such as personnel costs like severance and signing bonuses, consulting work, contract termination, and IT conversion costs. These costs are primarily in the Products segment and the corporate segment for personnel costs, legal and consulting expenses, and IT costs.
(3) SKU rationalization relates to the disposal of or reserve to estimated net realizable value for inventory that will either no longer be sold, or will be de-emphasized, as the Company aligns brands between Legacy PetIQ brands and brands acquired as part of the Perrigo Animal Health Acquisition. All costs are included in the Products segment gross margin.
(4) Fair value adjustment on the contingent note represents the non cash adjustment to mark the 2019 Contingent Note to fair value.
(5) Non same-store revenue and costs relate to our Services segment and are from wellness centers, host partners, and regions with less than six full trailing quarters of operating results.
(6) Clinic launch expenses relate to our Services segment and represent the nonrecurring costs to open new veterinary wellness centers, primarily employee costs, training, marketing, and rent prior to opening for business.
(7) Costs related to maintaining service segment infrastructure, staffing, and overhead related to clinics and wellness centers closed due to COVID-19 related health and safety initiatives. Product segment and unallocated corporate costs related to incremental wages paid to essential workers and sanitation costs due to COVID.
Financial Condition, Liquidity, and Capital Resources
Historically, our primary sources of liquidity have been cash flow from operations, borrowings, and equity contributions. As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, our cash and cash equivalents were $33.5 million and $27.3 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had $15.0 million outstanding under a revolving credit facility, $217.3 million under a term loan, $143.8 million of outstanding 4.0% Convertible Senior Notes due 2026 (the “Notes”), and $16.3 million in other debt. The debt agreements bear interest at rates between 2.3% and 6.75%.
Our primary cash needs are for working capital and to support our growth plans, which may include acquisitions. Our maintenance capital expenditures have typically been less than 1.0% of net sales, but we may make additional capital expenditures as necessary to support our growth, such as the investment in additional veterinary clinics that is currently ongoing or the construction of new corporate headquarters, which is also currently underway. Our primary working capital requirements are to carry inventory and receivable levels necessary to support our increasing Product net sales. Fluctuations in working capital are primarily driven by the timing of new product launches and seasonal retailer demand. As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, we had working capital (current assets less current liabilities) of $141.2 million and $112.4 million, respectively.
We believe that our operating cash flow, cash on hand, and debt proceeds from our borrowings under our credit facility will be adequate to meet our operating, investing, and financing needs for the foreseeable future. To the extent additional funds are necessary to meet long-term liquidity needs as we continue to execute our business strategy, we anticipate that they will be obtained through the incurrence of additional indebtedness, additional equity financings or a combination of these potential sources of funds, although we can provide no assurance that these sources of funding will be available on reasonable terms. As in the past, we will continue to explore opportunities to optimize our capital structure.
Cash Flows
Cash provided by or used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $20.8 million provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019. The change in operating cash flows primarily reflects lower earnings, offset by higher non-cash items such as stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization, deferred tax adjustment, and decreases in working capital. Working capital changes are driven by increased accounts receivable resulting from our growing sales and increased inventory due to timing and composition of expected sales in 2021, offset by growth in accounts payable to purchase inventory. Net changes in assets and liabilities accounted for $23.0
million in cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $7.2 million of cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Cash used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $118.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $195.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in net cash used in investing activities is a result of the purchase of Perrigo Animal Health in the prior year, partially offset by the Acquisition of Capstar®. as well as increased purchase of property, plant, and equipment, primarily to support the launch of additional wellness centers and the construction of the new corporate headquarters.
Cash provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $128.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $135.1 million in net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019. The change in cash provided by financing activities is primarily driven by the Company’s issuance of Notes and the purchase of capped call options to finance the Capstar Acquisition, compared to financing obtained for the purchase of Perrigo Animal Health. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received $137.9 million of proceeds from the issuance the Notes, net of issuance costs and paid $14.8 million for the Capped Call.
Description of Indebtedness
Convertible Notes
On May 19, 2020, the Company issued $143.8 million in aggregate principal amount of 4.00% Convertible Senior Notes due 2026 pursuant to the indenture (the “Indenture”), dated as of May 19, 2020. The total net proceeds from the Notes offering, after deducting debt issuance costs paid or payable by us, was $137.9 million. The Notes accrue interest at a rate of 4.00% per annum, payable semi-annually in arrears on June 1 and December 1 of each year, beginning on December 1, 2020. The Notes will mature on June 1, 2026, unless earlier repurchased, redeemed or converted. Before January 15, 2026, holders will have the right to convert their Notes only upon the occurrence of certain events. From and after January 15, 2026, holders may convert their Notes at any time at their election until the close of business on the scheduled trading day immediately before the maturity date. The Company will settle conversions by paying or delivering, as applicable, cash, shares of its Class A common stock, or a combination of cash and shares of its Class A common stock, at its election. The initial conversion rate is 33.7268 shares of Class A common stock per $1,000 principal amount of Notes. The conversion rate and conversion price will be subject to customary adjustments upon the occurrence of certain events. In addition, if certain corporate events that constitute a “Make-Whole Fundamental Change” (as defined in the Indenture) occur, then the conversion rate will, in certain circumstances, be increased for a specified period of time.
The Notes are redeemable, in whole or in part, at the Company’s option at any time, and from time to time, on or after June 1, 2023 and on or before the 40th scheduled trading day immediately before the maturity date, at a cash redemption price equal to the principal amount of the Notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but excluding, the redemption date, but only if the last reported sale price per share of the Company’s Class A common stock exceeds 130% of the conversion price on (i) each of at least 20 trading days, whether or not consecutive, during the 30 consecutive trading days ending on, and including, the trading day immediately before the date the Company sends the related redemption notice; and (2) the trading day immediately before the date the Company sends such notice. In addition, calling any Notes will constitute a Make-Whole Fundamental Change with respect to such Notes, which will result in an increase to the conversion rate if such Notes are converted after they are called for redemption.
If certain corporate events that constitute a “Fundamental Change” (as defined in the Indenture) occur, then noteholders may require the Company to repurchase their Notes at a cash repurchase price equal to the principal amount of the Notes to be repurchased, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but excluding, the fundamental change repurchase date. The definition of Fundamental Change includes certain business combination transactions involving the Company and certain de-listing events with respect to the Company’s Class A common stock.
The Notes are the Company’s senior, unsecured obligations and are (i) equal in right of payment with the Company’s existing and future senior, unsecured indebtedness; (ii) senior in right of payment to the Company’s existing and future indebtedness that is expressly subordinated to the Notes; (iii) effectively subordinated to the Company’s existing and future secured indebtedness, to the extent of the value of the collateral securing that indebtedness; and (iv) structurally subordinated to all existing and future indebtedness and other liabilities, including trade payables, and (to the extent the Company is not a holder thereof) preferred equity, if any, of the Company’s subsidiaries. The Notes contain customary events of default.
In accounting for the issuance of the Notes, the Company separated the Notes into liability and equity components. The carrying amount of the liability component was calculated using a discount rate of 13%, which was determined by measuring the fair value of a similar debt instrument that does not have an associated convertible feature. The carrying amount of the equity component representing the conversion option was $53.3 million and was determined by deducting the fair value of the liability component from the par value of the Notes. The excess of the principal amount of the liability component over its carrying amount, or the debt discount, is amortized to interest expense at an annual effective interest rate over the contractual terms of the Notes.
A&R Credit Agreement
On July 8, 2019 the Company amended the existing revolving credit agreement of PetIQ, LLC and each of its domestic wholly-owned subsidiaries (the “Amended Revolving Credit Agreement”). The Amended Revolving Credit Agreement provides for a secured revolving credit facility of $110 million, with an accordion feature allowing an additional increase up to a total facility of $125 million and extends the maturity date of the revolving facility to July 8, 2024. In addition, the Amended Revolving Credit Agreement reduces the interest rate on Eurodollar rate loans and modifies certain financial covenants, including eliminating the maximum first lien net coverage ratio. The borrowers under the Amended Revolving Credit Facility incur fees between 0.375% and 0.50% as unused facility fees, dependent on the aggregate amount borrowed.
All obligations under the Amended Revolving Credit Agreement are unconditionally guaranteed by PetIQ Holdings, LLC and, subject to certain exceptions, each of its material current and future domestic wholly-owned subsidiaries. All obligations under the Amended Revolving Credit Agreement, and the guarantees of those obligations, are secured by substantially all of the assets of each borrower and guarantor under the Amended Revolving Credit Agreement, subject to certain exceptions.
The Amended Revolving Credit Agreement contains a number of covenants that, among other things, restrict the ability of the borrowers and guarantors thereunder to (subject to certain exceptions): (i) make investments, loans or advances; (ii) incur additional indebtedness; (iii) create liens on assets; (iv) engage in mergers or consolidations and/or sell assets; (v) pay dividends and distributions or repurchase our equity interests; (vi) repay subordinated indebtedness; (vii) make certain acquisitions; and (viii) other restrictions typical for a credit agreement of this type. As of December 31, 2020, the borrowers and guarantors thereunder were in compliance with these covenants.
The Amended Revolving Credit Agreement also contains certain customary affirmative covenants and events of default (including change of control). In addition, the Amended Revolving Credit Agreement contains a minimum fixed charge coverage ratio covenant which is tested if availability under the Amended Revolving Credit Agreement falls below a certain level. As of December 31, 2020, the borrowers and guarantors thereunder were in compliance with these covenants.
As of December 31, 2020, $15.0 million was outstanding under the Amended Revolving Credit Agreement. The weighted average interest rate on the Amended Revolving Credit Agreement was 2.3% at December 31, 2020.
A&R Term Loan Credit Agreement
Also on July 8, 2019, the Company amended and restated the existing term loan credit agreement of PetIQ, LLC (the “A&R Term Loan Credit Agreement”). The A&R Term Loan Credit Agreement was increased from $74.1 million to $220.0 million at an interest rate equal to the Eurodollar rate plus 4.50%, the proceeds of which were used to refinance the existing term loan facility and consummate the acquisition.
All obligations under the A&R Term Loan Credit Agreement are unconditionally guaranteed by PetIQ Holdings, LLC and each of its domestic wholly-owned subsidiaries and, subject to certain exceptions, each of its material current and future domestic wholly-owned subsidiaries. All obligations under the A&R Term Loan Credit Agreement, and the guarantees of those obligations, are secured by substantially all of the assets of PetIQ, LLC and each guarantor under the A&R Term Loan Credit Agreement, subject to certain exceptions.
The A&R Term Loan Credit Agreement contains a number of covenants that, among other things, restrict the ability of the borrower and guarantors thereunder to (subject to certain exceptions): (i) make investments, loans or advances; (ii) incur additional indebtedness; (iii) create liens on assets; (iv) engage in mergers or consolidations and/or sell assets; (v) pay dividends and distributions or repurchase our equity interests; (vi) repay subordinated indebtedness; (vii) make certain acquisitions; and (viii) other restrictions typical for a credit agreement of this type. As of December 31, 2020, the borrower and guarantors thereunder were in compliance with these covenants.
The A&R Term Loan Credit Agreement also contains certain customary affirmative covenants and events of default (including change of control). In addition, the A&R Term Loan Credit Agreement includes a maintenance covenant that requires compliance with a maximum first lien net leverage ratio. The availability of certain baskets and the ability to enter into certain transactions (including our ability to pay dividends) may also be subject to compliance with secured leverage ratios. As of December 31, 2020, the borrower and guarantors thereunder were in compliance with these covenants.
As of December 31, 2020, $217.3 million was outstanding under the A&R Term Loan Credit Agreement.
General Other Debt
The Company entered into a mortgage with a local bank to finance $1.9 million of the purchase price of a commercial building in Eagle, Idaho, in July 2017. The mortgage bears interest at a fixed rate of 4.35% and utilizes a 25 year amortization schedule with a 10 year balloon payment of the balance due at that time.
In July 2020, the Company entered into the Agreement. See Note 2 - “Business Combinations and Asset Acquisitions.” In the footnotes to the financial statements included in Item 8 to this Form 10-K. The Agreement called for PetIQ to pay $20.6 million, $2.6 million at signing and $1.0 million per quarter thereafter with no interest. The Company discounted the payment stream using a market interest rate of 8.3%, resulting in an obligation of $17.5 million.
In connection with the VIP Acquisition, the Company entered into a guarantee note and the Contingent Notes (together the “Notes Payable - VIP Acquisition”), which have a collective balance of $27.5 million and require quarterly interest payments of 6.75% with the balance payable July 17, 2023.
The Company paid deferred financing fees and debt discount related to the Notes of $6.4 million and $0.6 million of loan fees related to the A&R Credit Agreement during the year ended December 31, 2020.
The Company incurred debt issuance costs of $0.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, related to the A&R Credit Agreement and $5.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, related to the A&R Term Loan Credit Agreement.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the revenue and expenses incurred during the reported periods. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to accrued expenses and stock-based compensation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not apparent from other sources. Changes in estimates are reflected in reported results for the period in which they become known. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in the notes to our financial statements appearing in this report, we believe that the following critical accounting policies are most important to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes product sales when product control is transferred to the customer, which is generally upon delivery or shipment of goods, depending on terms with a customer. Many customer contracts include some form of variable consideration such as discounts, rebates, and sales returns and allowance. Variable consideration is treated as a reduction in revenue when product revenue is recognized. Depending on the specific type of variable consideration, we use either the expected value or most likely amount method to determine the variable consideration.
Revenue for services is recognized over time as the service is delivered, typically over a single day. Payment is typically rendered at the time of service.
Trade marketing expense, consisting primarily of customer pricing allowances and merchandising funds are offered through various programs to customers and are designed to promote our products. They include the cost of in-store product displays, feature pricing in retailers' advertisements and other temporary price reductions. These programs are offered to our customers both in fixed and variable (rate per case) amounts. The ultimate cost of these programs depends on retailer performance and is subject to management estimates.
Certain retailers require the payment of product introductory fees in order to obtain space for the Company's products on the retailer's store shelves. This cost is typically a lump sum and is determined using the expected value based on the contract between the two parties.
Both trade marketing expense and product introductory fees are recognized as reductions of revenue at the time the transfer of control of the associated products occurs. Accruals for expected payouts, or amounts paid in advance, under these programs are included as other current assets or accounts payable in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
The Company does not grant a general right of return. However, customers may return defective or non-conforming products. Customer remedies may include either a cash refund or an exchange of the product. As a result, the right of return and related refund liability is estimated and recorded as a reduction in revenue. This return estimate is reviewed and updated each period and is based on historical sales and return experience.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is determined on the first-in first-out (“FIFO”) method and includes estimated rebate amounts. The Company maintains reserves for estimated obsolete or unmarketable inventory based on the difference between the cost of inventory and its estimated net realizable value. In estimating the reserves, management considers factors such as excess or slow-moving inventories, product expiration dating, and market conditions. Changes in these conditions may result in additional reserves.
Purchase Accounting
The purchase method of accounting requires companies to assign values to assets and liabilities acquired based upon their fair values at the acquisition date. In most instances, there are not readily defined or listed market prices for individual assets and liabilities acquired in connection with a business, including intangible assets. The determination of fair value for assets and liabilities in many instances requires a high degree of estimation. The valuation of intangible assets, in particular, is very subjective. We generally obtain third-party valuations to assist us in estimating fair values. The use of different valuation techniques and assumptions could change the amounts and useful lives assigned to the assets and liabilities acquired and the related amortization expense.
Accounting for Income Taxes
The Company’s annual income tax rate is based on its income, statutory tax rates, changes in prior tax positions and tax planning opportunities available in the various jurisdictions in which it operates. Significant judgment and estimates are required to determine the Company’s annual tax rate and evaluate its tax positions. Despite the Company’s belief that its tax return positions are fully supportable, these positions are subject to challenge, and the Company may not be successful in defending these challenges.
Deferred income taxes arise from temporary differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts in the financial statements, which will result in taxable or deductible amounts in the future. In evaluating our ability to recover our deferred tax assets in the jurisdiction from which they arise, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, tax-planning strategies, and results of recent operations. In the event that it is determined that an asset is not more likely than not to be realized, a valuation allowance is recorded against the asset. Valuation allowances related to deferred tax assets can be impacted by changes to tax laws, changes to statutory tax rates and future taxable income levels. In the event the Company were to determine that it would not be able to realize all or a portion of its deferred tax assets in the future, the unrealizable amount would be charged to earnings in the period in which that determination is made. Conversely, if the Company were to determine that it would be able to realize deferred tax assets in the future in excess of the net carrying amounts, it would decrease the recorded valuation allowance through a favorable adjustment to earnings in the period that the determination was made. The Company has assessed the realizability of the net deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2020 and in that analysis has considered the relevant positive and negative evidence available to determine whether it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred income tax assets will not be realized. The Company believes it is more likely than not that the benefit from the recorded deferred tax assets will not be realized and has recorded a valuation allowance.
In future periods, if we conclude we have future taxable income sufficient to recognize the deferred tax assets, we may reduce or eliminate the valuation allowance.