Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following is Management’s Discussion and Analysis of the Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) of Professional Holding Corp. (“the Company”) for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related footnotes of our Company presented in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data. In addition to historical information, this
discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions that could cause actual results to differ materially from management’s expectations. Factors that could cause such differences include, but are not limited to, those described in the section titled “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Information.”
Overview
Net income for Professional Holding Corp. and subsidiaries (the “Company”) for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $8.3 million ($0.67 per diluted common share) compared to $2.3 million ($0.40 per diluted common share) for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing a 255.5% increase in net income and a 67.5% increase in earnings per diluted common share. The results from 2020 included closing our initial public offering, completion of the acquisition and integration of Marquis Bancorp Inc. (“MBI”) and expanding our market share despite a worldwide pandemic.
Highlights of our performance and financial condition as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020 and other key events that occurred during 2020 are provided below.
Results of Operations for the Year Ended December 31, 2020
● Net income of $8.3 million, an increase of $6.0 million, or 255.5%, compared to the same period in 2019.
● Net interest income of $60.1 million, an increase of $32.0 million, or 114.1%, compared to the same period in 2019.
● Noninterest income totaled $4.3 million, an increase of $1.5 million, or 53.3%, compared to the same period in 2019.
● Noninterest expense of $43.6 million, an increase of $16.6 million, or 61.6%, compared to the same period in 2019. MBI business combination expenses and additional full-time employees were primarily responsible for the increase.
● Pre-tax pre-provision earnings (non-GAAP, see Explanation of Certain Unaudited Non-GAAP Financial Measures) was $20.7 million for the current year, an increase of $16.8 million, or 438.1%, compared to pre-tax pre-provision earnings of $3.9 million in the previous year.
Financial Condition
At December 31, 2020:
● Total assets grew to $2.1 billion, an increase of $1.0 billion, or 95.3%, compared to December 31, 2019 due to the MBI business combination, our participation in the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP), with some of these loans match funded with PPPLF advances of $101.4 million, and new organic growth. At December 31, 2020, the Company had a gross PPP loan balance of $190.0 million.
● Net loans grew to $1.6 billion, an increase of $0.9 billion, or 109.5%, compared to December 31, 2019. We experienced growth across all loan types due to new organic originations (including PPP) of $0.6 billion, acquisitions of $0.5 billion, offset by net paybacks and advances of approximately $0.3 billion, for the year ended December 31, 2020.
● Nonperforming assets totaled $10.4 million, an increase of $8.1 million, or 357.6%, compared to $2.3 million at December 31, 2019. As part of our continued evaluation of a credit where the borrower, Coex Coffee International Inc. (“Coex”) petitioned the court for an Assignment for the Benefit of Creditors, the Company classified the full loan amount of $8.3 million as substandard non-accrual as of December 31, 2020.
● The Company maintained its strong capital position. As of December 31, 2020, the Company was well-capitalized, with a total risk-based capital ratio of 14.7%, a tier 1 risk-based capital ratio of 12.9%, a common equity tier 1 capital ratio of 12.9%, and a leverage ratio of 10.0%. As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, all of
our regulatory capital ratios exceeded the thresholds to be well-capitalized under the applicable bank regulatory requirements.
● The Company recorded adjustments to the original fair value estimates of the MBI valuation in the fourth quarter.
Other Highlights
● In February 2020, we announced the closing of our initial public offering of 3,565,000 shares of Class A Common Stock, which included an additional 465,000 shares in connection with the exercise in full of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares
● In March 2020, we closed on our acquisition of MBI and its wholly owned subsidiary, Marquis Bank.
● In June 2020, we successfully completed our systems conversion of MBI.
● In November 2020, we opened our new loan production office in Bedford, NH to service our new search fund lending business.
● We participated in the PPP and processed/closed/funded 1,506 small business loans representing $226.2 million in relief proceeds throughout 2020.
Acquisition of MBI
On March 26, 2020, we closed our acquisition with MBI and its wholly owned subsidiary, Marquis Bank, headquartered in Coral Gables, Florida. This acquisition resulted in the growth of the balance sheet, net interest income, and non-interest income and expense from the prior year. The Company identified $539.9 million of acquired loans with a book balance, prior to fair value adjustments. An initial fair value adjustment of $19.3 million was recorded through goodwill. Measurement period adjustments related to other fair value factors totaled $5.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and will amortize through interest income over the remaining life of each loan. The acquisition has already provided increased credit portfolio diversity and increased lending capacity and accelerated our growth strategy and profitability targets.
COVID-19 Operational Response and Bank Preparedness
The outbreak of the novel coronavirus COVID-19, which was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization on March 11, 2020, has led to adverse impacts on the global economy and created uncertainty in the world’s financial markets.
The Company continues to work within the COVID-19 pandemic response plans which were originally established in the Spring of 2020. The Company continues to update these plans to ensure that they comply with the latest governmental guidelines and health conditions. As conditions permit, these plans facilitate our staff judiciously and safely returning to the office. On December 31, 2020, approximately 35% of our staff was working in the office while approximately 65% was working by remote access. This compares to July 10, 2020, when 20% of our staff was working in the office and 80% was working by remote access.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic we have:
● The Company participated in the PPP and processed/closed/funded 1,506 small business loans representing $226.2 million in relief proceeds throughout 2020. The majority of these loans were initially pledged to the Federal Reserve as part of the PPPLF. The PPPLF pledged loans are non-recourse to the Company. In addition, we paid off approximately $123.6 million in PPPLF advances during the year ended December 31, 2020 and had a balance of $101.4 million remaining as of December 31, 2020.
● The Company added an online PPP application form and automated the PPP loan closing documentation process.
● As of December 31, 2020, we have reviewed and processed numerous debt service relief requests in accordance with Section 4013 of the CARES Act and interagency guidelines published by federal banking regulators on March 13, 2020. As currently interpreted by the agencies, the guidelines assert that short-term modifications made on good faith for reasons related to the COVID-19 pandemic to borrowers who were current prior to such relief are not considered Troubled Debt Restructurings (TDRs). These modifications include deferrals of principal and interest, modification to interest only, and deferrals to escrow requirements. The modifications have varying terms up to six months.
● During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company approved $199.8 million in payment relief modifications that were granted under the CARES Act guidance associated with the treatment of TDRs. Since the inception of the CARES Act, $187.8 million of these loans either have been reinstated to their original payment terms or have been paid off. As of December 31, 2020, there were 13 loans measured with a fair value of $11.1 million, that remain under the exemption from TDR classification as provided for in the CARES Act.
● To manage credit risk, the Company increased oversight and analysis of loans to borrowers in vulnerable industries, such as hotels and hospitality. As of December 31, 2020, these loans have a balance of $54.3 million. For the year ended December 31, 2020, $30.6 million of these loans were provided payment relief consistent with Section 4013 of the CARES Act and the interagency guidelines published on March 13, 2020, and as of December 31, 2020, $28.3 million has been reinstated and returned to normal payment schedules, with one deferred loan remaining in this group.
The economic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic have significantly impacted and continue to significantly impact business and economic activity in the United States and around the world. There have been full and partial business closures, increases in unemployment as workers are furloughed, laid off, or had hours limited. Such disruptions could adversely affect our loan and deposit fee income as well as create downward pressure on the quality of our loan portfolio possibly leading to an increase in loan charge-offs.
The COVID-19 pandemic is an unprecedented event that has created high levels of uncertainty. We are vigilantly monitoring global events and actions being taken by various Federal and State Agencies. We have maintained interim periodic communications with our regulators and have not experienced any material deposit outflows to date and frequently communicate with our credit clients.
Given the fluidity of the situation, management cannot predict the long-term impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company for 2021 or beyond.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Net Income
The following table sets forth the principal components of net income for the periods indicated.
Net income for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $8.3 million, an increase of $6.0 million, or 255.5%, from net income for the year ended December 31, 2019, of $2.3 million. Interest income increased $29.9 million while interest expense decreased $2.1 million, resulting in a net interest income increase of $32.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in the prior year. The increase in our interest income was primarily due to an increase in interest earning assets, primarily from the MBI business combination, our participation in the SBA’s PPP, with some of these loans match funded with PPPLF advances of $101.4 million. Provision for loan losses increased by $9.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in the prior year primarily due to a specific reserve of $7.6 million recorded to address the impairment of the loans made to one of its borrowers, Coex Coffee International Inc. (“Coex”) (See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Coex Coffee International Inc.”). Noninterest income increased $1.5 million and noninterest expense increased $16.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in the prior year. The increase in noninterest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in the prior year was primarily a result of the MBI business combination expenses as well as increases in occupancy and equipment expense due to the opening of two new bank branches and the digital innovation center and increases in professional services expense due to costs related to building the organizational infrastructure of a publicly traded company.
Net Interest Income and Net Interest Margin Analysis
We analyze our ability to maximize income generated from interest earning assets and control the interest expenses of our liabilities, measured as net interest income, through our net interest margin and net interest spread. Net interest income is the difference between the interest and fees earned on interest earning assets, such as loans and securities, and the interest expense paid on interest bearing liabilities, such as deposits and borrowings, which are used to fund those assets. Net interest margin is a ratio calculated as annualized net interest income divided by average interest earning assets for the same period. Net interest spread is the difference between average interest rates earned on interest earning assets and average interest rates paid on interest-bearing liabilities.
Changes in market interest rates and the interest rates we earn on interest earning assets or pay on interest-bearing liabilities, as well as in the volume and types of interest earning assets, interest bearing and noninterest-bearing liabilities and shareholders’ equity, are usually the largest drivers of periodic changes in net interest income, net interest margin and net interest spread. Fluctuations in market interest rates are driven by many factors, including governmental monetary policies, inflation, deflation, macroeconomic developments, changes in unemployment rates, the money supply, political and international conditions and conditions in domestic and foreign financial markets. Periodic changes in the volume and types of loans in our loan portfolio are affected by, among other factors, the economic and competitive conditions in the Miami-Dade MSA, as well as developments affecting the real estate, technology, government services, hospitality and tourism and financial services sectors within the Miami-Dade MSA. Our ability to respond to changes in these factors by using effective asset-liability management techniques is critical to maintaining the stability of our net interest income and net interest margin as our primary sources of earnings.
The following table shows the average outstanding balance of each principal category of our assets, liabilities and shareholders’ equity, together with the average yields on our assets and the average costs of our liabilities for the periods
indicated. Such yields and costs are calculated by dividing the annualized income or expense by the average daily balances of the corresponding assets or liabilities for the same period.
(1) Includes nonaccrual loans.
(2) Net interest spread is the difference between interest rates earned on interest earning assets and interest rates paid on interest-bearing liabilities.
(3) Net interest margin is a ratio of net interest income to average interest earning assets for the same period.
(4) Interest income on loans includes loan fees of $4.4 million and $0.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The following table presents information regarding the dollar amount of changes in interest income and interest expense for the periods indicated for each major component of interest earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities and distinguishes between the changes attributable to changes in volume and changes attributable to changes in interest rates. For purposes of this table, changes attributable to both rate and volume that cannot be segregated have been proportionately allocated to both volume and rate.
Net interest income increased by $32.0 million to $60.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Our total interest income was impacted by an increase in interest earning assets, primarily due to the MBI business combination, our participation in the SBA’s PPP, with some of these loans match funded with PPPLF advances of $101.4 million, and new organic growth. Average total interest earning assets were $1.7 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with $0.8 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019. The annualized yield on those interest earning assets decreased 64 basis points from 4.67% for the year ended December 31, 2019 to 4.03% for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the reductions in the federal funds target interest rates by the Federal Reserve as well as loans repricing, coupled with higher yielding loan payoffs. Our yield on interest earning assets declined during the year ended December 31, 2020, which was partially offset by lower interest expense on our interest-bearing deposits and earnings credits accumulated during the year of $26.5 thousand. The increase in the average balance of interest earning assets was driven primarily by growth in our loan portfolio of $0.9 billion, representing an increase of 109.5%, to $1.6 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $0.7 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Average interest-bearing liabilities increased by $0.6 billion, or 90.0%, from $0.6 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $1.2 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to a $0.4 billion, or 70.4%, increase in the average balance of interest-bearing deposits. The increase in the average balance of interest-bearing deposits was primarily due to increases in certificates of deposit and money market accounts for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to for the year ended December 31, 2019, and, to a lesser extent, negotiable order of withdrawal accounts, or NOW accounts. The annualized average interest rate paid on average interest-bearing liabilities decreased to 0.76% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 1.78% for the year ended December 31, 2019, while the annualized average interest rate paid on interest-bearing deposits decreased 105 basis points to 0.68% and the annualized average interest rate paid on borrowed funds increased by 120 basis points to 1.11%. The decreases in annualized average interest rates primarily reflected a decrease in market interest rates due to decreases in the federal funds target interest rate during the year ended December 31, 2020. For year ended December 31, 2020, our average other noninterest-bearing liabilities increased $1.2 million, or 6.8%, to $17.7 million from $16.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. Average noninterest-bearing deposits also increased $245.4 million, or 148.8%, from $165.0 million to $410.4 million for the same periods. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our annual net interest margin was 3.50% and net interest spread was 3.27%. For the year ended December 31, 2019, annual net interest margin was 3.34% and net interest spread was 2.90%. Our net interest margin was adversely affected by 0.16% during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019, as a result of the recent reductions in the federal funds target interest rates as well as continued declines in the 10-year treasury yield, average rates earned on
interest earning assets and average rates paid on our interest-bearing deposits generally declined during the year ended December 31, 2020. Correspondingly new loans were priced at lower yields in comparison to previously held loans which led to numerous loan payoffs at the beginning of 2020 compared to 2019.
Provision for Loan Losses
The provision for loan losses is a charge to income in order to bring our allowance for loan losses to a level deemed appropriate by management. For a description of the factors taken into account by our management in determining the allowance for loan losses see “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Allowance for Loan Losses.”
Our provision for loan losses amounted to $10.0 million for 2020 and $0.9 million for 2019. The increase from 2019 to 2020 was primarily due to a specific reserve of $7.6 million recorded to address the impairment of the Coex loan, the growth of our loan portfolio and the anticipated decline in worldwide economic activity due the actual and projected effects of COVID-19. Our allowance for loan losses as a percentage of total loans, net of overdrafts and excluding PPP loans was 1.10% and 0.83% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively (non-GAAP, see Explanation of Certain Unaudited Non-GAAP Financial Measures). The increase was primarily due to the Company addressing the impairment of the Coex loan in the third quarter of 2020. See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Coex Coffee International Inc.” We recorded three net charge-offs for $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. We did not record any net charge-offs for the year ended December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, MBI purchase accounting loan marks were $18.8 million.
Noninterest Income
Our primary sources of recurring noninterest income are service charges on deposit accounts, income from Bank owned life insurance, origination fees for Small Business Administration, or SBA loans, swap referral fees and other fees and charges. Noninterest income does not include loan origination fees to the extent they exceed the direct loan origination costs, which are generally recognized over the life of the related loan as an adjustment to yield using the interest method. The following table presents the major categories of noninterest income for the periods indicated.
Noninterest income for 2020 was $4.3 million, a $1.5 million or 53.3% increase compared to noninterest income of $2.8 million for 2019. The increase was primarily due an increase in deposit accounts service charges, of $0.9 million, or 338.1%, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 due to deposit growth. We also experienced an increase in revenue from loans held for sale of $0.5 million, or 166.7% during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019.
Noninterest Expense
Generally, noninterest expense is composed of all employee expenses and costs associated with operating our facilities, obtaining and retaining client relationships and providing banking services. The largest component of noninterest expense is salaries and employee benefits. Noninterest expense also includes operational expenses, such as occupancy and equipment expenses, professional fees, acquisition expenses, data processing expenses, advertising
expenses, loan processing expenses and other general and administrative expenses, including FDIC assessments, communications, travel, meals, training, supplies and postage. The following table presents the major categories of noninterest expense for the periods indicated.
Noninterest expense amounted to $43.6 million in 2020, an increase of $16.6 million, or 61.6%, compared to $27.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to the MBI business combination expenses as well as an increase in salaries and benefits from increased employee headcount, increases in occupancy and equipment expense due to the opening of two new bank branches and the digital innovation center, increases in professional services expense due to costs related to building the organizational infrastructure of a publicly traded company and a charitable contribution of $0.3 million to the AAA Scholarship Foundation.
Income Tax Expense
The amount of income tax expense we incur is influenced by the amounts of our pre-tax income, and other nondeductible expenses. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are reflected at current income tax rates in effect for the period in which the deferred tax assets and liabilities are expected to be realized or settled. As changes in tax laws or rates are enacted, such as the Tax Act, deferred tax assets and liabilities are adjusted through the provision for income taxes. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
Income tax expense was $2.4 million for 2020 and $0.7 million for 2019. Our effective tax rates for 2020 and 2019 were 22.5% and 21.9%, respectively.
Financial Condition
Our total assets grew to $2.1 billion at December 31, 2020, an increase of $1.0 billion, or 95.3%, compared to December 31, 2019 as a result of the MBI acquisition, our participation in the SBA’s PPP, with some of these loans match funded with PPPLF advances of $101.4 million, and new organic growth. At December 31, 2020, the Company had a gross PPP loan balance of $190.0 million. Net loans grew across all loan types due to new organic originations (including PPP) of $0.6 billion, acquisitions of $0.5 billion, offset by net paybacks and advances of approximately $0.3 billion, resulting in total net loan gowth of $0.9 billion, or 109.5%, for the year ended December 31, 2020. Interest-bearing deposits increased $0.5 billion, or 67.1%, during the year ended December 31, 2020, due to the acquisition as well as organic growth which provided us with additional capital to fund our growing loan pipeline. Shareholders’ equity increased $136.3 million, or 171.8%, to $215.6 million at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019, primarily due to the acquisition of MBI and the closing of our IPO. Net income resulted in an increase to retained earnings of $8.3 million as of December 31, 2020.
Interest-Bearing Deposits at Other Financial Institutions
Cash that is not immediately needed to fund loans by the Bank is invested in liquid assets that also earn interest, including deposits with other financial institutions. For the year ended December 31, 2020, interest-bearing deposits at other financial institutions decreased $21.3 million, or 14.1%, to $129.3 million from $150.6 million at December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to our desire to increase our investment portfolio by purchasing securities with higher returns.
Investment Securities
We use our securities portfolio to provide a secondary source of liquidity, achieve additional interest income through higher yields on funds invested (compared to other options, such as interest-bearing deposits at other banks or fed funds sold), manage interest rate risk, and meet both collateral and regulatory capital requirements.
Securities may be classified as either trading, held-to-maturity or available-for-sale. Trading securities (if any) are held principally for resale and recorded at their fair value with changes in fair value included in income. Held-to-maturity securities are those which the Company has the positive intent and ability to hold to maturity and are reported at amortized cost. Equity securities are carried at fair value, with changes in fair value reported in net income. Equity securities without readily determinable fair values are carried at cost, minus impairment, if any, plus or minus changes resulting from observable price changes in orderly transactions for the identical or a similar investment. Available-for-sale securities consist of securities not classified as trading securities nor as held-to maturity securities. Unrealized holding gains and losses on available-for-sale securities are excluded from income and reported in comprehensive income or loss. Gains and losses on the sale of available-for-sale securities are recorded on the trade date and are determined using the specific-identification method. Premiums and discounts on securities available for sale are recognized in interest income using the interest method over the period to maturity.
Our investment portfolio increased by $65.5 million, or 220.9%, to $95.1 million at December 31, 2020, from $29.6 million at December 31, 2019. The investment of a portion of the proceeds from the Company’s initial public offering and MBI acquisition are the primary reason for this increase. The Company invested these proceeds into liquid assets to fund loan growth, as well as securities available for sale. To supplement interest income earned on the Company’s loan portfolio, the Company invests in high quality mortgage-backed securities, government agency bonds, corporate bonds, community development district bonds, and equity securities (including mutual funds).
The following tables summarize the contractual maturities and weighted-average yields of investment securities as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 and the amortized cost and carrying value of those securities as of the indicated dates.
Loan Portfolio
Our primary source of income is derived from interest earned on loans. Our loan portfolio consists of loans secured by real estate as well as commercial business loans, construction and development and other consumer loans. Our loan clients primarily consist of small to medium sized businesses, the owners and operators of these businesses as well as other professionals and entrepreneurs. Our owner-occupied and investment commercial real estate loans, residential construction loans and commercial business loans provide us with higher risk-adjusted returns, shorter maturities and more sensitivity to interest rate fluctuations, and are complemented by our relatively lower risk residential real estate loans to individuals. Our lending activities are principally directed to our market area consisting of the Miami-Dade
MSA. The following table summarizes and provides additional information about certain segments of our loan portfolio as of the dates indicated.
Commercial Real Estate Loans. We originate both owner-occupied and non-owner-occupied commercial real estate loans. These loans may be more adversely affected by conditions in the real estate markets or in the general economy. Commercial real estate loans that are secured by owner-occupied commercial real estate and primarily collateralized by operating cash flows are also included in this category of loans. As of December 31, 2020, we had $287.0 million of owner-occupied commercial real estate loans and $490.8 million of investment commercial real estate loans, representing 36.9% and 63.1%, respectively, of our commercial real estate portfolio. As of December 31, 2020, the average loan balance of loans in our commercial real estate loan portfolio was approximately $1.2 million for owner-occupied and $1.6 million for non-owner-occupied. Commercial real estate loan terms are generally extended for 10 years or less and amortize generally over 25 years or less. Terms of 15 years are permitted where the loan is fully amortized over the term of the loan. The maximum loan to value is generally, 80% of the market value or purchase price, but may be as high as 90% for SBA 504 owner-occupied loans. Our credit policy also usually requires a minimum debt service coverage ratio of 1.20x. As of December 31, 2020, our weighted-average loan-to-value ratios for owner-occupied and non-owner-occupied commercial real estate were 46.9% and 50.8%, respectively and debt service coverage ratios were 2.33x and 1.74x, respectively. The interest rates on our commercial real estate loans have initial fixed rate terms that adjust typically at five years and we routinely charge an origination fee for our services. We generally require personal guarantees from the principal owners of the business, supported by a review of the principal owners’ personal financial statements and global debt service obligations. All commercial real estate loans with an outstanding balance of $1.0 million or more are reviewed at least annually. The properties securing the portfolio are located primarily
throughout our market and are generally diverse in terms of type. This diversity helps reduce the exposure to adverse economic events that affect any single industry.
As of December 31, 2020, non-owner occupied commercial real estate loans of $490.8 million represented 33.5% of total risk-weighted assets.
Construction and Development Loans. The majority of our construction loans are offered within the Miami-Dade MSA to builders primarily for the construction of single-family homes and condominium and townhouse conversions or renovations and, to a lesser extent, to individuals. Our construction loans typically have terms of 12 to 18 months with the goal of transitioning the borrowers to permanent financing or re-underwriting and selling into the secondary market. According to our credit policy, the loan to value ratio may not exceed the lesser of 80% of the appraised value, as established by an independent appraisal, or 85% of costs for residential construction and 90% of costs for SBA 504 loans. As of December 31, 2020, our weighted average loan-to-value ratio on our construction, vacant land, and land development loans were 57.3%, 53.5% and 47.9%, respectively. All construction and development loans require an interest reserve account, which is sufficient to pay the loan through completion of the project. We conduct annual stress testing of our construction loan portfolio and closely monitor underlying real estate conditions as well as our borrowers’ trends of sales valuations as compared to underwriting valuations as part of our ongoing risk management efforts. We
also closely monitor our borrowers’ progress in construction buildout and strictly enforce our original underwriting guidelines for construction milestones and completion timelines.
As of December 31, 2020, total construction and land development loans of $99.9 million represented 6.8% of total risk-weighted assets.
Residential Real Estate Loans. We offer one-to-four family mortgage loans primarily on owner-occupied primary residences which make up approximately 80% of our residential loan portfolio and, to a lesser extent, investor-owned residences, which make up approximately 20% of our residential loan portfolio. Our residential loans also include home equity lines of credit, which totaled approximately $60.2 million, or approximately 15.8% of our residential loan portfolio as of December 31, 2020. The average loan balance of closed-end residential loans in our residential portfolio was approximately $0.7 million as of December 31, 2020. Our one-to-four family residential loans have a relatively small balance spread between many individual borrowers compared to our other loan categories. Our owner-occupied residential real estate loans usually have fixed rates for five or seven years and adjust on an annual basis after the initial term based on a typical maturity of 30 years. Upon the implementation of rules under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, the origination, closing and servicing of the traditional residential loan products became much more complex, which led to increased cost of compliance and training. As a result, many banks exited the business, which created an opportunity for the banks that remained in the space. While the use of technology, and other related origination strategies have allowed non-bank originators to gain significant market share over the last several years, traditional banks that made investments in personnel and technology to comply with the new requirements have typically experienced loan growth. Unlike many of our competitors, we have been able to effectively compete in the residential loan market, while simultaneously doing the same in the commercial loan market which has enabled us to establish a broader and deeper relationship with our borrowers. Additionally, by offering a full line of residential loan products, the owners of the many small to medium sized businesses that we lend to use us, instead of a competitor, for financing a personal residence. This greater bandwidth to the same market has been a significant contributor to our
growth and market share in South Florida. The following chart shows our residential real estate portfolio by loan type and the weighted average loan-to-value ratio for each loan type.
Commercial Loans (non-PPP). In addition to our other loan products, we provide general commercial loans, including commercial lines of credit, working capital loans, term loans, equipment financing, letters of credit and other loan products, primarily in our market, and underwritten based on each borrower’s ability to service debt from income. These loans are primarily made based on the identified cash flows of the borrower, as determined based on a review of the client’s financial statements, and secondarily, on the underlying collateral provided by the borrower. The average loan balance of the non-PPP loans in our commercial loan portfolio was $0.5 million as of December 31, 2020. For commercial loans over $0.5 million, a global cash flow analysis is generally required, which forms the basis for the credit approval, “Global cash flow” is defined as a cash flow calculation which includes all income sources of all principals in the transaction as well as all debt payments, including the debt service associated with the proposed transaction. In general, a minimum 1.20x debt service coverage is preferred, but in no event may the debt service coverage ratio be less than 1.00x. As of December 31, 2020, the debt service coverage ratio for our Bank commercial loan portfolio was approximately 2.35x for non-PPP loans, excluding approximately 3.7% of the commercial loan portfolio that is cash secured. Most commercial business loans are secured by a lien on general business assets including, among other things, available real estate, accounts receivable, promissory notes, inventory and equipment, and we generally obtain a personal guaranty from the borrower or other principal. The following chart shows our commercial loan portfolio by industry segment as of December 31, 2020.
Paycheck Protection Program (PPP). The Company has participated in the PPP offered through the United States Small Business Administration (SBA) by way of the Coronavirus Aid Relief and Economic Security (CARES) Act that was passed at the end of the first quarter 2020. As a qualified SBA lender, the Company was automatically authorized to originate PPP loans. To help clients, the Company added an online PPP application form and automated the PPP loan closing documentation process. The Company processed, closed and funded 1,506 loans representing $226.2 million in relief proceeds throughout 2020. The majority of these loans were initially pledged to the Federal Reserve as part of the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility (PPPLF). The PPPLF pledged loans are non-recourse to the Bank. These loans are guaranteed by the government and as such no loan loss reserves have been recorded for these loans. In addition, the Company paid off approximately $123.6 million in PPPLF advances during the year ended December 31, 2020, and
had a balance of $101.4 million remaining as of December 31, 2020. At December 31, 2020, the Company had a gross PPP loan balance of $190.0 million. Interest income on loans include PPP loan fees. PPP loan fees recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020 were $2.5 million.
Consumer and Other Loans. We offer consumer, or retail credit, to individuals for household, family, or other personal expenditures. Generally, these are either in the form of closed-end/installment credit loans or open-end/revolving credit loans. Occasionally, we will make unsecured consumer loans to highly qualified clients. Repayment terms are generally shorter in nature.
The following chart illustrates our gross loans net of unearned income and weighted average loan-to-value ratio for our collateralized loan portfolio as of the end of the months indicated.
The repayment of loans is a source of additional liquidity for us. The following table details maturities and sensitivity to interest rate changes for our loan portfolio at December 31, 2020.
Nonperforming Assets
Loans are considered past due if the required principal and interest payments have not been received as of the date such payments were due. Loans are placed on nonaccrual status when, in management’s opinion, the borrower may be unable to meet payment obligations as they become due, as well as when required by regulatory provisions. Loans may be placed on nonaccrual status regardless of whether or not such loans are considered past due. In general, we place loans on nonaccrual status when they become 90 days past due. We also place loans on nonaccrual status if they are less than 90 days past due if the collection of principal or interest is in doubt. When interest accrual is discontinued, all unpaid accrued interest is reversed from income. Interest income is subsequently recognized only to the extent cash payments are received in excess of principal due. Loans are returned to accrual status when all the principal and interest amounts contractually due are brought current and future payments are, in management’s opinion, reasonably assured. Any loan which the Bank deems to be uncollectible, in whole or in part, is charged off to the extent of the anticipated loss. Loans that are past due for 180 days or more are charged off unless the loan is well secured and in the process of collection. We currently have no loans that are 90 days or greater past due and accruing as of December 31, 2020.
We believe our disciplined lending approach and focused management of nonperforming assets has resulted in sound asset quality and timely resolution of problem assets. We have several procedures in place to assist us in maintaining the overall quality of our loan portfolio, such as annual reviews of the underlying financial performance of all commercial loans in excess of $1.0 million. We also engage in annual stress testing of the loan portfolio, and proactive collection and timely disposition of past due loans. Our bankers follow established underwriting guidelines, and we also monitor our delinquency levels for any negative trends. As a result, we have, in recent years, experienced a relatively low level of nonperforming assets. We had nonperforming assets of $10.4 and $2.3 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, or 0.51% and 0.22% of total assets, respectively. Occasionally, loans that we make will be impacted due to the occurrence of unforeseen events, such as COVID-19, which was a primary factor in the recent increase in our nonperforming assets relative to our historically low, near-zero levels. However, we believe that our low loan-to-value loan portfolio is well positioned to withstand these types of discrete events as they occur from time. There
can be no assurance, however, that our loan portfolio will not become subject to increasing pressures from deteriorating borrower credit due to general economic conditions.
Coex Coffee International Inc.
The Company learned on July 15, 2020 that one of its borrowers, Coex Coffee International Inc. (“Coex”), filed a Petition Commencing an Assignment for the Benefit of Creditors in the 11th Judicial Circuit Court in Miami-Dade County, Florida. This state court action is similar to a federal bankruptcy case where the assignee is tasked, under the oversight of a judge, with the repayment of creditors of a troubled entity. The court has appointed Philip Von Kahle as the “Assignee.” Coex was primarily in the business of purchasing and selling green coffee beans. Coex financed its business through various credit facilities from ten financial institutions in an amount totaling $191.9 million. On July 15, 2020, the Company had a total of thirty-one (31) advances to Coex for the purchase of coffee from growers for period of up to 90 days with an aggregate outstanding balance of $12.4 million. However, the Company had a current balance of $8.3 million net of a participation, without recourse, to another financial institution. The loans are collateralized by coffee beans and the proceeds from coffee sales. While at the time of petition, the advances were current, the preliminary records reviewed by the Assignee indicate that certain loan documents, including purchase orders, were fraudulent and that only $1.2 million of the associated value may have been attributed as collateral against the aggregate outstanding balance. In the third quarter of 2020, the Company recorded an impairment of $7.6 million against the Coex loan. The Company continues to vigorously pursue all courses of action available to mitigate potential losses, including a potential insurance claim, in order to recover as much of the current outstanding balance as possible. At this time, the Company is unable to provide any assurances whether these courses of action will ultimately be successful.
Credit Quality Indicators
We strive to manage and control credit risk in our loan portfolio by adhering to well-defined underwriting criteria and account administration standards established by our management team and approved by our Board. We employ a dedicated Chief Risk Officer and have established a Risk Committee at the Bank level which oversees, among other things, risks associated with our lending activities and enterprise risk management. Our written loan policies document underwriting standards, approval levels, exposure limits and other limits or standards that our management team and Board deem appropriate for an institution of our size and character. Loan portfolio diversification at the obligor, product and geographic levels are actively managed to mitigate concentration risk, to the extent possible. In addition, credit risk management includes an independent credit review process that assesses compliance with policies, risk rating standards and other critical credit information. In addition, we adhere to sound credit principles and evaluate our clients’ borrowing needs and capacity to repay, in conjunction with their character and financial history. Our management team and Board place significant emphasis on balancing a healthy risk profile and sustainable growth. Specifically, our approach to lending seeks to balance the risks necessary to achieve our strategic goals while ensuring that our risks are appropriately managed and remain within our defined limits. We believe that our credit culture is a key factor in our relatively low levels of nonperforming loans and nonperforming assets compared to other institutions within our market.
We categorize loans into risk categories based on relevant information about the ability of borrowers to service their debt including: current financial information, historical payment experience, credit documentation, public information, and current economic trends, among other factors. Generally, all credits greater than $1.0 million, other than residential real estate loans, are reviewed no less than annually to monitor and adjust, if necessary, the credit risk profile. Loans classified as “substandard” or “special mention” are reviewed quarterly for further evaluation to determine if they are appropriately classified and whether there is any impairment. Beyond the annual review, all loans are graded at initial issuance. In addition, during the renewal process of any loan, as well as if a loan becomes past due, we will determine the appropriate loan grade. Loans excluded from the review process above are generally classified as “pass” credits until: (a) they become past due; (b) management becomes aware of deterioration in the credit worthiness of the borrower; or (c) the client contacts us for a modification. In these circumstances, the loan is specifically evaluated for potential reclassification to special mention, substandard, doubtful, or even a charged-off status. We use the following definitions for risk ratings:
Pass. A Pass loan’s primary source of loan repayment is satisfactory, with secondary sources very likely to be realized if necessary. The pass category includes the following:
● Riskless: Loans that are fully secured by liquid, properly margined collateral (listed stock, bonds, or other securities; savings accounts; certificates of deposit; loans or that portion thereof which are guaranteed by the United States Government or agencies backed by the “full faith and credit” thereof; loans secured by properly executed letters of credit from prime financial institutions).
● High Quality Risk: Loans to recognized national companies and well-seasoned companies that enjoy ready access to capital markets or to a range of financing alternatives. Borrower’s public debt offerings are accorded highest ratings by recognized rating agencies, e.g., Moody’s or Standard & Poor’s. Companies display sound financial conditions and consistent superior income performance. The borrower’s trends and those of the industry to which it belongs are positive.
● Satisfactory Risk: Loans to borrowers, reasonably well established, that display satisfactory financial conditions, operating results and excellent future potential. Capacity to service debt is amply demonstrated. Current financial strength, while financially adequate, may be deficient in a number of respects. Normal comfort levels are achieved through a closely monitored collateral position and/or the strength of outside guarantors.
● Moderate Risk: Loans to borrowers who are in non-compliance with periodic reporting requirements of the loan agreement, and any other credit file documentation deficiencies, which do not otherwise affect the borrower’s credit risk profile. This may include borrowers who fail to supply updated financial information that supports the adequacy of the primary source of repayment to service the Bank’s debt and prevents bank management to evaluate the borrower’s current debt service capacity. Existing loans will include those with consistent track records of timely loan payments, no material adverse changes to underlying collateral, and no material adverse changes to guarantor(s) financial capacity, evidenced by public record searches.
Special mention. A Special Mention loan has potential weaknesses that deserve management’s close attention. If left uncorrected, these potential weaknesses may result in the deterioration of the repayment prospects for the asset or our credit position at some future date. Special Mention loans are not adversely classified and do not expose an institution to sufficient risk to warrant adverse classification.
Substandard. A Substandard loan is inadequately protected by the current sound worth and paying capacity of the obligor or of the collateral pledged, if any. Loans so classified must have a well-defined weakness or weaknesses that jeopardizes the liquidation of the debt. They are characterized by the distinct possibility that we will sustain some loss if the deficiencies are not corrected.
Doubtful. A loan classified Doubtful has all the weaknesses inherent in one classified Substandard with the added characteristics that the weaknesses make collection or liquidation in full, on the basis of currently existing facts, conditions, and values, highly questionable and improbable.
Loss. A loan classified Loss is considered uncollectible and of such little value that continuance as a bankable asset is not warranted. This classification does not mean that the asset has absolutely no recovery or salvage value, but rather it is not practical or desirable to defer writing off this basically worthless asset even though partial recovery may be affected in the future. Based on the most recent analysis performed, the risk category of loans by class of loans is as follows:
Allowance for Loan Losses
We believe that we maintain our allowance for loan losses at a level sufficient to provide for probable incurred credit losses inherent in the loan portfolio as of the balance sheet date. Credit losses arise from the borrowers’ inability or unwillingness to repay, and from other risks inherent in the lending process including collateral risk, operations risk, concentration risk, and economic risk. We consider all of these risks of lending when assessing the adequacy of our allowance. The allowance for loan losses is established through a provision charged to expense. Loans are charged-off against the allowance when losses are probable and reasonably quantifiable. Our allowance for loan losses is based on management’s judgment of overall credit quality, which is a significant estimate based on a detailed analysis of the loan portfolio. Our allowance can and will change based on revisions to our assessment of our loan portfolio’s overall credit quality and other risk factors both internal and external to us.
We evaluate the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses on a quarterly basis. The allowance consists of two components. The first component consists of those amounts reserved for impaired loans. A loan is deemed impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that the Bank will not be able to collect all amounts due (principal and interest), according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement. Loans are monitored for potential impairment through our ongoing loan review procedures and portfolio analysis. Classified loans and past due loans over a specific dollar amount, and all troubled debt restructurings are individually evaluated for impairment.
The approach for assigning reserves for the impaired loans is determined by the dollar amount of the loan and loan type. Impairment measurement for loans over a specific dollar are determined on an individual loan basis with the amount reserved dependent on whether repayment of the loan is dependent on the liquidation of collateral or from some other source of repayment. If repayment is dependent on the sale of collateral, the reserve is equivalent to the recorded investment in the loan less the fair value of the collateral after estimated sales expenses. If repayment is not dependent on the sale of collateral, the reserve is equivalent to the recorded investment in the loan less the estimated cash flows discounted using the loan’s effective interest rate. The discounted value of the cash flows is based on the anticipated timing of the receipt of cash payments from the borrower. The reserve allocations for individually measured impaired loans are sensitive to the extent market conditions or the actual timing of cash receipts change. Impairment reserves for smaller-balance loans under a specific dollar amount are assigned on a pooled basis utilizing loss factors for impaired loans of a similar nature.
The second component is a general reserve on all loans other than those identified as impaired. General reserves are assigned to various homogenous loan pools, including commercial, commercial real estate, construction and development, residential real estate, and consumer. General reserves are assigned based on historical loan loss ratios determined by loan pool and internal risk ratings that are adjusted for various internal and external risk factors unique to each loan pool. The following table analyzes the activity in the allowance over the past two years.
Our allowance for loan losses was $16.3 million at December 31, 2020 compared to $6.5 million at December 31, 2019, an increase in the allowance of 150.8%. The increase was primarily due to the growth of our loan portfolio, the anticipated decline in worldwide economic activity due to the actual and projected effects of COVID-19, and a specific reserve of $7.6 million on the loan facility for Coex Coffee International. At December 31, 2020, our allowance for loan losses was 1.10% of total loans, net of overdrafts and excluding PPP loans (non-GAAP, see Explanation of Certain Unaudited Non-GAAP Financial Measures) and provided coverage of 155.8% of our nonperforming loans, compared to an allowance for loan losses to total gross loans (net of overdrafts) ratio of 0.83% as of December 31, 2019. We believe our allowance at December 31, 2020 was adequate to absorb potential losses inherent in our loan portfolio. As of December 31, 2020, MBI purchase accounting loan marks were $18.8 million.The following table provides an allocation of the allowance for loan losses to specific loan types as of the end of the fiscal year for each of the past two years.
At December 31, 2020, the recorded investment in impaired loans (consisting of nonaccrual loans, troubled debt restructured loans, loans past due 90 days or more and still accruing interest and other loans based on management’
judgment) was $13.1 million, of which there were three impaired loans with a recorded investment of $10.4 million on nonaccrual with an allowance $8.3 million and one substandard accruing loan with a recorded investment of $2.4 million with no allowance. At December 31, 2019, the recorded investment in impaired loans was $5.1 million, $1.1 million of which required a specific reserve of $0.6 million. The increase was primarily due to the impairment of the Coex loan in the third quarter of 2020.
Impaired loans also include certain loans that were modified as troubled debt restructurings, or TDRs. At December 31, 2020, we had two loans amounting to $0.3 million that were considered to be TDRs, compared to two loans amounting to $0.4 million at December 31, 2019. We did not allocate any specific reserves to loans that have been modified as TDRs as of December 31, 2020 or 2019.
Deposits
Deposits are our primary source of funding. We offer a variety of deposit products including checking, NOW, savings, money market and time accounts all of which we actively market at competitive pricing. We generate deposits from our consumer and commercial clients through the efforts of our private bankers. We supplement our deposits with wholesale funding sources such as Quickrate and brokered deposits. However, we do not significantly rely on wholesale funding sources, which are generally viewed as less stable compared to core deposits due to the relatively higher price elasticity of demand for deposits from wholesale sources. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, these wholesale deposits represented 4.3% and 4.6%, respectively, of our total deposits.
Interest-bearing deposits increased $475.3 million, or 67.1%, from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020 primarily due to a $317.3 million increase in money market account balances and a $127.2 million increase in certificates of deposit. In order to fund our loan growth, all of our bankers are actively involved with our strategic efforts and are incentivized to grow core deposits. The average rate paid on interest-bearing deposits decreased 105 basis points from 1.73% for the year ended December 31, 2019 to 0.68% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in average rates paid on interest-bearing deposits was a result of a continued decrease in market rates of interest during the year ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $30.1 million in brokered deposits, 1.8% of total deposits, an increase of approximately $7.5 million, or 33.2% from December 31, 2019. We did not obtain these brokered deposits through a deposit listing agency, but rather through an existing relationship with the Bank and through the business combination with MBI. As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $0.5 million in outstanding brokered deposits that were assumed through the business combination with MBI and are included in the total brokered deposits. These deposits meet the regulatory definition of brokered deposits and are reported accordingly.
The following table presents the ending balances and percentage of total deposits for the periods indicated.
The following table presents the maturities of our certificates of deposit as of December 31, 2020.
Borrowings
We primarily use short-term and long-term borrowings to supplement deposits to fund our lending and investment activities.
FHLB Advances. The FHLB allows us to borrow up to 25% of our assets on a blanket floating lien status collateralized by certain securities and loans. As of December 31, 2020, approximately $189.9 million in loans were pledged as collateral for our FHLB borrowings. We utilize these borrowings to meet liquidity needs and to fund certain fixed rate loans in our portfolio. As of December 31, 2020, we had $40.0 million in outstanding advances and $109.7 million in additional available borrowing capacity from the FHLB based on the collateral that we have currently pledged. The following table sets forth certain information on our FHLB borrowings during the periods presented.
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. The Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta has an available borrower in custody arrangement which allows us to borrow on a collateralized basis. No advances were outstanding under this facility as of December 31, 2020.
Loan Participations. The Company reclassified three loans, originally recorded net of participations in March as part of the MBI acquisition in accordance with ASC Topic 860 Transfers and Servicing. As a result, both loans and other borrowings increased by $13.2 million during the fourth quarter due to the reclassification. A review of the original
participation documentation revealed that the agreements did not contain certain technical attributes required to qualify for sales treatment. These reclassifications do not impact earnings or capital.
PPPLF Advances. The Company participated in the PPP and processed, closed and funded 1,506 small business loans representing $226.2 million in relief proceeds throughout 2020. The majority of these loans were initially pledged to the Federal Reserve as part of the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility (PPPLF). The PPPLF pledged loans are non-recourse to the Company. These loans are guaranteed by the government and as such no loan loss reserves have been recorded for these loans. In addition, the Company paid off approximately $123.6 million in PPPLF advances during the year ended December 31, 2020, and had a balance of $101.4 million remaining as of December 31, 2020. Interest income on loans include PPP loan fees.
Subordinated Debt. On March 26, 2020, pursuant to terms of the acquisition, the Company assumed the subordinated notes payable of MBI at its fair value of $10.3 million. According to the terms of the subordinated note, the principal amount due is $10.0 million with a 7% fixed rate until October 30, 2021 and a variable rate thereafter at LIBOR plus 576 basis points. The note matures on October 30, 2026 and can be redeemed by the Company anytime on or after October 30, 2021. The subordinated debt was fair valued at a premium of $0.5 million and will be amortized over the expected life.
Valley National Line of Credit. On December 19, 2019, the Company entered a $10.0 million secured revolving line of credit with Valley National Bank, N.A. Amounts drawn under this line of credit bears interest at the Prime Rate, as announced by The Wall Street Journal from time to time as its prime rate, and its obligations under this line of credit are secured by all the issued and outstanding shares of capital stock of the Bank, which we have pledged as security. On January 7, 2021 (the “Closing Date”) the Company and Valley National Bank, entered an amendment, among other things, extended the maturity date of the note to March 19, 2021. No other material terms of the note changed. The principal balance outstanding pursuant to the Note on the Closing Date was $0.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Capital Resources
Shareholders’ equity increased $136.3 million, or 171.8%, to $215.6 million at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019, primarily due to the acquisition of MBI and the closing of our IPO. Net income resulted in an increase to retained earnings of $8.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Shareholders’ equity decreased $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018, primarily due to our repurchase of 225,000 shares of Class A Common Stock for an aggregate purchase price of $3.9 million. Net income resulted in an increase to retained earnings of $2.3 million as of December 31, 2019.
We are subject to various regulatory capital requirements administered by the federal banking agencies. Failure to meet minimum capital requirements can initiate certain mandatory and possibly additional discretionary actions by regulators that, if undertaken, could have a material effect on our financial statements. Under capital adequacy guidelines and the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action, we must meet specific capital guidelines that involve quantitative measures of our assets, liabilities, and certain off-balance sheet items as calculated under regulatory accounting practices. The capital amounts and classifications are also subject to qualitative judgments by the regulators about components, risk weightings, and other factors.
Quantitative measures established by regulation to ensure capital adequacy require us to maintain minimum ratios of common equity Tier 1, Tier 2, and total capital as a percentage of assets and off-balance sheet exposures, adjusted for risk weights ranging from 0% to 150%. We are also required to maintain capital at a minimum level based on quarterly average assets, which is known as the leverage ratio.
In July 2013, federal bank regulatory agencies issued a final rule that revised their risk-based capital requirements and the method for calculating risk-weighted assets to make them consistent with certain standards that were developed by Basel III and certain provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act. The final rule applies to all depository institutions and bank holding companies and savings and loan holding companies with total consolidated assets of more than $1 billion, which
we refer to below as “covered” banking organizations. We were required to implement the new Basel III capital standards as of January 1, 2015 and January 1, 2019, respectively.
As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all applicable regulatory capital requirements to which we were subject, and the Bank was classified as “well capitalized” for purposes of the prompt corrective action regulations. As we deploy our capital and continue to grow our operations, our regulatory capital levels may decrease depending on our level of earnings. However, we intend to monitor and control our growth in order to remain in compliance with all regulatory capital standards applicable to us.
The following table presents our regulatory capital ratios as of the dates indicated. The amounts presented exclude the capital conservation buffer.
Liquidity
In general terms, liquidity is a measurement of our ability to meet our cash needs. Our objective in managing our liquidity is to maintain our ability to fund loan commitments, purchase securities, accommodate deposit withdrawals or repay other liabilities in accordance with their terms, without an adverse impact on our current or future earnings. Our liquidity strategy is guided by policies that are formulated and monitored by our Asset Liability Management Committee, or ALCO, and senior management, including our Liquidity Contingency Policy, and which take into account the marketability of assets, the sources and stability of funding and the level of unfunded commitments. We regularly evaluate all of our various funding sources with an emphasis on accessibility, stability, reliability and cost-effectiveness.
Our principal source of funding has been our clients’ deposits, supplemented by our short-term borrowings, primarily from FHLB borrowings. We believe that the cash generated from operations, our borrowing capacity and our access to capital resources are sufficient to meet our future operating capital and funding requirements.
At December 31, 2020, we had the ability to generate approximately $313.7 million in additional liquidity through available resources. In addition to the primary borrowing outlets mentioned above, we also have the ability to generate liquidity by borrowing from the Federal Reserve Discount Window and through brokered deposits. We recognize the importance of maintaining liquidity and have developed a Contingent Liquidity Plan, which addresses various liquidity stress levels and our response and action based on the level of severity. We periodically test our credit facilities for access to the funds, but also understand that as the severity of the liquidity level increases, certain credit facilities may no longer be available. We conduct quarterly liquidity stress tests and the results are reported to our Asset-Liability Management Committee and our Board. We believe the liquidity available to us is sufficient to meet our ongoing needs.
We also view our investment portfolio as a liquidity source and have the option to pledge securities in our portfolio as collateral for borrowings or deposits, and/or sell selected securities. Our portfolio primarily consists of debt issued by the federal government and governmental agencies. The weighted-average maturity of our portfolio was 3.02 years and 3.50 years at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and had a net unrealized pre-tax gain of $1.2 million and pre-tax loss of $0.1, respectively, in our available for sale securities portfolio as of those dates.
As we deploy our capital and continue to grow our operations, we maintain cash in our Holding Company for added liquidity. As of December 31, 2020, cash held at the Holding Company was approximately $38.5 million. Our average net overnight funds sold position (defined as funds sold plus interest-bearing deposits with other banks less funds purchased) was $39.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to an average net overnight funds sold position of $25.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
We expect our capital expenditures over the next 12 months to be approximately $0.8 million, which will consist primarily of investments in digital capabilities, technology purchases for our new banking offices, business applications and information technology security needs. We expect that these capital expenditures will be funded with existing resources without impairing our ability to meet our ongoing obligations.
Inflation
The impact of inflation on the banking industry differs significantly from that of other industries in which a large portion of total resources are invested in fixed assets such as property, plant and equipment. Assets and liabilities of financial institutions are primarily all monetary in nature, and therefore are principally impacted by interest rates rather than changing prices. While the general level of inflation underlies most interest rates, interest rates react more to changes in the expected rate of inflation and to changes in monetary and fiscal policy.
Contractual Obligations
We have contractual obligations to make future payments on debt and lease agreements. While our liquidity monitoring and management consider both present and future demands for and sources of liquidity, the following table
of contractual commitments focuses only on future obligations and summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020.
Off-Balance Sheet Items
In the normal course of business, we enter into various transactions that, in accordance with GAAP, are not included in our consolidated balance sheets. We enter into these transactions to meet the financing needs of our clients. These transactions include commitments to extend credit and issue letters of credit, which involve, to varying degrees, elements of credit risk and interest rate risk in excess of the amounts recognized in our consolidated balance sheets. Our exposure to credit loss is represented by the contractual amounts of these commitments. The same credit policies and procedures are used in making these commitments as for on-balance sheet instruments. We are not aware of any accounting loss to be incurred by funding these commitments, however we maintain an allowance for off-balance sheet credit risk which is recorded in other liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet.
Our commitments associated with outstanding letters of credit and commitments to extend credit expiring by period as of the date indicated are summarized below. Since commitments associated with letters of credit and commitments to extend credit may expire unused, the amounts shown do not necessarily reflect the actual future cash funding requirements.
Unfunded lines of credit represent unused portions of credit facilities to our current borrowers that represent no change in credit risk in our portfolio. Lines of credit generally have variable interest rates. The maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make is represented by the contractual amount of the commitment, less the amount of any advances made.
Letters of credit are conditional commitments issued by us to guarantee the performance of a client to a third party. In the event of nonperformance by the client in accordance with the terms of the agreement with the third party, we would be required to fund the commitment. If the commitment is funded, we would be entitled to seek recovery from the client from the underlying collateral, which can include commercial real estate, physical plant and property, inventory, receivables, cash or marketable securities.
Our policies generally require that letter of credit arrangements contain security and debt covenants similar to those contained in loan agreements and our credit risk associated with issuing letters of credit is similar to the credit risk involved in extending loan facilities to our clients. The effect on our revenue, expenses, cash flows, and liquidity of the
unused portions of these letters of credit commitments and letters of credit cannot be precisely predicted because there is no guarantee that the lines of credit will be used.
Commitments to extend credit are agreements to lend funds to a client, as long as there is no violation of any condition established in the contract, for a specific purpose. Commitments generally have variable interest rates, fixed expiration dates or other termination clauses and may require payment of a fee. Since many of the commitments are expected to expire without being fully drawn, the total commitment amounts disclosed above do not necessarily represent future cash requirements. We evaluate each client’s creditworthiness on a case-by-case basis. The amount of collateral obtained, if considered necessary by us, upon extension of credit is based on management’s credit evaluation of the client.
We enter into forward commitments for the delivery of mortgage loans in our current pipeline. Interest rate lock commitments are entered into in order to economically hedge the effect of changes in interest rates resulting from our commitments to fund the loans. These commitments to fund mortgage loans, to be sold into the secondary market, (interest rate lock commitments) and forward commitments for the future delivery of mortgage loans to third party investors are considered derivatives. We attempt to minimize our exposure to loss under credit commitments by subjecting them to the same credit approval and monitoring procedures as we do for on-balance sheet instruments.
Certain Performance Metrics
The following table shows the return on average assets (computed as net income divided by average total assets), return on average equity (computed as net income divided by average equity) and average equity to average assets ratios for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Market Risk and Interest Rate Sensitivity
Overview
Market risk arises from changes in interest rates, exchange rates, commodity prices, and equity prices. We have risk management policies designed to monitor and limit exposure to market risk and we do not participate in activities that give rise to significant market risk involving exchange rates, commodity prices, or equity prices. In asset and liability management activities, our policies are designed to minimize structural interest rate risk.
Interest Rate Risk Management
Our net income is largely dependent on net interest income. Net interest income is susceptible to interest rate risk to the degree that interest-bearing liabilities mature or reprice on a different basis than interest earning assets. When interest-bearing liabilities mature or reprice more quickly than interest earning assets in a given period, a significant increase in market rates of interest could adversely affect net interest income. Similarly, when interest earning assets mature or reprice more quickly than interest-bearing liabilities, falling market interest rates could result in a decrease in net interest income. Net interest income is also affected by changes in the portion of interest earning assets that are funded by interest-bearing liabilities rather than by other sources of funds, such as noninterest-bearing deposits and shareholders’ equity.
We have established what we believe to be a comprehensive interest rate risk management policy, which is administered by ALCO. The policy establishes limits of risk, which are quantitative measures of the percentage change in net interest income (a measure of net interest income at risk) and the fair value of equity capital (a measure of economic value of equity, or EVE, at risk) resulting from a hypothetical change in interest rates for maturities from one
day to 30 years. We measure the potential adverse impacts that changing interest rates may have on our short-term earnings, long-term value, and liquidity by employing simulation analysis through the use of computer modeling. The simulation model captures optionality factors such as call features and interest rate caps and floors imbedded in investment and loan portfolio contracts. As with any method of gauging interest rate risk, there are certain shortcomings inherent in the interest rate modeling methodology used by us. When interest rates change, actual movements in different categories of interest earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, loan prepayments, and withdrawals of time and other deposits, may deviate significantly from assumptions used in the model. Finally, the methodology does not measure or reflect the impact that higher rates may have on adjustable-rate loan clients’ ability to service their debts, or the impact of rate changes on demand for loan and deposit products.
The balance sheet is subject to testing for interest rate shock possibilities to indicate the inherent interest rate risk. We prepare a current base case and several alternative interest rate simulations (-400, -300, -200, -100,+100, +200, +300 and +400 basis points (bps)), at least once per quarter, and report the analysis to ALCO and our Board. We augment our interest rate shock analysis with alternative interest rate scenarios on a quarterly basis that may include ramps, parallel shifts, and a flattening or steepening of the yield curve (non-parallel shift). In addition, more frequent forecasts may be produced when interest rates are particularly uncertain or when other business conditions so dictate.
Our goal is to structure the balance sheet so that net interest earnings at risk over a 12-month period and the economic value of equity at risk do not exceed policy guidelines at the various interest rate shock levels. We attempt to achieve this goal by balancing, within policy limits, the volume of floating-rate liabilities with a similar volume of floating-rate assets, by keeping the average maturity of fixed-rate asset and liability contracts reasonably matched, by managing the mix of our core deposits, and by adjusting our rates to market conditions on a continuing basis.
Analysis
The following table indicates that, for periods less than one year, rate-sensitive assets exceeded rate-sensitive liabilities, resulting in a slightly asset-sensitive position. For a bank with an asset-sensitive position, otherwise referred to as a positive gap, rising interest rates would generally be expected to have a positive effect on net interest income, and falling interest rates would generally be expected to have the opposite effect.
REPRICING GAP
(1) Includes loans held for resale
(2) Includes FRB and FHLB stock, which has been historically redeemable at par.
CASH FLOW GAP
(1) Includes loans held for sale
(2) Includes FRB and FHLB stock, which has been historically redeemable at par.
Measures of net interest income at risk produced by simulation analysis are indicators of an institution’s short-term performance in alternative rate environments. These measures are typically based upon a relatively brief period, and do not necessarily indicate the long-term prospects or economic value of the institution.
The following table summarizes the results of our net interest income at risk analysis in simulating the change in net interest income and fair value of equity over a 12-month and 24-month horizon as of December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Using an EVE, we analyze the risk to capital from the effects of various interest rate scenarios through a long-term discounted cash flow model. This measures the difference between the economic value of our assets and the economic value of our liabilities, which is an estimate of liquidation value. While this provides some value as a risk measurement tool, management believes net interest income at risk is more appropriate in accordance with the going concern principle.
The following table illustrates the results of our EVE analysis as of December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with United States GAAP and with general practices within the financial services industry. Application of these principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under current circumstances. These assumptions form the basis for our judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily available from independent, objective sources. We evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis. Use of alternative assumptions may have resulted in significantly different estimates. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
We have identified the following accounting policies and estimates that, due to the difficult, subjective, or complex judgments and assumptions inherent in those policies and estimates and the potential sensitivity of the financial statements to those judgments and assumptions, are critical to an understanding of our financial condition and results of operations. We believe that the judgments, estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements are appropriate.
Allowance for Loan Losses
The allowance for loan losses provides for probable incurred losses in the loan portfolio based upon management’s best assessment of the loan portfolio at each balance sheet date. It is maintained at a level estimated to be adequate to absorb potential losses through periodic charges to the provision for loan losses.
The allowance for loan losses consists of specific and general reserves. Specific reserves relate to loans classified as impaired. Loans are considered impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that we will be
unable to collect all amounts due in accordance with the contractual terms of the loan. Impaired loans include troubled debt restructurings, and performing and nonperforming loans. Impaired loans are reviewed individually and a specific allowance is allocated, if necessary, based on evaluation of either the fair value of the collateral underlying the loan or the present value of future cash flows calculated using the loan’s existing interest rate. General reserves relate to the remainder of the loan portfolio, including overdrawn deposit accounts, and are based on evaluation of a number of factors, such as current economic conditions, the quality and composition of the loan portfolio, loss history, and other relevant factors.
Our loans are generally secured by specific items of collateral including real property, consumer assets, and business assets. However, the ability of borrowers to honor their contractual repayment obligations is substantially dependent on changing economic conditions. Because of the uncertainties associated with economic conditions, collateral values, and future cash flows on impaired loans, it is reasonably possible that management’s estimate of loan losses in the loan portfolio and the amount of the allowance needed may change in the future. The determination of the allowance for loan losses is, in large part, based on estimates that are particularly susceptible to significant changes in the economic environment and market conditions. In situations where the repayment of a loan is dependent on the value of the underlying collateral, an independent appraisal of the collateral’s current market value is customarily obtained and used in the determination of the allowance for loan loss.
While management uses available information to recognize losses on loans, further reductions in the carrying amounts of loans may be necessary based on changes in economic conditions. Also regulatory agencies, as an integral part of their examination process, periodically review management’s assessments of the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses. Such agencies may require us to recognize additional losses based on their judgments about information available to them at the time of their examination.
Fair Value Measurements
Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in the principal or most advantageous market for an asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. The degree of management judgment involved in determining the fair value of a financial instrument is dependent upon the availability of quoted market prices or observable market inputs. For financial instruments that are traded actively and have quoted market prices or observable market inputs, there is minimal subjectivity involved in measuring fair value. However, when quoted market prices or observable market inputs are not fully available, significant management judgment may be necessary to estimate fair value. In developing our fair value estimates, we maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs.
The fair value hierarchy defines Level 1 valuations as those based on quoted prices (unadjusted) for identical assets or liabilities in active markets. Level 2 valuations include inputs based on quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets, and inputs that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly or indirectly, for substantially the full term of the financial instrument. Level 3 valuations are based on at least one significant assumption not observable in the market, or significant management judgment or estimation, some of which may be internally developed.
Financial assets that are recorded at fair value on a recurring basis include investment securities available for sale, and loans held for sale. Determining the fair values of assets and liabilities, especially the loan portfolio, core deposit intangibles and goodwill, is a complicated process involving significant judgement regarding methods and assumptions used to calculate the estimated fair values. As of December 31, 2020, MBI purchase accounting loan marks were $18.8 million.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The following provides a brief description of accounting standards that have been issued but are not yet adopted that could have a material effect on our financial statements. Please also refer to the Notes to our consolidated financial statements included in this annual report for a full description of recent accounting pronouncements, including the respective expected dates of adoption and anticipated effects on our results of operations and financial condition.
ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326)
In June 2016, FASB issued guidance to replace the incurred loss model with an expected loss model, which is referred to as the current expected credit loss, or CECL, model. The CECL model is applicable to the measurement of credit losses on financial assets measured at amortized cost, including loan receivables and held to maturity debt securities. It also applies to off-balance sheet credit exposures not accounted for as insurance (i.e. loan commitments, standby letters of credit, financial guarantees and other similar instruments). We anticipated that this ASU would be effective for us on January 1, 2021, but the FASB announced on October 16, 2019, a delay of the effective date of ASU 2016-13 for smaller reporting companies until January 1, 2023. We are in the process of evaluating and implementing changes to credit loss estimation models and related processes. Updates to business processes and the documentation of accounting policy decisions are ongoing. We may recognize an increase in the allowance for credit losses upon adoption, recorded as a one-time cumulative adjustment to retained earnings. However, the magnitude of the impact on our consolidated financial statements has not yet been determined.
ASU 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740)
In December 2019, FASB issued guidance which simplifies the accounting for income taxes by removing multiple exceptions to the general principals in Topic 740. The standard is effective for public business entities for fiscal years, and for interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2020. The Company does not expect the adoption of this standard to have a material impact on the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements.
ASU 2020-04, Reference Rate Reform (Topic 848)
In March 2020, FASB issued guidance which provides optional guidance to ease the accounting burden in accounting for, or recognizing the effects from, reference rate reform on financial reporting. The new standard is a result of the London Interbank Offered Rate ("LIBOR") likely being discontinued as an available benchmark rate. The standard is elective and provides optional expedients and exceptions for applying GAAP to contracts, hedging relationships, or other transactions that reference LIBOR, or another reference rate expected to be discontinued. The amendments in the update are effective for all entities between March 12, 2020 and December 31, 2022. The Company has established a cross-functional working group to guide the Company’s transition from LIBOR and has begun efforts to transition to alternative rates consistent with industry timelines. The Company has identified its products that utilize LIBOR and has implemented enhanced fallback language to facilitate the transition to alternative reference rates. The Company is evaluating existing platforms and systems and preparing to offer new rates.
FIL-36-2020, Interagency Statement on Loan Modifications and Reporting for Financial Institutions Working with Customers Affected by the Coronavirus
On March 22, 2020, the federal banking agencies issued an “Interagency Statement on Loan Modifications and Reporting for Financial Institutions Working with Customers Affected by the Coronavirus”, which was subsequently clarified and revised by an interagency statement issued on April 7, 2020. This guidance encourages financial institutions to work prudently with borrowers that may be unable to meet their contractual obligations because of the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. The guidance explains that the staffs of the FASB and the federal banking agencies have concluded that short-term modifications (e.g. six months) made on a good faith basis to borrowers who were current as of the implementation date of a relief program are not Troubled Debt Restructurings (“TDRs”). The Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (CARES Act) was signed into law on March 27, 2020 and has subsequently been amended several times. Section 4013 of the CARES Act also addressed COVID-19 pandemic related modifications and specified that COVID-19 pandemic related modifications on loans that were current as of December 31, 2019 are not TDRs. Modifications were executed in the second and third quarters of 2020. The majority of the loan modifications we made for customers involved three to six month forbearance payments which were added to the end of the note.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company approved $199.8 million in payment relief modifications that were granted under the CARES Act guidance associated with the treatment of TDRs. Since the inception of the CARES Act, $187.8 million of these loans either have been reinstated to their original payment terms or have been paid
off. As of December 31, 2020, there were 13 loans measured with a fair value of $11.1 million, that remain under the exemption from TDR classification as provided for in the CARES Act. To manage credit risk, the Company increased oversight and analysis of loans to borrowers in vulnerable industries, such as hotels and hospitality. As of December 31, 2020, these loans have a balance of $54.3 million. For the year ended December 31, 2020, $30.6 million of these loans were provided payment relief consistent with Section 4013 of the CARES Act and the interagency guidelines published on March 13, 2020, and as of December 31, 2020, $28.3 million has been reinstated and returned to normal payment schedules, with one deferred loan remaining in this group.
Explanation of Certain unaudited non-GAAP Financial Measures
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains financial information determined by methods other than United States GAAP, including adjusted net income and adjusted net income per share, which we refer to “non-GAAP financial measures.” The table below provides a reconciliation between these non-GAAP measures and net income and net income per share, which are the most comparable GAAP measures.
Management uses these non-GAAP financial measures in its analysis of the Company’s performance and believes these measures are useful supplemental information that can enhance investors’ understanding of the Company’s business and performance without considering taxes or provisions for loan losses and can be useful when comparing performance with other financial institutions. However, these non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the comparable GAAP measures.
Reconciliation of non-GAAP Financial Measures
Reconciliation of non-GAAP Earnings and Adjusted Earnings
Reconciliation of non-GAAP Allowance for Loan Loss