ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following is a discussion of our financial condition and results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, and other factors that are expected to affect our prospective financial condition. The following discussion and analysis should be read together with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes beginning on page 28 of this annual report.
Some of the statements set forth in this section are forward-looking statements relating to our future results of operations, financial condition, liquidity and capital resources. Our actual results, financial condition, liquidity and capital resources may vary from the results anticipated by these statements. We disclaim any obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements based on the occurrence of future events, the receipt of new information, or otherwise. Actual future results may differ materially from those expressed in the forward-looking statements as a result of risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Please see “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” on page 4 of this annual report.
Overview
We are workers’ compensation cost containment specialists. Our business objective is to deliver value to our customers that reduces their workers’ compensation related medical claims expense in a manner that will assure injured employees receive high quality healthcare that allows them to recover from injury and return to gainful employment without undue delay. Our customers include self-administered employers, insurers, third party administrators, municipalities and others. While we process medical bill reviews in a number of states, our customers are based principally in California where the high cost of workers’ compensation insurance is a critical problem.
Our core services focus on reducing medical treatment costs by enabling our customers to share control over the medical treatment process of their injured workers. This control is obtained by participation in one of our medical treatment networks. We realize revenues from enrollment of the employees of our customers into our various networks. We also provide claims-related services including utilization review, medical case management, medical bill review, lien representation, workers’ compensation carve-outs, legal support and Medicare set-aside services that bring efficiencies to claims processing and management that reduce the overall burden of workers’ compensation claims resolution.
Our business generally has a long sales cycle, typically more than one year. Once we have established a customer relationship and enrolled employees of our customers, our revenue adjusts with the growth or retraction of our customers’ managed headcount. Throughout the year, new employees and customers are added while others terminate for a variety of reasons.
As discussed in this annual report, COVID-19 has had and will likely continue to have an impact on our business. We anticipate that even after work restrictions and social distancing mandates are lifted some portion of our customers’ workforces will continue to work remotely. This could lead to lower incidences of workplace injuries among certain of our customers workforces. Notwithstanding such a reduction, this does not eliminate an employer’s obligation to provide workers compensation coverage to employees working remotely. We expect businesses will continue to seek ways to control their workers’ compensation program costs. While our HCO and MPN programs have been shown to create a favorable return on investment for our customers, (as our services are a significant component of our customers’ loss prevention programs), from time to time we experience customer volatility in the form of existing customers terminating or seeking to renegotiate the scope and terms of existing services, switching to a third party administrator or insurance company that provides the same services as ours, or seeking to reduce costs by managing their workers’ compensation care services in-house.
Summary of Fiscal 2020
During the year ended December 31, 2020, total revenues decreased 18%. Revenue from HCO, MPN, utilization review, medical bill review, medical case management, and other fees decreased 16%, 2%, 6%, 43%, 22% and 12%, respectively.
During fiscal 2020, operating expenses decreased by 8%, primarily as a result of decreases in depreciation, bad debt provision, consulting fees, salaries and wages, professional fees, outsource service fees, data maintenance and general and administration expenses. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in insurance expense. As a result, our income from operations was $820,271 during fiscal 2020, compared to $1,680,135 in fiscal 2019.
Our provision for income tax expense decreased 44% during fiscal 2020, from $482,075 in 2019 to $270,701 in 2020 due to a 51% decrease in income from operations.
Our net income also decreased 54% to $549,570 in 2020. Basic and fully diluted earnings per share during fiscal 2020 was $0.04 and $0.04, respectively compared to $0.09 and $0.09, respectively during fiscal 2019.
Comparison of the Fiscal Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Results of Operations
The following represents selected components of our consolidated results of operations, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, together with changes from year-to-year:
Revenue
HCO
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, HCO revenue was $1,453,365 and $1,724,276, respectively, a 16% decrease. This decrease in HCO revenue was primarily attributable to the loss of four customers, one customer switching to our MPN program and a reduction in use of our other services due to state and local business restrictions from COVID-19. Many of our customers have temporarily or permanently reduced their workforces because of COVID-19. As a result, fees generated from employee enrollment into our HCO networks, monthly HCO program administration fees, and claim network fees for workplace injuries decreased. HCO revenue is generated largely from fees charged to our customers for access to our HCO networks, per claim fees, notification fees and fees for other ancillary services they may select. We also generate revenue from HCO notifications, which are mailed out annually and handed out by the employer for all new hires during the month of hire. We prepare the mailings no earlier than three months prior to the end of the previous year’s enrollment so that our customers are able to prepare their employee rosters.
MPN
MPN revenue for 2020 was $502,590 compared to $510,622 for 2019, a decrease of 2%, primarily from decreases in claims administration fees due to COVID-19 business restrictions that caused customers to reduce their workforce temporarily or permanently. This resulted in a decrease in the number of claims and MPN program fees. These decreases were partially offset by a customer switching from our HCO program to our MPN program and an increase in claim network fees from existing customers in the fourth quarter. Like HCO revenue, MPN revenue is generated largely from fees charged to our customers for access to our MPN networks, per claim fees and fees for other services our MPN customers may select. Unlike the HCO, MPNs do not require annual notifications, MPNs are only required to provide a notice to an injured worker at the time the employer is notified by the injured worker that an injury occurred.
Utilization review
During the year ended December 31, 2020, utilization review revenue decreased 6% from $1,215,089 in 2019 to $1,142,796 in 2020. The decrease in revenue was due to there being fewer medical treatment requests to review as a result of COVID-19-related restrictions on non-essential medical treatments. The decrease was partially offset by the addition of one new customer in the second quarter. Utilization review is the review of medical treatment requests by providers to provide a safeguard for employers and injured workers against unnecessary and inappropriate medical treatment from the perspective of medical necessity, quality of care, appropriateness of decision-making, and timeliness of treatment. Its purpose is to reduce employer liability for medical costs that are not medically appropriate or approved by the relevant medical and legal authorities and the payor.
Medical bill review
During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, revenue from medical bill review decreased by 43% to $305,510 when compared the same period a year earlier. This decrease in revenue was due to the loss of one customer, state and local COVID-19 business restrictions that prevented medical providers from performing non-essential medical treatments during most of 2020, which resulted in fewer medical and hospital bills to review for customers. California and many other states have established fee schedules for the maximum allowable fees payable under workers’ compensation for a variety of procedures performed by medical providers. Many procedures, however, are not covered under the fee schedules, such as hospital bills, which still require review and negotiation. Medical bill review involves analyzing medical provider services and equipment billing to ascertain proper reimbursement. Such services include, but are not limited to, coding review and re-bundling, confirming that the services are customary and reasonable, fee schedule compliance, out-of-network bill review, pharmacy review, and preferred provider organization repricing arrangements. Our medical bill review services can result in significant savings for our customers.
Medical case management
During the twelve-month periods ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, revenue from medical case management was $2,404,148 and $3,078,488, respectively. The $674,340 decrease in medical case management revenue was primarily the result of the loss of two customers, changes to our billing hours structure for various activities, and a decrease in the number of new claims and time spent on open claims managed with existing customers.
State and local COVID-19 restrictions placed on the delivery of non-essential medical treatment by medical providers reduced our customers’ needs for medical case management as medical providers’ offices were closed or limited to emergency medical care. The decrease was partially offset by the addition of three new customers in the first and second quarters and increases in the medical case management of COVID-19-related illness claims. Medical case management keeps medical treatment claims progressing to a resolution and assures treatment plans are aligned from a medical perspective. Medical oversight is a collaborative process that assesses, evaluates, coordinates, implements and monitors medical treatment plans and the options and services required to meet an injured worker’s health needs. A medical case manager acts as a liaison between the injured worker, claims adjuster, medical providers and attorneys to achieve optimal results for injured workers and customers. We work to manage the number of nurses in our program to maintain our ratio of claims per nurse at a level that ensures timely and appropriate medical care is given to the injured worker and facilitates faster claims closures for our customers.
Other
Other fees consist of revenue from network access fees derived from out of network referrals to our network of physicians, claims fees, expert witness testimony, lien representation, legal support services, Medicare set-aside, and workers’ compensation carve-outs services. Other fee revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased 12% when compared to the same period a year earlier. The decrease of $32,214 was the result of fewer employee claims accessing our network from two customers, partially offset by an increase in Medicare set-aside arrangements. We recorded no revenues from lien representation, legal support services, and workers’ compensation carve-outs services during 2020.
Expenses
Total expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, were $5,222,447 and $5,650,805, respectively. The decrease of $428,358 was the result of decreases in depreciation, bad debt provision, consulting fees, salaries and wages, professional fees, outsource service fees, data maintenance and general and administrative expenses. These decreases were partially offset by increases in insurance.
Depreciation expenses
During the twelve-month period ended December 31, 2020, we recorded depreciation expense of $55,428 compared to $76,168 during the comparable 2019 period. The decrease in depreciation was primarily attributable to certain furniture, fixtures, and computer software being fully depreciated during 2020.
Consulting fees
During the year ended December 31, 2020, consulting fees decreased $15,222, from $268,403 in 2019 to $253,181 in 2020. This 6% decrease was mainly the result of a reduction of services by the consultant that was assisting with our insurance company acquisition search.
Salaries and wages
During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, salaries and wages decreased by 6%. This decrease was the result of a reduction in our workforce due to a decline in demand for our services caused by the effects of COVID-19 restrictions on our customers.
Professional fees
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we decreased professional fees 16% compared to the same period in 2019. This decrease was primarily the result of decreases in medical case management professional fees, legal, accounting, and other fees.
Insurance
During 2020, we incurred insurance expenses of $351,122, an increase of $22,459 when compared to 2019 primarily due to the increases in insurance expenses for group health, business, directors and officers liability, and workers’ compensation. We expect insurance fees to increase in August 2021, when our current group health insurance plan is up for renewal.
Outsource service fees
Outsource service fees consist of costs incurred by our subsidiaries in partially outsourcing utilization review, medical bill review, medical case management, and Medicare set-aside services and typically tends to increase and decrease in correlation with the demand for those services. We incurred $449,836 and $481,695 in outsource service fees during the twelve-month periods ended December 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease of $31,859 was primarily the result of decreases in the number of utilization review referrals, medical bill reviews, and medical case management assignments received from customers due to COVID-19 restrictions on medical providers for non-essential services, partially offset by an increase of referrals sent out for Medicare set-aside arrangements. We anticipate our outsource service fees will continue to move in correspondence with the level of utilization review, medical bill review, certain medical case management services and Medicare set-aside services we provide in the future.
Data maintenance
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we incurred data maintenance fees of $184,946 and $192,059, respectively. The decrease of $7,113 was primarily the result of a decrease in the number of employee HCO and MPN notification fees from customers as a result of COVID-19 related workforce reductions. Data maintenance fees tend to fluctuate from month to month depending on when new customers are enrolled, when the annual renewal of existing customer notification is due, and how many new employees our customers enroll in our HCO or MPN program.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses decreased 15% to $695,899 during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, when compared to 2019. The decrease in general and administrative expense was primarily attributable to decreases in advertising, charitable contributions, auto expense, dues and subscriptions, equipment/repairs, IT enhancements, office supplies, parking, postage and delivery, printing and reproduction, rent expense for equipment, travel and entertainment, vacation and miscellaneous expenses, partially offset by increases in bank charges, licenses and permits, telephone, rent, and shareholders’ expenses. These changes in general and administrative expenses were largely the result of COVID-19-related changes to how we conducted business during 2020.
Income from Operations
The 18% decrease in total revenues during fiscal 2020 more than offset the 8% decrease in total expenses during the same period, resulting in a 51% decrease in income from operations during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, when compared to 2019.
Income Tax Provision
During the year ended December 31, 2020 we realized income from operations of $820,271 compared to $1,680,135, during the year ended December 31, 2019. This 51% decrease in income from operations resulted in a corresponding 44% decrease in our provision for income taxes.
Net Income
During the year ended December 31, 2020, total revenues of $6,042,718 decreased by $1,288,222 when compared to the same period 2019. This decrease in total revenues was only partially offset by decreases in total expenses of $428,358, resulting in income from operations of $820,271, compared to income from operations of $1,680,135 during 2019. These changes coupled with changes in our income tax provision resulted in net income of $549,570 in 2020, compared to net income of $1,198,060 during 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We realized net income and an increase in cash during fiscal 2020. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash on hand of $9,498,457 compared to $8,104,164 at December 31, 2019. The $1,394,293 increase in cash on hand was primarily the result of net cash provided by our operating and financing activities, partially offset by cash used in investing activities.
Net cash provided by our operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020, was the result of realizing net income coupled with increases in depreciation, bad debt allowances, accounts payable, accrued expenses, income tax payable, and deferred tax and decreases in accounts receivable, prepaid income tax, receivable - other, prepaid expenses, partially offset by decreases in deferred rent expense and unearned revenue. By comparison, net cash provided by our operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2019, was the result of realizing net income coupled with increases in bad debt provision, accrued expenses, deferred rent expense, unearned revenue decreases in receivable other, prepaid expense and deferred tax asset, partially offset by increases in accounts receivable and prepaid income tax and decreases in accounts payable.
We used $53,848 in investing activities during 2020 for purchases of computers, furniture and equipment compared to $59,168 in 2019.
In 2019, we replaced all of our desktops with laptops due to the age of the computers and as part of our continuity plan. In 2020, additional computers and equipment were needed to move operations remotely for employees. We anticipate investing activities will continue as we replace damaged and outdated equipment. Barring a significant downturn in the economy or the loss of major customers, we believe that cash on hand and anticipated revenues from operations will be enough to cover our operating expenses over the next twelve months.
Net cash provided by financing activities during 2020 of $460,700 came from three PPP loans for PHCO, MMC and MMM in the amounts of $133,400, $59,600, and $267,700, respectively. We didn’t engage in financing activities in 2019. In February 2021, all three loans and any interest accrued between the time the forgiveness application was submitted and approved were fully forgiven.
We continue to investigate potential opportunities to expand our business either through the creation of new business lines or the acquisition of existing businesses. We continue to have interest in expanding our business into the insurance industry and through acquisitions of other companies providing similar or complimentary services to the services we currently offer but have not identified any suitable candidates or opportunities at the current time. We anticipate an expansion or acquisition of this sort may require greater capital resources than we currently possess. Should we need additional capital resources, we could seek to obtain such through debt and/or equity financing. We do not currently possess an institutional source of financing and there is no assurance that we could be successful in obtaining equity or debt financing when needed on acceptable terms, or at all. We could also use shares of our capital stock as consideration for a business acquisition transaction, if the counterparty has interest. We anticipate an acquisition using our capital stock as consideration would result in dilution to our existing shareholders.
Cash Flow
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash was primarily used to fund operations. We had net increases in cash of $1,394,293 and $1,031,657 during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. See below for additional, discussion and analysis of cash flow.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $987,441 and $1,090,825 in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease of $103,384 in cash flow from operating activities was the result of realizing lower net income coupled with decreases in accounts receivable, bad debt provision, prepaid income tax, receivable - other, prepaid expenses, deferred rent expense, and unearned revenue, partially offset by increases in accounts payable, accrued expenses, deferred taxes and income tax payable.
Net cash used in investing activities was $53,848 and $59,168 in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Net cash used in investing activities was lower by $5,320 in 2020 because of a decrease in purchases of computers, furniture and equipment.
In 2020 net cash provided by financing activities was $460,700 from PPP loans issued to PHCO, MMC and MMM, respectively, compared to $0 in 2019.
Impact of COVID-19 on our Business
In late 2019, the novel coronavirus, COVID-19, was identified. By February 2020, the virus had spread to many countries around the world, including the United States. By late February, authorities in the United States began advising American businesses to prepare for the effects of the outbreak. On March 19, 2020, the governor of California issued a stay-at-home order except for essential services, such as grocery stores, gas stations and banks. In mid-March 2020, we implemented our disaster recovery and business plan addressing how our business operations would be performed by our employees working remotely. As a result, since that time, nearly 100% of our employees have been working remotely and performing approximately 95% of our typical business functions, with the primary exceptions being certain manual, non-critical functions.
We have continued throughout the pandemic to keep our workforce almost entirely remote and have implemented strict risk reduction measures in the on-site office work environment, including limiting on-site capacity to 10%, requiring pre-shift symptom checks, requiring the use of face coverings, requiring social distancing and virtual meetings, enhancing cleaning and sanitizing measures, and other practices and physical changes that tend to reduce the risk of contracting COVID-19 at work. We are continually assessing the situation and taking such actions as we believe appropriate to respond to threats and potential business impacts, including incurring expenses to maintain remote work viability, information technology and security.
Thus far these measures have shown to be effective in preventing the spread of COVID-19 among our employees in the course of their employment, and to date we have incurred no workers’ compensation costs, penalties from Cal/OSHA or other relevant safety authorities, or lost labor hours due to an outbreak. Although these measures have thus far been successful in preventing the spread of COVID-19 among our employees, if these measures cease to be effective, any resulting spread of COVID-19 among our employees could negatively impact our workforce availability and efficiency to provide revenue-generating services and continued operations.
To date we have been able to adapt our business operations to a primarily remote workforce, with no material interruptions in service, data breaches, technology failures, or ability to complete mission-critical functions. We have been able to effectively maintain contact with employees, partners, clients, and other related parties using technological solutions such as virtual meetings, enhanced collaboration programs, and have developed policies and protocols to ensure department and employee performance quality is maintained despite the change in work setting. This has resulted in costs associated with maintaining a remote workforce, including reimbursing employees for internet, phone, and office supply expenses; costs of sanitizing and cleaning the office after potential COVID-19 exposure events; costs of cleaning and PPE supplies; additional computer hardware costs; and some administrative burdens in complying with California laws and regulations related to COVID-19 safety.
Revenue for our services is derived from our customers’ employee counts and workers’ workplace injuries. Several of our customers, including some of our largest customers, have had to suspend or significantly modify their operations during the pandemic. Until the impacts of COVID-19 on our customers’ businesses lessens, employees return to more normal workloads and the occurrence of workplace injuries returns to more traditional levels, we anticipate our revenues will continue to be negatively affected.
California state orders have been modified to allow some categories of businesses to re-open under COVID-19 restrictions, while others, such as bars and restaurants, have been under various orders that have forced closures and re-openings several times. As of March 22, 2021, most of our customers’ businesses are allowed to operate under COVID-19 restrictions but continue to experience lower-than normal business volume and employee counts due to the pandemic.
In May 2020, the governor of California issued an executive order declaring that any employee who becomes ill with COVID-19 will be presumed to have contracted the disease in the workplace if the worker worked onsite any time during the fourteen-day period prior to the onset of the illness. The presumption is rebuttable by the employer with sufficient evidence discovered within 30 days, but in many cases, this places the burden of medical care for COVID-19 cases on employers. The executive order was valid through July 5, 2020. A new California bill has been passed to address employer liability in workers’ compensation for COVID-19 cases contracted after the expiration of the Governor’s executive order. The bill includes a requirement that a certain percentage of the employer’s workers be confirmed to have contracted the coronavirus before a rebuttable presumption of industrial origin is applied to individual cases, which may impact the extent to which workers’ compensation is used to address its treatment in California.
The Actuary Committee of the California Workers’ Compensation Insurance Rating Bureau is attempting to assess the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on future claims frequency and costs in relation to historically traditional claims frequency during times of severe economic downturn. They are especially focused on post-termination claims, work-at-home arrangements, and the COVID-19 presumption.
On April 21, 2020, PHCO was granted a Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loan for an amount of $133,400. On April 30, 2020 and May 11, 2020 subsidiaries MMM and MMC were granted PPP loans of $267,700 and $59,600, respectively. In the spirit of the PPP loan program policy of protecting the continued economic stability of employees, we put virtually all of the PPP loan amounts toward payroll and employee benefit expenses. During February 2021, PHCO, MMC, and MMM received full forgiveness of their PPP loans including accrued interest.
In late June 2020, the reduction in volume in some areas of our business became clear as a trend. As a result, and after attempts to cut expenses in other areas, it became necessary to institute a business restructuring that included a reduction in force. After conducting an analysis of departmental demand, departmental function, projected business needs, and personnel, we laid off four employees in July 2020. The layoffs have not impacted our customers, or our revenue generation potential based on our current and projected business volume.
Contractual Obligations and Contingencies
Smaller reporting companies are not required to provide this information.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we had no off-balance sheet financing arrangements.
Inflation
We experience pricing pressures in the form of competitive pricing. Insurance carriers and third-party administrators often try to take our customers by offering bundled claims administration services with their own managed care services at a lower rate. We are also impacted by rising costs for certain inflation-sensitive operating expenses such as labor and employee benefits and facility leases. We believe that these impacts are material to our revenues or net income. Some of our customers are public entities which contract with us at a fixed price for the term of the contract. Increases in labor and employee benefits can reduce our profit margin over the term of these contracts.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principle generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). Application of these principles requires us to make estimates, assumptions, and judgments that affect the amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. We continually evaluate our accounting policies, estimates, and judgments and base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Because of the inherent uncertainty in making estimates and judgments, actual results could differ from our estimates and judgments. We consider (i) revenue recognition, (ii) leases, (iii) allowance for uncollectible accounts, and (iv) income taxes to be the most critical accounting policies because they relate to accounting areas that require the most subjective or complex judgments by us, and, as such, could be most subject to revision as new information becomes available.
Revenue Recognition: We recognize revenue when control of the promised services is transferred to our customers in an amount that reflects the consideration expected to be entitled to in exchange for those services. As we complete our performance obligations which are identified below, we have an unconditional right to consideration as outlined in our contracts with our customers. Generally, our accounts receivable are expected to be collected in 30 days in accordance with the underlying payment terms.
We offer multiple services under our managed care and network solutions service lines, which the customer may choose to purchase. These services are billed individually as separate components to our customers. Revenue is recognized as the work is performed in accordance with our customer contracts. Based upon the nature of our products, bundled managed care elements are generally delivered in the same accounting period. Advance payments from subscribers and billings made in advance are recorded on the balance sheet as deferred revenue.
Leases: We determine if an arrangement includes a lease at inception. Right-of-use assets represent our right to use an underlying asset for the lease term; and lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Right-of-use assets and lease liabilities are recognized at the commencement date of the lease, renewal date of the lease or significant remodeling of the lease space based on the present value of the remaining future minimum lease payments. Leases with a term greater than one year are recognized on the balance sheet as right-of-use assets and short-term and long-term lease liabilities, as applicable.
Operating lease liabilities and their corresponding right-of-use assets are initially recorded based on the present value of lease payments over the expected remaining lease term. The interest rate implicit in lease contracts is typically not readily determinable. As a result, we utilize our incremental borrowing rate to discount lease payments, which reflects the fixed rate at which we could borrow on a collateralized basis the amount of the lease payments in the same currency, for a similar term, in a similar economic environment. Our leases may include options to extend or terminate the lease which are included in the lease term when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise any such options. Lease expense for lease payments is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts: We determine our allowance for uncollectible accounts by considering a number of factors, including the length of time trade accounts receivable are past due, our previous loss history, the customers’ current ability to pay its obligation to us, and the condition of the general economy and the industry as a whole. We write off accounts receivable when they become uncollectible.
We must make significant judgments and estimates in determining contractual and bad debt allowances in any accounting period. One significant uncertainty inherent in our analysis is whether our past experience will be indicative of future periods. Although we consider future projections when estimating contractual and bad debt allowances, we ultimately make our decisions based on the best information available to us at the time the decision is made. Adverse changes in general economic conditions or trends in reimbursement amounts for our services could affect our contractual and bad debt allowance estimates, collection of accounts receivable, cash flows, and results of operations. Three customers and one customer accounted for 10% or more of accounts receivable at December 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Accounting for Income Taxes: We record a tax provision for the anticipated tax consequences of our reported results of operations. The provision for income taxes is computed using the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the currently enacted tax rates that apply to taxable income in effect for the years in which those tax assets are expected to be realized or settled. We record a valuation allowance, if necessary, to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is believed more likely than not to be realized.
We recognize tax benefits from uncertain tax positions only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such positions are then measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement.
Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, will be sufficient to fully recover the deferred tax assets. In the event we determine all, or part of the net deferred tax assets are not realizable in the future, we will make an adjustment to the valuation allowance that would be charged to earnings in the period such determination is made. In addition, the calculation of tax liabilities involves significant judgment in estimating the impact of uncertainties in the application of GAAP and complex tax laws. Resolution of these uncertainties in a manner inconsistent with management’s expectations could have a material impact on our financial condition and operating results. The significant assumptions and estimates described above are important contributors to our ultimate effective tax rate in each year.