Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
For a complete understanding, this Management's Discussion and Analysis should be read in conjunction with the Financial Statements and Notes to the Financial Statements contained in this annual report on Form 10-K.
Recent Developments
On November 27, 2020, we sold one of the bays from our old office building located in Spruce Grove, Canada. The remaining three bays were subsequently sold on January 22, 2021. We received overall cash proceeds from these two sales of $1,154,714 CAD which resulted in a gain on the sale of this building. Due to the timing of these two sales transactions, a gain
on the sale of the first bay was recorded in our 2020 results and a gain from the sale of the remaining three bays was recorded in January 2021.
Results of Operations
Revenues, Cost of Goods Sold, and Gross Profit
The table below presents information regarding revenues, cost of goods sold, and gross profit.
Total revenues decreased by 45% which was primarily driven by macro industry changes associated with the COVID-19 pandemic during 2020. The average oil price in 2020 was $39.16 per barrel compared to $56.99 per barrel in 2019, representing a decrease of 31.3%. The 2020 weekly average onshore rig count for North America was 505 compared to 1,052 in 2019. As a result of these macro trends, we believe many exploration and production companies pulled back on capital expenditure budgets or deferred planned spending. We continue to focus our resources in geographic areas that we believe have the greatest potential for improved revenues and return on investment. However, continued volatility in commodity prices, or weak oil prices during 2021, could cause our customers to reduce operating and capital expenditures even more, which would adversely affect our revenues.
Total cost of goods sold decreased due to the decrease in revenues. As a percentage of revenue, cost of goods sold increased during 2020 due to the fixed portion of cost of goods and services being higher as a percentage of revenue given the drop in sales volume during the year. We continue to work with our suppliers to control our inventory costs, which has the largest impact on margin. As a result of these changes, total gross profit decreased by $10,002,158 during 2020 compared to 2019. As a percentage of revenues, total gross profit decreased due to factors described above.
Operating Expenses
The table below presents information on operating expenses:
General and administrative expenses decreased by $2,813,073 or 21% during 2020 compared to 2019 but increased as a percentage of revenue because revenues decreased 45% during the same period. Throughout 2020 we took actions to reduce expenses and adjust our cost structure to reduce the fixed cost burden on our business. These efforts contributed to the decrease in general and administrative expenses during the year. In the current environment, we continue to evaluate our cost structure in an effort to manage costs closely and improve profitability.
Research and development expenses decreased by $634,009 or 33% during 2020 compared to 2019 and increased slightly as a percentage of revenue. We continue to prioritize research and development projects to ensure that we remain a leader in technology and automation in the oil and gas industry. We intend to continue our research and development efforts during 2021 in order to further expand, diversify and enhance our product offerings.
Depreciation and amortization expense (inclusive of amounts in COGS) decreased by $301,122 or 21% in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to an asset impairment we recorded during 2019 with respect to one of our patents relating to chemical management systems. As a result of deterioration in market conditions related to chemical management systems during 2019, we determined that the patent was impaired and recorded an impairment of $417,777, which represented the excess of the carrying value of this patent over its estimated fair value. Refer to Note 4 and Note 5 of the financial statements included in this report for further details on property and equipment, depreciation expense, intangible assets and amortization expense.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Management is committed to maintaining strong liquidity in an effort to be conservative and be able to respond quickly to changes in industry or economic conditions. The Company currently has no long-term debt, and does not have any immediate plans that would require long-term financing. While Management believes sources of financing are available if needed, we cannot be certain that financing would be available to us on favorable terms, or at all. We currently do not expect any material changes to our capital resource mix during the next year.
We acquired land for a new office building and research and development facility in Canada in June of 2018. In the first quarter of 2020, we completed the construction of this new building in Acheson, Canada. Excluding the cost of the land, the total cost of the building was approximately $4,600,000 USD. Since our new building was completed during the year, we sold our old office building in Canada as described in Recent Developments above.
The table below presents information on cash and investments:
The Company invests its available cash in investment grade securities. All of the investments either mature within one year or can be sold quickly in response to liquidity needs, if necessary.
The table below presents information regarding cash flows:
Our liquidity position is impacted by operating, investing and financing activities. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated $264,400 of positive cash flow from operating activities, primarily due to cash received from customer sales and cash held from slower purchasing of inventory during the year, partially offset by cash outflows for accounts payable and accrued liabilities. Operating activity trends consist of cash inflows and outflows related to changes in operating assets and liabilities. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated $1,766,664 of positive cash flow from investing activities, primarily due to investment sales, partially offset by costs incurred for the construction of the new office building in Canada and purchases of other fixed assets. Investing activity trends consist of changes in the mix of our investment portfolio, purchases or sales of fixed assets, and acquisition activities. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we used $210,435 of cash in financing activities, primarily related to equity awards issued to management. Financing activity trends consist of transactions related to equity awards and purchases or sales of treasury stock.
The global COVID-19 pandemic has impacted our business in 2020 and as a result, we have focused on cost control measures as we navigate the uncertainty caused by the pandemic and the resulting oil market supply and demand imbalance. We have focused on decreasing operating, investing and financing costs. We have reduced labor costs, travel and other non-essential expenditures in this current environment. We have also completed the construction of our new office building in Canada, and as a result we expect fewer costs related to fixed asset purchases in the near future. Our stock repurchase program expired in 2019, and our Board of Directors did not adopt a new repurchase program during 2020 in order to reduce costs related to financing activities. The extent to which the global COVID-19 pandemic will continue to affect our liquidity position will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence. As of December 31, 2020, we hold $17,601,207 of cash and investments that form our core excess liquidity which could be utilized, if required, due to the issues described above.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not engaged in any off-balance sheet arrangements, nor do we plan to engage in any in the foreseeable future.