ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
KEY INDICATORS
Economic Measures
Much of our business is driven by the ebbs and flows of the general economic conditions in both the United States and, to a lesser extent, abroad. We focus on a wide array of customer types including, but not limited to large retailers, aerospace manufacturers, large and small resellers of pneumatic tools and parts, and automotive related customers. We tend to track the general economic conditions of the United States, industrial production, and general retail sales.
A key economic measure relevant to us is the cost of the raw materials in our products. Key materials include metals, especially various types of steel and aluminum. Also important is the value of the United States Dollar (“USD”) in relation to the Taiwanese dollar (“TWD”), as we purchase a significant portion of our products from Taiwan. Purchases from Chinese sources are made in USD; however, if the Chinese currency, the Renminbi (“RMB”), were to be revalued against the USD, there could be a negative impact on the cost of our products. Additionally, we closely monitor the fluctuation in the Great British Pound (“GBP”) to the USD, and the GBP to TWD, both of which can have an impact on the consolidated results.
We now must consider tariffs a key economic measure, as a significant portion of products imported by Florida Pneumatic for our Retail customers are subject to these tariffs.
Lastly, the cost and availability of a quality labor pool in the countries where products and components are manufactured, both overseas as well as in the United States, could materially affect our overall results.
Operating Measures
Key operating measures we use to manage our operations are orders; shipments; development of new products; customer retention; inventory levels and productivity. These measures are recorded and monitored at various intervals, including daily, weekly, and monthly. To the extent these measures are relevant, they are discussed in the detailed sections below.
Financial Measures
Key financial measures we use to evaluate the results of our business include various revenue metrics; gross margin; selling, general and administrative expenses; earnings before interest and taxes; earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization; operating cash flows and capital expenditures; return on sales; return on assets; days sales outstanding and inventory turns. These measures are reviewed at monthly, quarterly, and annual intervals and compared to historical periods as well as to established objectives. To the extent that these measures are relevant, they are discussed in detail below.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
We prepare our Consolidated Financial Statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“US GAAP”). Certain of these accounting policies require us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and the related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities, revenue and expenses. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates pertaining to such matters as bad debts, inventory reserves, goodwill and intangible assets, warranty reserves, sales discounts, and taxes. We base our estimates on historical data and experience, when available, and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the combined results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. As future events and their effects cannot be determined with precision, actual results could differ significantly from those estimates and assumptions. Significant changes, if any, in those estimates resulting from continuing changes in the economic environment will be reflected in the Consolidated Financial Statements in future periods. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
We consider the following policies and estimates to be the most critical in understanding the judgments that are involved in the preparation of the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements and the uncertainties that could impact the Company’s financial position, results of operations and cash flows.
Revenue Recognition
Our accounting policy relating to revenue recognition reflects the impact of the adoption of Accounting Standards Codification, (“ASC”) 606 Revenue from Contracts with Customers ("ASC 606"), which is discussed further in our Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements. As a result of our adoption of ASC 606, we record revenue based on a five-step model. We sell our goods on terms that transfer title and risk of loss at a specified location, which may be our warehouse, destination designated by our customer, port of loading or port of discharge, depending on the final destination of the goods. Other than standard product warranty provisions, our sales arrangements provide for no other post-shipment obligations. We offer rebates and other sales incentives, promotional allowances, or discounts to certain customers, typically related to purchase volume, and are classified as a reduction of revenue and recorded at the time of sale, using the most likely amount approach. We periodically evaluate whether an allowance for sales returns is necessary. Historically, we have experienced minimal sales returns. If we believe there are material potential sales returns, we will provide the necessary provision against sales.
Performance obligations underlying our core revenue sources remain substantially unchanged. Our revenue is generated through the sale of finished products and is recognized at the point in time when merchandise is transferred to the customer with a fixed payment due generally within 30 to 90 days, and in an amount that considers the impacts of estimated allowances. Further, we have made a policy election to account for shipping and handling activities that occur after the customer has obtained control of the products as fulfillment costs rather than as an additional promised service. This election is consistent with our prior policy, and therefore the adoption of ASC 606 relating to shipping and handling activities did not have any impact on our financial results. There are no other performance obligations as of December 31, 2020.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Accounts receivable are customer obligations due under normal trade terms. We sell our products to retailers, distributors, OEMs and end-users involved in a variety of industries. We perform continuing credit evaluations of our customers’ financial condition, and although we generally do not require collateral, letters of credit may be required from customers in certain circumstances. Management reviews accounts receivable to determine if any receivables will potentially be uncollectible. Factors considered in the determination include, among other factors, number of days an invoice is past due, customer historical trends, available credit ratings information, other financial data, and the overall economic environment. Collection agencies may also be utilized if management so determines.
We record an allowance for doubtful accounts based on specifically identified amounts that are believed to be uncollectible. We also may record as an additional allowance a certain percentage of aged accounts receivable, based on historical experience and our assessment of the general financial conditions affecting our customer base. If actual collection experience changes, revisions to the allowance may be required. We have a limited number of customers with individually large amounts due at any given consolidated balance sheet date. Further, any unanticipated change in the creditworthiness of any of our customers could have a material effect on our results of operations in the period in which such changes or events occur. After all reasonable attempts to collect an account receivable have failed, the amount of the receivable is written off against the allowance. Based on the information available, we believe that our allowance for doubtful accounts as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 were adequate. However, actual write-offs in future periods could exceed the recorded allowance.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Inventories
Inventories are valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is determined by the first-in, first-out method. Inventory, which includes materials, labor, and manufacturing overhead costs, is recorded net of an allowance for obsolete or slow-moving inventory (“OSMI”), as well as unmarketable inventory. Such allowance is based upon historical experience and management’s understanding of market conditions and forecasts of future product demand. Specifically, at Florida Pneumatic and Jiffy we generally place a 100% reserve on inventory that has not had any sales or usage in more than two years. Hy-Tech’s methodology is primarily based on inventory turns, with inventory items that turn less frequently, receiving a greater allowance. Changes in our OSMI impact our balance sheet, gross profit, and net earnings.
Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level on an annual basis. This test is performed as of the last day in November, or more frequently if we believe indicators of impairment might exist. The Company considered its market capitalization and the carrying value of its assets and liabilities, including goodwill, when performing its goodwill impairment test. In evaluating goodwill for impairment, we first assessed qualitative factors to determine whether it was more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit was less than its carrying amount. Qualitative factors considered included, for example, macroeconomic and industry conditions, overall financial performance, and other relevant entity-specific events. If we bypassed the qualitative assessment, or concluded that it was more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit was less than its carrying value, we then performed a quantitative goodwill impairment test to identify potential goodwill impairment and measure the amount of goodwill impairment to be recognized, if any. If the carrying value of the reporting unit’s goodwill exceeded the implied fair value of the goodwill, an impairment loss was recognized in the amount of that excess, not to exceed the carrying amount of goodwill. See Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Intangible assets represent trademarks, customer agreements and patents related to our brands. Finite-lived intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets. Indefinite-lived intangible assets are not amortized, but instead are subject to impairment evaluation. This test is performed as of the last day in November, or more frequently if we believe indicators of impairment might exist through the use of discounted cash flow models. Assumptions used in our discounted cash flow models include: (i) discount rates; (ii) projected annual revenue growth rates; and (iii) projected long-term growth rates. Our estimates also factor in economic conditions and expectations of management, which may change in the future based on period-specific facts and circumstances. Other intangibles with determinable lives, including certain trademarks, customer agreements and patents, are evaluated for the possibility of impairment when certain indicators are present, and are otherwise amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets (currently ranging from 3 to 20 years).
When conducting our impairment assessment of indefinite-lived intangible assets, we initially perform a qualitative evaluation of whether it is more likely than not that the asset is impaired. If it is determined by a qualitative evaluation that it is more likely than not that the asset is impaired, we then test the asset for recoverability. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of the asset to its future discounted net cash flows. If the carrying amount of such assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets exceeds the fair value of the assets. Assets to be disposed of are reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We review long-lived assets, including property, plant, and equipment and identifiable intangible assets, for impairment whenever changes in circumstances or events may indicate that the carrying amounts are not recoverable. If the fair value is less than the carrying amount of the asset, a loss is recognized for the difference.
Factors which may cause an impairment of long-lived assets include significant changes in the manner of use of these assets, negative industry or market trends, a significant underperformance relative to historical or projected future operating results, or a likely sale or disposal of the asset before the end of its estimated useful life. If any of these factors exist, we are required to test the long-lived asset for recoverability and may be required to recognize an impairment charge for all or a portion of the asset's carrying value.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability approach. This approach requires the recognition of current tax assets or liabilities for the amounts refundable or payable on tax returns for the current year, as well as the recognition of deferred tax assets or liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences that can arise between (a) the amount of taxable income and pretax financial income for a year, such as from net operating loss carryforwards and other tax credits, and (b) the tax bases of assets or liabilities and their reported amounts in the consolidated financial statements. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates. The impact on deferred tax assets and liabilities of changes in tax rates and laws, if any, is reflected in the Consolidated Financial Statements in the period enacted. Further, we evaluate the likelihood of realizing benefit from our deferred tax assets by estimating future sources of taxable income and the impact of tax planning strategies. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance when, in the opinion of management, it is more likely than not that some portion, or all, of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
We file a consolidated Federal tax return. P&F and certain of its subsidiaries file combined tax returns in New York, California, Illinois, and Texas. All subsidiaries, other than UAT, file other state and local tax returns on a stand-alone basis. UAT files an income tax return with the taxing authorities in the United Kingdom.
When tax returns are filed, it is highly certain that some positions taken would be sustained upon examination by the taxing authorities, while other positions are subject to uncertainty about the merits of the position taken or the amount of the position that would be ultimately sustained. The benefit of a tax position is recognized in the financial statements in the period during which, based on all available evidence, management believes it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon examination, including the resolution of appeals or litigation processes, if any. Tax positions taken are not offset or aggregated with other positions. Tax positions that meet the more likely than not recognition threshold are measured as the largest amount of tax benefit that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon settlement with the applicable taxing authority. The portion of the benefits associated with tax positions taken that exceeds the amount measured as described above is reflected as a liability for unrecognized tax benefits in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets along with any associated interest and penalties that would be payable to the taxing authorities upon examination. Interest and penalties associated with unrecognized tax benefits are classified as income taxes in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive (loss) income.
The authoritative guidance for income taxes requires a reduction of the carrying amounts of deferred tax assets by recording a valuation allowance if, based on the available evidence, it is more likely than not (defined as a likelihood of more than 50%) such assets will not be realized. The valuation of deferred tax assets requires judgment in assessing the likely future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our financial statements or tax returns and future profitability. Our accounting for deferred tax consequences represents our best estimate of those future events. Changes in estimates, due to unanticipated events or otherwise, could have a material effect on our financial condition and results of operations. We continually evaluate our deferred tax assets to determine if a valuation allowance is required.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
OVERVIEW
During 2020, significant factors that impacted our results of operations were the:
· Ongoing negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on revenue and income;
· Ongoing production slow-down by Boeing of its 737 MAX aircraft, as well as significant reductions in activity at other commercial and military aerospace manufacturing facilities; and
· Continued weakness in oil and gas exploration.
TRENDS AND UNCERTAINTIES
COVID-19 PANDEMIC
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization designated the recent novel coronavirus, or COVID-19, as a global pandemic. COVID-19 was first detected in Wuhan City, Hubei Province, China and continued to spread, significantly impacting various markets around the world, including the United States. Various policies and initiatives have been implemented to reduce the global transmission of COVID-19.
For a portion of 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic impacted our ability to source certain of our products, particularly with respect to factories that we utilize located in China and Italy; however, we do not believe that this is likely to have a material negative impact on our results for the foreseeable future.
The impact of the COVID-19 virus and the resultant global economic down-turn, has had a material impact on our results during 2020. In March 2020, nearly all of the United States, United Kingdom and much of Europe, had ordered non-essential businesses to stop physical operations and ordered its residents to remain home or “shelter-in-place” in order to attempt to control the impact of this pandemic. In addition, many businesses are restricting visits from vendors thus impeding demand. Fortunately, we were able to continue our operations at all of our facilities. While these controls were lifted in the United Sates and many countries abroad, a number of major European nations and the United Kingdom reinstated “lock-downs” in late 2020 and early 2021. We believe that until this pandemic subsides, where hospitalizations and deaths have declined significantly, it is likely our results will continue to be negatively affected.
BOEING/AEROSPACE
The Federal Aviation Administration (“FAA”) and the European Union Aviation Safety Agency (“EASA”) have lifted the grounding of the 737 MAX. However, production is still very limited due to the inventory at Boeing and the reluctance of airlines to accept deliveries due to weak air travel demand. This will likely continue to have an adverse effect on our revenue. In addition, production of military and other commercial aircraft throughout the industry has slowed as well due to the ongoing global COVID-19 pandemic. However, we believe when all other commercial and military production lines throughout the United States come back online, an increase in our revenue should follow.
OIL AND GAS
We believe the primary factor contributing to the significant decline occurring in early 2020 in the price of oil worldwide was the COVID-19 pandemic. The profitability of crude oil production generally declines as prices fall. As a result, as prices dropped in 2020, production slowed dramatically worldwide. This activity is most easily measured by analyzing the number of active rotary rigs. The number of active rotary oil rigs according to Baker Hughes, Inc. as of December 31, 2020, has declined by approximately 60% or more, from a year ago. Additionally, while not as large a market for our products, the natural gas rig count is down approximately 34%, when comparing the data for same two dates. Until these counts return to pre-pandemic levels, we will continue to be impacted negatively.
TECHNOLOGIES
We believe that over time, several newer technologies and features will have a greater impact on the market for our traditional pneumatic tool offerings. The impact of this evolution has been felt initially by the advent of advanced cordless operated hand tools in the automotive aftermarket. We continue to perform a cost-benefit analysis of developing or incorporating more advanced technologies in our tool platforms.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
TRENDS AND UNCERTAINTIES
OTHER MATTERS
Other than the aforementioned, or matters that may be discussed below, there are no major trends or uncertainties that had, or we could have reasonably expected to have a material impact on our revenue, nor was there any unusual or infrequent event, transaction or any significant economic change that materially affected our results of operations.
Unless otherwise discussed elsewhere in the Management’s Discussion and Analysis, we believe that our relationships with our key customers and suppliers remain satisfactory.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
2020 compared to 2019
REVENUE
The tables set forth below provide an analysis of our revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Consolidated
Florida Pneumatic
Florida Pneumatic markets its air tool products to four primary sectors within the pneumatic tool market; Retail, Automotive, Aerospace, and Industrial. It also generates revenue from its Berkley products line, as well as a line of air filters and other OEM parts (“Other”).
The Boeing Corporation is a major customer of Jiffy. The continued grounding and minimal production of Boeing’s 737 MAX and reduced production of other Boeing aircraft was the major factor driving the decline in Florida Pneumatic’s 2020 revenue, when compared to 2019 revenue. Additionally, we believe that the limited air travel caused by the COVID-19 pandemic forced many of our other aircraft customers to reduce their 2020 order levels. Further, military aircraft production declined, we believe due to constraints placed in manufacturing facilities caused by the pandemic. Although the FAA has recently lifted the “No Fly” ruling it imposed on all Boeing 737 MAX aircraft, recently allowing it to begin flights in the United States, we believe it will take several months for the Boeing Corporation to increase its manufacturing of its 737 MAX aircraft to a volume that will require our Jiffy tools. Our Industrial product line has also encountered lower revenue this year, compared to 2019, due primarily to the business interruptions caused by global effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, as our ability to travel has resulted in little to no direct interaction with current or prospective customers. Automotive revenue also declined when comparing full year 2020 and 2019 results.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
REVENUE - Florida Pneumatic - Continued
The key drivers to this decline were weak sales at our U.K. operations, which in turn was due we believe to limited travel caused by the pandemic, and the loss of a major distributor in the U.S. A portion of this decline was offset with higher gross margin sales to other distributors. After an increase in Retail revenue during the first quarter of 2020, the pandemic adversely affected revenue during the second quarter of 2020, then improved again during the last six months of 2020. The improvement that occurred during the second half of 2020 was driven primarily from the sale of spray guns (used to apply anti-viral and anti-bacterial solution) and, to a lesser extent, growth in other pneumatic tools.
Hy-Tech
Hy-Tech designs, manufactures, and sells a wide range of industrial products under the brands ATP and ATSCO which are categorized as ATP for reporting purposes. In addition to Engineered Solutions, products and components manufactured for other companies under their brands are included in the OEM category in the table below. Power Transmission Group (“PTG”) revenue is comprised of products manufactured and sold by the gear businesses that were acquired in October 2019, products sold through Hy-Tech’s legacy gear manufacturing division and products sold to a certain customer whose revenue was included in OEM in 2019. NUMATX, Thaxton and other peripheral product lines, such as general machining, are reported as Other.
The decline in Hy-Tech’s total net revenue for the fiscal year 2020, compared to 2019, was primarily due to the following key factors: the global COVID-19 pandemic; the severe downturn of the oil and gas market, and certain key customers that were in inventory over-stock positions and unable or unwilling to place orders during 2020, at similar levels to 2019. Additionally, our OEM revenue was adversely affected by significant declines in orders during the third quarter of 2020, compared to the same period in 2019, from a major customer that services the aerospace market, which as discussed elsewhere, encountered weak demand for new aircraft. Specifically, we believe that our ATP products offering is likely to continue to struggle due to among other things, the ongoing sluggishness of the price of oil and natural gas, which in turn inhibits exploration and drilling. The oil and gas sector in the United States has been hindered by the downward pricing pressure caused by among other things, excess supply, and ripple effects from the pandemic. This is evidenced by the significant decline in drilling rigs, which is a metric that we monitor. According to Baker Hughes Inc., the average number of rotary rigs in operation during 2020 were 433, compared to 943 during 2019. As such, early in 2020 we made a decision to focus a greater portion of our product development and marketing efforts on our Engineered Solutions and to a lesser extent PTG products offering. We believe the development of the Engineered Solutions and PTG product offerings should provide Hy-Tech an opportunity to generate new, additional sources of revenue in the future. Additionally, we believe that the inability to travel, due to restrictions put in place as the result of the pandemic, greatly reduced direct interaction with current and potential customers was a significant factor in the decline in revenue in all product categories, particularly OEM. Further, as noted above, certain OEM customers who were active in 2019, did not place orders in 2020. Partially offsetting the above, our PTG line, driven by the acquisition in late 2019, saw its revenue improve. However, the transition and relocation from their former Illinois locations to our facility in Punxsutawney, Pennsylvania and the ongoing negative effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, resulted in lower than projected PTG revenue and profits during 2020. Reductions in staff, marketing and product development are the key factors in the reduction on Hy-Tech’s Other lines.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
GROSS MARGIN
A significant factor causing the 2.7 percentage point decline in Florida Pneumatic’s gross margin is the under absorption of manufacturing overhead at Jiffy, due to lower Aerospace revenue, which as discussed earlier was due to travel and visitation restrictions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and the halt in production of Boeing’s 737 MAX aircraft and other commercial and military sales. Additionally, its gross margin declined due to product/customer mix. Specifically, there was a nearly 30 percent decline in Industrial and Automotive revenue sectors when comparing 2020 to 2019, both of which have higher gross margin than other product lines, compounded with an increase in Retail revenue, which tends to generate lower gross margin.
The decline in Hy-Tech’s gross margin was the result of several factors. We believe this significant decline was directly corelated to the global pandemic and economic down turn. With major travel constraints imposed due to the COVID-19 global pandemic, Hy-Tech’s revenue was greatly impacted, which lead to Hy-Tech encountering a reduction in machine hours, which resulted in significant under absorption of their manufacturing overhead. Specifically, when comparing full year 2020 to 2019, total machine hours declined approximately 35%. Hy-Tech’s total gross margin was also negatively impacted by the general mix of products sold during the year. During the second quarter of 2020, Hy-Tech recorded an unfavorable physical inventory adjustment. Additionally, it incurred an increase in charges relating to obsolete, slow moving inventory (“OSMI”) which also negatively impacted Hy-Tech’s overall gross margin. Further, primarily occurring during the first half of 2020, Hy-Tech’s total gross margin was impacted by lower than expected gross margin on the sale of PTG products, due primarily to start-up issues in the new facility during this period. Lastly, Hy-Tech incurred increased duty charges on certain imported parts and increased costs incurred from outside vendors due to smaller batch sizes for certain manufacturing processes.
SELLING, GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES
Selling, general and administrative expenses (“SG&A”) include salaries and related costs, commissions, travel, administrative facilities, communications costs and promotional expenses for our direct sales and marketing staff, administrative and executive salaries, and related benefits, legal, accounting, and other professional fees as well as general corporate overhead and certain engineering expenses.
Our SG&A during 2020 declined to $19,367,000, from $21,869,000 in 2019. A significant component of the net decrease of approximately $2.5 million was a reduction of $1,434,000 in compensation expenses, which is comprised of base salaries and wages, accrued performance-based bonus incentives and associated payroll taxes and employee benefits. The elimination of 2020 corporate bonuses, and to a much lesser extent, staff reductions and significant reductions of subsidiary bonuses also contributed to the reduction in our 2020 SG&A. Additionally, our variable expenses, which consist of operating costs such as travel and entertainment, commission, warranty, advertising, and freight out, decreased $956,000, primarily due to travel and business constraints caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, non-cash impairment charges that were reported in 2019 did not reoccur in 2020, thus resulting in a $221,000 expense reduction. Depreciation and general corporate expenses declined $128,000 and $81,000, respectively. The decrease in depreciation was due primarily to the sale in 2019 of the Jupiter, Florida facility. Partially offsetting the above decreases was an increase of $237,000 in professional fees and consulting costs. The relocation of the gear businesses during the first and second quarters of 2020 and temporary staffing were the primary factors. Lastly, our rent expense increased $55,000, as Florida Pneumatic now rents a portion of the facility it sold.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
GOODWILL AND INTANGIBLE ASSETS IMPAIRMENT
During the second quarter of 2020, we recorded goodwill and intangible asset impairment charges totaling $1,612,000, with $284,000 related to goodwill and $1,328,000 related to customer relationships, patents, and trade name. See Note 6 - Goodwill and other intangible assets to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
OTHER INCOME
In connection with the Gears Acquisition, (See Note 2 - Acquisition-2019), there was the possibility that we could pay additional consideration (“contingent consideration”) to the sellers if certain inventory components were sold during the two-year period commencing on the date of acquisition. At the time of the acquisition we believed, based on a range of possible outcomes, that it was more likely than not, that items within this inventory group would be sold, and accordingly included in the purchase price a contingent consideration obligation of $64,000. In January 2021, we and the sellers agreed to settle this obligation for $12,000. As such, we reduced the contingent consideration payable by $52,000 and recorded a like amount as Other Income.
During 2020 we received grants totaling $53,000 at our United Kingdom operation from Her Majesty’s Government, which is not required to be repaid.
INTEREST EXPENSE - NET
The reduction in short-term borrowings interest expense was due primarily to lower average borrowings in 2020, compared to the average borrowing levels in the prior year. The reduction in short-term borrowings were driven by reduced inventory and accounts receivable levels. As we have not received forgiveness from the Small Business Administration relating to our Payroll Protection Program Loan (“PPP”), discussed in Note 7 - Debt, we accrued $18,000. The Term loan interest in 2019 related to a loan that was fully paid during 2019. Lastly, we and our bank amended the Credit Agreement in February 2019. The debt issue costs associated with such amendment, are significantly lower than the costs associated with the expiring Credit Agreement. As such, the amortization of debt issue costs during 2020 declined compared to the prior year.
INCOME TAX EXPENSE
The 2020 provision for income taxes was a benefit of $1,901,000 compared to a tax expense of $1,797,000 in 2019. Significant factors impacting 2020’s net effective tax benefit rate of 27.7% were the enactment of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, non-deductible permanent differences, state and local taxes. The net effective tax rate for 2019 was 26.8%. See Note 11 - Income Taxes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
We monitor such metrics as days’ sales outstanding, inventory requirements, accounts payable and capital expenditures to project liquidity needs, as well as evaluate return on assets. Our primary sources of funds are operating cash flows and our Revolver Loan (“Revolver”) with our bank.
We gauge our liquidity and financial stability by various measurements, some of which are shown in the following table:
Credit facility
Our Credit Facility is discussed in detail in Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements.
The average balance of short-term borrowings during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $4,042,000 and $4,253,000, respectively.
We believe that should a need arise whereby the current credit facility is insufficient; we can obtain additional funds based on the value of our real property.
Payroll Protection Program Loan (“PPP”)
On April 20, 2020, we received a $2.9 million PPP loan, as provided pursuant to the CARES Act. This loan was obtained from BNB Bank is unsecured and is guaranteed by the SBA. See Note 8 - CARES Act to our consolidated financial statements for further discussion.
Cash Flows
At December 31, 2020, cash provided by operating activities for the year was $3,047,000, compared to cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 of $2,514,000. At December 31, 2020, our cash balance was $904,000, compared to $380,000 at December 31, 2019. Cash at our UAT subsidiary at December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $335,000 and $85,000, respectively. We operate under the terms and conditions of the Credit Agreement. As a result, all domestic cash receipts are remitted to Capital One lockboxes.
Our total debt to total book capitalization (total debt divided by total debt plus equity) at December 31, 2020 was 9.4%, compared to 10.8% at December 31, 2019.
We believe as a result of operations and working capital needs due to anticipated growth, we will likely be required to increase our borrowings from our Revolver during 2021.
Capital spending during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1,104,000, compared to $1,524,000 in 2019. Capital expenditures currently planned for 2021 are approximately $1,100,000, which we expect will be financed through the Credit Facility. The major portion of these planned capital expenditures will be for new metal cutting equipment, tooling and information technology hardware and software.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
On February 11, 2020, our Board of Directors, in accordance with its dividend policy, declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.05 per common share, which was paid on February 28, 2020, to shareholders of record at the close of business on February 24, 2020. The total amount of this dividend payment was approximately $157,000. Additionally, our Board of Directors did not issue any further dividends in 2020. As relates to declarations and payments of dividends in the future, the Board of Directors will continue to monitor several factors, which includes such things as our overall financial condition, results of operations, capital requirements and other factors our board may deem relevant.
At December 31, 2020, we had $8,530,000 of open purchase order commitments, compared to $4,871,000 at December 31, 2019.
Customer concentration
At December 31, 2020, The Home Depot (“THD”) accounted for 26.3% of our consolidated revenue, compared to 20.7% of 2019’s revenue. Further, accounts receivable at December 31, 2020 and 2019 from THD were 38.0% and 27.2%, respectively. There was no other customer that accounted for more than 10% of revenue or accounts receivable in 2020 or 2019.
IMPACT OF INFLATION
We believe that the effects of changing prices and inflation on our consolidated financial position and our results of operations have been minimal.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
Please refer to Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this report for a discussion of recently adopted accounting pronouncements and new accounting pronouncements that may impact us.