Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 2020 versus 2019
(Dollars in thousands, except per share data)
Management’s Discussion and Analysis appearing on the following pages should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and Management’s Discussion and Analysis 2019 versus 2018 contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Forward-Looking Discussion:
In addition to the historical information contained in this document, the discussion presented may contain and, from time to time, may make, certain statements that constitute forward-looking statements. Words such as “expects,” “anticipates,” “believes,” “estimates” and other similar expressions or future or conditional verbs such as “should,” “would” and “could” are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. These statements are not historical facts, but instead represent the current expectations, plans or forecasts of Peoples Financial Services Corp. and its subsidiaries regarding its future operating results, financial position, asset quality, credit reserves, credit losses, capital levels, dividends, liquidity, service charges, cost savings, effective tax rate, impact of changes in fair value of financial assets and liabilities, impact of new accounting and regulatory guidance, legal proceedings and other matters relating to us and the securities that we may offer from time to time. These statements are not guarantees of future results or performance and involve certain risks, uncertainties and assumptions that are difficult to predict, change over time and are often beyond our control. Actual outcomes and results may differ materially from those expressed in, or implied by, forward-looking statements.
You should not place undue reliance on any forward-looking statement and should consider the uncertainties and risks discussed in the “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report, among others, and in any of our subsequent SEC filings. Forward-looking statements speak only as of the date they are made, and we undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statement to reflect the impact of circumstances or events that arise after the date the forward-looking statement was made. Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements referred to in the Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) are incorporated by reference into the MD&A. Certain prior period amounts have been reclassified to conform with the current year’s presentation.
Critical Accounting Policies:
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires us to establish critical accounting policies and make accounting estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during those reporting periods.
For a discussion of the recent Accounting Standards Updates (“ASU”) issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) refer to Note 1 entitled “Summary of significant accounting policies - Recent accounting standards,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report.
An accounting estimate requires assumptions about uncertain matters that could have a material effect on the consolidated financial statements if a different amount within a range of estimates were used or if estimates changed from period to period. Readers of this report should understand that estimates are made considering facts and circumstances at a point in time, and changes in those facts and circumstances could produce results that differ from when those estimates were made. Significant estimates that are particularly susceptible to material change within the near term relate to the determination of allowance for loan losses, determination of other-than-temporary impairment of investment securities, fair value of financial instruments, the valuation of real estate acquired in connection with foreclosures or satisfaction of loans, the valuation of deferred tax assets, and the impairment of goodwill. Actual amounts could differ from those estimates.
We maintain the allowance for loan losses at a level we believe adequate to absorb probable credit losses related to individually evaluated loans, as well as probable incurred losses inherent in the remainder of the loan portfolio as of the balance sheet date. The balance in the allowance for loan losses account is based on past events and current economic conditions among other things.
The allowance for loan losses account consists of an allocated element and an unallocated element. The allocated element consists of a specific portion for the impairment of loans individually evaluated and a formula portion for loss contingencies on those loans collectively evaluated. The unallocated element, if any, is used to cover inherent losses that exist as of the evaluation date, but which have not been identified as part of the allocated allowance using our impairment evaluation methodology due to limitations in the process.
We monitor the adequacy of the allocated portion of the allowance quarterly and adjust the allowance as necessary through normal operations. This ongoing evaluation reduces potential differences between estimates and actual observed losses. The determination of the level of the allowance for loan losses is inherently subjective as it requires estimates that are susceptible to significant revision as more information becomes available. Accordingly, management cannot ensure that charge-offs in future periods will not exceed the allowance for loan losses or that additional increases in the allowance for loan losses will not be required, resulting in an adverse impact on operating results.
In determining the requirement to record an other-than-temporary impairment on securities owned by us, four main characteristics are considered including: (i) the length of time and the extent to which the fair value has been less than amortized cost; (ii) the financial condition and near-term prospects of the issuer; (iii) whether the market decline was affected by macroeconomic conditions and (iv) whether the Company has the intent to sell the debt security or more likely than not will be required to sell the debt security before its anticipated recovery. The assessment of whether an other-than-temporary impairment exists involves a high degree of subjectivity and judgment and is based on information available to us at a point in time.
Fair values of financial instruments, in cases where quoted market prices are not available, are based on estimates using present value or other valuation techniques which are subject to change.
Real estate acquired in connection with foreclosures or in satisfaction of loans is adjusted to fair value based upon current estimates derived through independent appraisals less cost to sell. However, proceeds realized from sales may ultimately be higher or lower than those estimates.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the estimated future tax effects of temporary differences by applying enacted statutory tax rates to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts and the tax bases of existing assets and liabilities. The amount of deferred tax assets is reduced, if necessary, to the amount that, based on available evidence, will more likely than not be realized. As changes in tax laws or rates are enacted, deferred tax assets and liabilities are adjusted through the provision for income taxes.
Goodwill is evaluated at least annually for impairment or more frequently if conditions indicate potential impairment exist. Any impairment losses arising from such testing are reported in the income statement in the current period as a separate line item within operations.
For a further discussion of our critical accounting policies, refer to Note 1 entitled, “Summary of significant accounting policies,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements to this Annual Report. Note 1 lists the significant accounting policies used by us in the development and presentation of the consolidated financial statements. This discussion and analysis, the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements and other financial statement disclosures identify and address key variables and other qualitative and quantitative factors that are necessary for the understanding and evaluation of our financial position, results of operations and cash flows.
Operating Environment:
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared a coronavirus, identified as COVID-19, a global pandemic. In the United States, the rapid spread of the COVID-19 virus invoked various federal, state and local authorities to make emergency declarations and issue executive orders to limit the spread of the disease. Measures included restrictions on travel, limitations on public gatherings, implementation of social distancing protocols, school closings, orders to shelter in place and mandates to close all non-essential businesses to the public. Concerns about the spread of the disease and its anticipated negative impact on economic activity severely disrupted domestic financial markets prompting the Federal Reserve System’s FOMC to aggressively cut the target federal funds rate to a range of 0% to 0.25%, including a 50 basis point reduction in the target federal funds rate on March 3, 2020 and an additional 100 basis point reduction on March 15, 2020. In addition, the Federal Reserve rolled out various market support programs to ease the stress on financial markets which continue to be in place.
The rate cuts in March marked the fourth and fifth cut in the overnight rate in the most recent monetary easing cycle, which began in July 2019 after the most recent high for the target range for federal funds of 2.25% to 2.50% which was in December 2018. Overall inflation lags below the FOMC’s long-term desired 2% level for items other than food and energy. The consumer price index (“CPI”) registered 1.6% for the 12 months ended December 31, 2020, down from 1.7% for the 12 months ended September 30, 2020 but higher than the 1.2% reading for the 12 months ended June 30, 2020. The all items index increased 1.4% for the 12 months ending December 31, 2020, level from the 1.4% registered for the 12 months ending September 30, 2020 and up from the reading for the 12 months ending June 30, 2020 which was 0.6%. As the U.S. economy rebounded from the initial slowdown in the second quarter of 2020 that was brought on by the nation wide shutdown, Gross domestic product (“GDP”), the value of all goods and services produced in the nation, grew in the fourth quarter at a 2.1% annualized rate, in line with consensus forecasts, which followed a third quarter 2020 reading of a 33.4% annualized rate, better than the consensus forecast of 32.0% for the quarter. Personal consumption increased by 1.7% during the fourth quarter.
The employment situation deteriorated in New York and Pennsylvania and in all of the thirteen counties representing our market areas in Pennsylvania and New York from one year ago when comparing December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2019. Projections for our local market unemployment are not readily available, however the most current economic statistics as of January 31, 2021 show continuing jobless claims of over 4.5 million. This indicates a significant improvement from the peak of 17 million jobless claims from 2020, but it remains elevated as does the unemployment rate at 8.1% on a national level per the latest report from the Bureau of Labor Statistics at December 31, 2020. By comparison, the unemployment rate was 8.8% at quarter end September 30, 2020 and 13.0% at quarter end June 30, 2020. Prior to the economic fallout of the COVID-19 pandemic, the highest recorded unemployment rate in recent history was 9.9% in 2009 during the Great Recession. As the pandemic continues to remain a focus of the economic recovery, elevated unemployment rates could have an adverse effect on our credit quality and may result in increased credit losses within the loan portfolio in future periods. On a national level, as with our regional and local economies, employment conditions deteriorated in 2020. The civilian labor force decreased 4.0 million, while the number of people employed decreased 8.9 million in 2020. As a result, the annual unemployment rate for the U.S. increased in 2020 when compared to 2019.
National, Pennsylvania, New York and our market area’s non-seasonally-adjusted annual unemployment rates in 2020 and 2019, are summarized as follows:
With respect to the banking industry, net income for all FDIC-insured banks in 2020 totaled $147.9 billion, a decrease of $84.9 billion or 36.5 percent from 2019. The decline was primarily attributable to the increased provisioning due to the decline in economic conditions in the first six months of 2020. Approximately 53.7 percent of all institutions reported higher net income in 2020, while only 3.9 percent reported net losses, up slightly from last year’s reported 3.6 percent unprofitable institutions. Loan loss provisions of $132.2 billion in 2020 were $77.1 billion or 140.0 percent more than banks set aside in 2019. Net interest income decreased for the first time in seven years, by $20.0 billion or 3.7 percent. Noninterest income was $15.9 billion or 6.0 percent above the level of 2019. Realized gains on sales of investments were $8.1 billion compared to $4.0 billion in 2019. Total noninterest expense increased $32.9 billion or 6.9 percent comparing 2020 and 2019. The return on average assets for 2020 was 0.72 percent compared to 1.29 percent in 2019.
Review of Financial Position:
Peoples Financial Services Corp., a bank holding company incorporated under the laws of Pennsylvania, provides a full range of financial services through its wholly-owned subsidiary, Peoples Security Bank and Trust Company (“Peoples Bank”), collectively, the “Company” or “Peoples”. The Company services its retail and commercial customers through twenty-six full-service community banking offices located within the Lackawanna, Lebanon, Lehigh, Luzerne, Monroe, Montgomery, Northampton, Susquehanna and Wyoming Counties of Pennsylvania and Broome County of New York.
Peoples Bank is a state-chartered bank and trust company under the jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania Department of Banking and Securities and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. Peoples Bank’s primary product is loans to small- and medium-sized businesses. Other lending products include one-to-four family residential mortgages and consumer loans. Peoples Bank primarily funds its loans by offering checking accounts and money market accounts to commercial enterprises and individuals. Other deposit product offerings include certificates of deposits and various non-maturity deposit accounts.
The Company faces competition primarily from commercial banks, thrift institutions and credit unions within its Pennsylvania and New York market, many of which are substantially larger in terms of assets and capital. In addition, mutual funds and security brokers compete for various types of deposits, and consumer, mortgage, leasing and insurance companies compete for various types of loans and leases. Principal methods of competing for banking and permitted nonbanking services include price, nature of product, quality of service and convenience of location.
The Company and Peoples Bank are subject to regulations of certain federal and state regulatory agencies, including the Federal Reserve, the FDIC, and Pennsylvania Department of Banking and Securities, and undergo periodic examinations by such agencies.
Total assets, loans and deposits were $2.9 billion, $2.2 billion and $2.4 billion, respectively, at December 31, 2020. Total assets, loans and deposits grew 16.5 percent, 12.4 percent and 23.6 percent, respectively, compared to 2019 year-end balances.
The loan portfolio consisted of $1.8 billion of business loans, including commercial and commercial real estate loans, and $360.7 million in retail loans, including residential mortgage and consumer loans at December 31, 2020. Total investment securities were $303.3 million at December 31, 2020, including $295.9 million of investment securities classified as available-for sale and $7.2 million classified as held-to-maturity. Total deposits consisted of $622.5 million in noninterest-bearing deposits and $1.8 billion in interest-bearing deposits at December 31, 2020.
Stockholders’ equity equaled $316.9 million, or $43.92 per share, at December 31, 2020, and $299.0 million, or $40.47 per share, at December 31, 2019. Our equity to asset ratio was 11.0 percent and 12.1 percent at those respective period ends. Dividends declared for the 2020 amounted to $1.44 per share representing 35.8 percent of net income.
Nonperforming assets equaled $10.5 million or 0.48 percent of loans, net and foreclosed assets at December 31, 2020, as the balance remained the same, however, the percentage was lower when compared to $10.5 million or 0.54 percent at December 31, 2019. The allowance for loan losses equaled $27.3 million or 1.26 percent of loans, net, at December 31, 2020, compared to $22.7 million or 1.17 percent at year-end 2019. Loans charged-off, net of recoveries equaled $2.7 million or 0.13 percent of average loans in 2020, compared to $4.8 million or 0.26 percent of average loans in 2019.
Investment Portfolio:
Primarily, our investment portfolio provides a source of liquidity needed to meet expected loan demand and generates a reasonable return in order to increase our profitability. Additionally, we utilize the investment portfolio to meet pledging requirements and reduce income taxes. At December 31, 2020, our portfolio consisted primarily of short-term U.S. Treasury and government agency securities, which provide a source of liquidity and intermediate-term, tax-exempt state and municipal obligations, which mitigate our tax burden.
Our investment portfolio is subject to various risk elements that may negatively impact our liquidity and profitability. The greatest risk element affecting our portfolio is market risk or interest rate risk (“IRR”). Understanding IRR, along with other inherent risks and their potential effects, is essential in effectively managing the investment portfolio.
Market risk or IRR relates to the inverse relationship between bond prices and market yields. It is defined as the risk that increases in general market interest rates will result in market value depreciation. A marked reduction in the value of the investment portfolio could subject us to liquidity strains and reduced earnings if we are unable or unwilling to sell these investments at a loss. Moreover, the inability to liquidate these assets could require us to seek alternative funding, which may further reduce profitability and expose us to greater risk in the future. In addition, since the majority of our investment portfolio is designated as available-for-sale and carried at estimated fair value, with net unrealized gains and losses reported as a separate component of stockholders’ equity, market value depreciation could negatively impact our capital position.
During March 2020, the FOMC took aggressive actions to cut the targeted federal funds rate 150 basis points to a range of 0.00% to 0.25% in an effort to help protect the U.S. economy from COVID-19. At their January 2021 meeting, the FOMC decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent and expects it will be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. Furthermore, the Committee stated it is committed to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy during the COVID-19 pandemic. Our investment portfolio consists primarily of fixed-rate bonds. As a result, changes in the velocity and magnitude of future FOMC actions can significantly influence the fair value of our portfolio.
Specifically, the parts of the yield curve most closely related to our investments include the 2-year and 10-year U.S. Treasury security. The yield on the 2-year U.S. Treasury note affects the values of our U.S. Treasury and government agency securities, whereas the 10-year U.S. Treasury note influences the value of tax-exempt and taxable state and municipal obligations. The yield on the 2-year U.S. Treasury ranged from a low of 10 basis points to a high of 160 basis points during 2020 before ending the year at 12 basis points. The yield on the 10-year U.S. Treasury ranged from a low of 39 basis points to a high of 189 basis points while ending 2020 at 91 basis points. Since bond prices move inversely to yields, we experienced an increase in the aggregate fair value of our investment portfolio when comparing December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2019 due to lower market rates at year end 2020. The net unrealized holding gains included in our available-for-sale investment portfolio were $9.7 million at December 31, 2020 compared to a gain of $1.8 million at December 31, 2019. We reported net unrealized holding gain, included as a separate component of stockholders’ equity of $7.7 million, net of income taxes of $2.0 million, at December 31, 2020, and an unrealized holding gain of $1.4 million, net of income taxes of $0.4 million, at December 31, 2019. An increase in interest rates could negatively impact the market value of our investments and our capital position. In order to monitor the potential effects a rise in interest rates could have on the value of our investments, we perform stress test modeling on the portfolio. Stress tests conducted on our portfolio at December 31, 2020, indicated that should general market rates increase by 100, 200 or 300 basis points, we would anticipate declines of 4.8 percent, 9.9 percent and 14.9 percent in the market value of our portfolio.
The carrying values of the major classifications of investment securities and their respective percentages of total investment securities for the past three years are summarized as follows:
Distribution of investment securities (Dollars in thousands)
Investment securities decreased $35.3 million, to $303.3 million at December 31, 2020, from $338.6 million at December 31, 2019. At December 31, 2020, the investment portfolio consisted of $295.9 million of investment securities classified as available-for-sale and $7.2 million classified as held-to-maturity. Investment cash flow was used to fund the loan pipeline prior to the economic slowdown brought on by COVID-19 during the first quarter of 2020. For the majority of the remainder of 2020, investment cash flow was directed to overnight federal funds sold, as management focused on increasing liquidity in the uncertain economic environment. As the level of overnight funds increased, our Asset Liability Committee recommended a strategy to deploy a portion of those funds back into the investment portfolio through purchases of primarily taxable and tax-free municipal bonds and mortgage-backed securities to mitigate risk in a flat and down rate environment. Security purchases totaled $107.2 million in 2020, with purchases consisting of longer term taxable and tax-exempt municipal securities and mortgage-backed securities. Investment purchases in 2019 amounted to $124.5 million.
Repayments of investment securities totaled $85.0 million in 2020 and $58.2 million in 2019. During the first quarter of 2020, the Company sold $26.5 million of low-yielding short-term municipal bonds resulting in a gain of $267 thousand. The proceeds were used to fund higher yielding loans. Additionally, two mortgage-backed securities were sold during
the second half of 2020 with proceeds totaling $38.3 million and gains recognized of $651 thousand due to favorable market rates. Sales of $9.7 million of low-yielding municipal securities during 2019 resulted in a gain of $23 thousand. We continually analyze the investment portfolio with respect to its exposure to various risk elements.
The composition of our investment portfolio changed during 2020 as a result of the aforementioned transactions. Short-term bullet U.S. Treasury and U.S. government-sponsored enterprise securities comprised 27.7 percent of our total portfolio at yearend 2020 compared to 32.9 percent at the end of 2019. Tax-exempt municipal obligations increased as a percentage of the total portfolio to 21.1 percent at year-end 2020 from 19.8 percent at the end of 2019, however the total balance declined as the sales of $26.5 million, maturities and bond calls offset the new purchases. Taxable municipals increased as a percentage of the total portfolio to 18.3 percent at year-end 2020 from 10.3 percent at the end of 2019 as the sector provided value opportunities. The weighted average life of the investment portfolio lengthened to 4.3 years at December 31, 2020 from 3.7 years at year end 2019, while the effective duration of the investment portfolio increased to 4.4 years at December 31, 2020 from 3.6 years at December 31, 2019.
There were no other-than-temporary impairments (“OTTI”) recognized for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. For additional information related to OTTI refer to Note 3 entitled “Investment securities” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements to this Annual Report.
Investment securities averaged $292.7 million and equaled 11.7 percent of average earning assets in 2020, compared to $279.4 million and 13.0 percent of average earning assets in 2019. The tax-equivalent yield on the investment portfolio decreased eleven basis points to 2.36 percent in 2020 from 2.47 percent in 2019. The decrease in the tax-equivalent yield is due primarily to cash flow from maturing and called bonds being reinvested into lower market rates.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, there were no securities of any individual issuer, except for U.S. government agency mortgage-backed securities, that exceeded 10.0 percent of stockholders’ equity.
The maturity distribution based on the carrying value and weighted-average, tax-equivalent yield of the investment portfolio at December 31, 2020, is summarized as follows. The weighted-average yield, based on amortized cost, has been computed for tax-exempt state and municipals on a tax-equivalent basis using the prevailing federal statutory tax rate of 21.0 percent. The distributions are based on contractual maturity. Expected maturities may differ from contractual maturities because borrowers have the right to call or prepay obligations with or without call or prepayment penalties.
Maturity distribution of investment securities (Dollars in thousands)
Loan Portfolio:
Economic factors and how they affect loan demand are of extreme importance to us and the overall banking industry, as lending is a primary business activity. Loans are the most significant component of earning assets and they generate the greatest amount of revenue for us. Similar to the investment portfolio, there are risks inherent in the loan portfolio that must be understood and considered in managing the lending function. These risks include IRR, credit concentrations and fluctuations in demand. Changes in economic conditions and interest rates affect these risks which influence loan demand, the composition of the loan portfolio and profitability of the lending function.
The composition of the loan portfolio at year-end for the past five years is summarized as follows:
Distribution of loan portfolio (Dollars in thousands)
From a lending perspective, organic loan growth, with the exception of PPP loans, slowed during 2020 as we focused on managing our existing portfolio during the pandemic. We participated in the CARES Act, Paycheck Protection Program, a $350 billion specialized low-interest loan program funded by the U.S. Treasury Department and administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration. The PPP provides borrower guarantees for lenders, as well as loan forgiveness incentives for borrowers that utilize the loan proceeds to cover employee compensation related business operating costs. During 2020, we had approved 1,450 PPP loans totaling $217.5 million. Substantially all of the loans were made to existing customers, funded under the two year PPP loan program. PPP loan forgiveness commenced during the fourth quarter of 2020 with $27.8 million being received. We expect the majority of the remaining $189.7 million to be forgiven during 2021. In addition, the Company is participating in the 2021 second round of PPP lending and has
received approval by the SBA on 605 applications totaling $80.7 million. These loans closed during January and February.
Overall, total loans increased $239.7 million or 12.4 percent in 2020 to $2.2 billion at December 31, 2020. Excluding PPP loans, loan growth totaled $50.0 million or 2.6%. Business loans, including commercial loans and commercial real estate loans, were $1.8 billion or 83.4 percent of total loans at December 31, 2020, and $1.5 billion or 79.2 percent at year-end 2019. Residential mortgages and consumer loans totaled $360.7 million or 16.6 percent of total loans at year-end 2020 and $403.9 million or 20.8 percent at year-end 2019. Loan growth, excluding PPP loans, was significantly affected by the economic slowdown resulting from COVID-19. Total loan growth, excluding PPP loans, of $50.0 million was primarily attributable to increases in our commercial real estate portfolio which grew $126.6 million in 2020 due to continued success of our strategy to expand in larger markets with strong growth potential, and strong organic growth in our legacy markets. Our expansion strategy commenced during 2014 in the Lehigh Valley with a community banking office and team of dedicated lenders and has expanded with two additional branch offices and additional teams of experienced lenders and credit professionals. Growth is also due to our presence in the Greater Delaware Valley, first by opening a branch office in King of Prussia in 2016, and most recently during the first quarter of 2020 with the opening of a branch in Doylestown and recruitment of two experienced lenders. Further growth was attained by our entrance into Central Pennsylvania with a branch office in Lebanon, staffed with a team of lending professionals during the middle of 2018. Based on the customer service oriented philosophy of our organization along with the commitment of these employees, we continue to be well received in these new markets as we are in our existing markets.
Residential mortgage loans decreased $24.0 million during 2020 as low market rates due to the FOMC’s actions to cut rates in response to the adverse economic impact of the pandemic, were an incentive for borrowers to refinance their current mortgages. We sold the majority of our residential mortgage originations into the secondary market instead of holding the mortgages in portfolio to mitigate interest rate risk. Consumer loans declined $19.2 million during 2020 primarily from the run-off in our indirect automobile portfolio due to pricing changes.
Loans averaged $2.1 billion in 2020, compared to $1.9 billion in 2019. Taxable loans averaged $2.0 billion, while tax-exempt loans averaged $124.9 million in 2020. The loan portfolio continues to play the prominent role in our earning asset mix. As a percentage of earning assets, average loans equaled 85.1 percent in 2020, a decrease from 86.6 percent in 2019.
The tax-equivalent yield on our loan portfolio decreased 55 basis points to 4.16 percent in 2020 from 4.71 percent in 2019 due to lower yields on new loan originations, the repricing lower of floating and adjustable rate loans due to the decrease in market rates beginning during the second half of 2019 and continuing into 2020, and the low 1% interest rate on PPP loans. In the first quarter of 2020 we decreased our prime lending rate 150 basis points after reducing it 75 basis points during the second half of 2019 all in response to the FOMC cutting its targeted federal funds rate. Our prime rate ended the year at 3.25%. The lower prime rate has resulted in lower loan yields which can be evidenced by evaluating 2020 quarterly loan yields, which ranged from 4.55 percent in the first quarter to 3.97 percent in the fourth quarter. The yield on the loan portfolio may continue to be under pressure as repayments on loans are replaced with new originations at current market rates, floating and adjustable rate loans continue to reprice lower, PPP loans continue to be included in the portfolio and competition continues to prompt more aggressive pricing for high quality fixed rate intermediate term loans, thus providing downward momentum in loan yields.
The maturity distribution and sensitivity information of the loan portfolio by major classification at December 31, 2020, is summarized as follows:
Maturity distribution and interest sensitivity of loan portfolio (Dollars in thousands)
As previously mentioned, there are numerous risks inherent in the loan portfolio. We manage the portfolio by employing sound credit policies and utilizing various modeling techniques in order to limit the effects of such risks. In addition, we utilize private mortgage insurance (“PMI”) and guaranteed Small Business Administration and Federal Home Loan Bank of Pittsburgh (“FHLB-Pgh”) loan programs to mitigate credit risk in the loan portfolio.
In an attempt to limit interest rate risk (“IRR”) and liquidity strains, we continually examine the maturity distribution and interest rate sensitivity of the loan portfolio. Market interest rates began to fall during the final six months of 2019 as the FOMC cut the targeted federal funds rate three times and continued to fall as the FOMC cut the targeted federal funds rate 150 basis points in March 2020 in response to COVID-19. Given our IRR to flat or falling rates, we placed emphasis on originating longer-term fixed-rate and adjustable-rate loans with interest rate floors. Fixed-rate loans represented 47.3 percent of the loan portfolio at December 31, 2020, compared to floating or adjustable-rate loans at 52.7 percent. Approximately 31.1 percent of the loan portfolio is expected to reprice within the next 12 months.
Additionally, our secondary market mortgage banking program provides us with an additional source of liquidity and a means to limit our exposure to IRR. Through this program, we are able to competitively price conforming one-to-four family residential mortgage loans without taking on IRR which would result from retaining these long-term, low fixed-rate loans on our books. The loans originated are subsequently sold in the secondary market, with the sales price locked in at the time of commitment, thereby greatly reducing our exposure to IRR.
Loan concentrations are considered to exist when the total amount of loans to any one borrower, or a multiple number of borrowers engaged in similar business activities or having similar characteristics, exceeds 25.0 percent of capital outstanding in any one category. We provide deposit and loan products and other financial services to individual and corporate customers in our current market area. There are no significant concentrations of credit risk from any individual counterparty or groups of counterparties, except for geographic concentrations in our market area.
Off- Balance Sheet Arrangements:
In addition to the risks inherent in our loan portfolio, in the normal course of business, we are also a party to financial instruments with off-balance sheet risk to meet the financing needs of our customers. These instruments include legally binding commitments to extend credit, unused portions of lines of credit and commercial letters of credit, and may involve, to varying degrees, elements of credit risk and IRR in excess of the amount recognized in the consolidated financial statements.
Credit risk is the principal risk associated with these instruments. Our involvement and exposure to credit loss in the event that the instruments are fully drawn upon and the customer defaults is represented by the contractual amounts of these instruments. In order to control credit risk associated with entering into commitments and issuing letters of credit, we employ the same credit quality and collateral policies in making commitments that we use in other lending activities. We evaluate each customer’s creditworthiness on a case-by-case basis, and if deemed necessary, obtain collateral. The amount and nature of the collateral obtained is based on our credit evaluation.
The contractual amounts of off-balance sheet commitments at year-end for the past three years are summarized as follows:
Distribution of off-balance sheet commitments (Dollars in thousands)
We record a valuation allowance for off-balance sheet credit losses, if deemed necessary, separately as a liability. The valuation allowance amounted to $122 thousand and $45 thousand at December 31, 2020 and 2019. We do not anticipate that losses, if any, that may occur as a result of funding off-balance sheet commitments, would have a material adverse effect on our operating results or financial position.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments:
In the ordinary course of operations, we enter into various financial obligations, including contractual obligations that may require future cash payments. As a financial services provider, we routinely enter into commitments to extend credit, including loan commitments, standby and commercial letters of credit. Such commitments are subject to the same credit policies and approval process accorded to loans made by the Bank. See Note 5 of the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations and other commitments to make future payments as of December 31, 2020. Payments for deposits and borrowings do not include interest. Payments related to leases are based on actual payments specified in the underlying contracts. Commitments to extend credit and standby letters of credit are presented at contractual amounts; however, since many of these commitments are expected to expire unused or only
partially used based upon our historical experience, the total amounts of these commitments do not necessarily reflect future cash requirements.
Asset Quality:
We are committed to developing and maintaining sound, quality assets through our credit risk management policies and procedures. Credit risk is the risk to earnings or capital which arises from a borrower’s failure to meet the terms of their loan obligations. We manage credit risk by diversifying the loan portfolio and applying policies and procedures designed to foster sound lending practices. These policies include certain standards that assist lenders in making judgments regarding the character, capacity, cash flow, capital structure and collateral of the borrower.
With regard to managing our exposure to credit risk in light of general devaluations in real estate values, we have established maximum loan-to-value ratios for commercial mortgage loans not to exceed 80.0 percent of the appraised value. With regard to residential mortgages, customers with loan-to-value ratios in excess of 80.0 percent are generally required to obtain Private Mortgage Insurance (PMI). PMI is used to protect us from loss in the event loan-to-value ratios exceed 80.0 percent and the customer defaults on the loan. Appraisals are performed by an independent appraiser engaged by us, not the customer, who is either state certified or state licensed depending upon collateral type and loan amount.
With respect to lending procedures, lenders and our credit underwriters must determine the borrower’s ability to repay their loans based on prevailing and expected market conditions prior to requesting approval for the loan. The Bank’s board of directors establishes and reviews, at least annually, the lending authority for certain senior officers, loan underwriters and branch personnel. Credit approvals beyond the scope of these individual authority levels are forwarded to a loan committee. This committee, comprised of certain members of senior management, review credits to monitor the quality of the loan portfolio through careful analysis of credit applications, adherence to credit policies and the examination of outstanding loans and delinquencies. These procedures assist in the early detection and timely follow-up of problem loans.
Credit risk is also managed by monthly internal reviews of individual credit relationships in our loan portfolio by credit administration and the asset quality committee. These reviews aid us in identifying deteriorating financial conditions of borrowers and allows us the opportunity to assist customers in remedying these situations.
Nonperforming assets consist of nonperforming loans and foreclosed assets. Nonperforming loans include nonaccrual loans, troubled debt restructured loans and accruing loans past due 90 days or more. For a discussion of our policy regarding nonperforming assets and the recognition of interest income on impaired loans, refer to the notes entitled, “Summary of significant accounting policies - Nonperforming assets,” and “Loans, net and allowance for loan losses” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements to this Annual Report which are incorporated in this item by reference.
Information concerning nonperforming assets for the past five years is summarized as follows. The table includes credits classified for regulatory purposes and all material credits that cause us to have serious doubts as to the borrower’s ability to comply with present loan repayment terms.
Distribution of nonperforming assets (Dollars in thousands)
Our nonperforming assets remained relatively stable decreasing $25 thousand or 0.2 percent at December 31, 2020 when compared to the end of 2019, however, we experienced improvement in our asset quality ratios as evidenced by a decrease in nonperforming assets as a percentage of loans, net and foreclosed assets to 0.48 percent from 0.54 percent, and nonperforming loans as a percentage of loans, net to 0.45 percent from 0.52 percent. The slight decrease in balances resulted from a $0.5 million decrease in nonaccrual loans due to the transfer of a $0.4 million residential mortgage to other real estate owned, offset by an increase in troubled debt restructurings of $0.6 million. The increase of $0.6 million in troubled debt restructured loans resulted from a $1.0 million increase in commercial real estate loans due to the addition of one restaurant related credit and two small business loans adversely impacted by the economic slowdown caused by COVID-19, partially offset by a decrease to commercial loans of $0.4 million due to a partial charge off to one credit and principal payments. We believe the three credits added are all adequately secured. Total accruing loans past due ninety days or more decreased $0.3 million to partially offset the increases. For a further discussion of assets classified as nonperforming assets and potential problem loans, refer to the note entitled, “Loans, net and the allowance for loan losses,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements to this Annual Report.
We maintain the allowance for loan losses at a level we believe adequate to absorb probable credit losses related to individually evaluated loans, as well as probable incurred losses inherent in the remainder of the loan portfolio as of the balance sheet date. The balance in the allowance for loan losses account is based on past events and current economic conditions. We employ the FFIEC Interagency Policy Statement, as amended, and GAAP in assessing the adequacy of the allowance account. Under GAAP, the adequacy of the allowance account is determined based on the provisions of FASB Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 310 for loans specifically identified to be individually evaluated for
impairment and the requirements of FASB ASC 450, for large groups of smaller-balance homogeneous loans to be collectively evaluated for impairment.
We follow our systematic methodology in accordance with procedural discipline by applying it in the same manner regardless of whether the allowance is being determined at a high point or a low point in the economic cycle. Each quarter, our credit administration department identifies those loans to be individually evaluated for impairment and those to be collectively evaluated for impairment utilizing a standard criteria. We consistently use loss experience from the latest twelve quarters in determining the historical loss factor for each pool collectively evaluated for impairment. Qualitative factors are evaluated in the same manner each quarter and are adjusted within a relevant range of values based on current conditions to assure directional consistency of the allowance for loan loss account. Regulators, in reviewing the loan portfolio as part of the scope of a regulatory examination, may require us to increase our allowance for loan losses or take other actions that would require increases to our allowance for loan losses.
For a further discussion of our accounting policies for determining the amount of the allowance and a description of the systematic analysis and procedural discipline applied, refer to the note entitled, “Summary of significant accounting policies - Allowance for loan losses,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements to this Annual Report.
A reconciliation of the allowance for loan losses including charge-offs and recoveries by major loan category for the past five years are summarized as follows:
Reconciliation of allowance for loan losses (Dollars in thousands)
The allowance for loan losses increased $4.6 million to $27.3 million at December 31, 2020, from $22.7 million at the end of 2019. The increase resulted from a provision for loan losses of $7.4 million less net loans charged-off of $2.7 million. Changes made during the first six months of 2020 to the qualitative factors, which related to economic decline resulting from the adverse impact of the COVID-19 crisis, was the primary reason for the higher provision. Commercial loan charge-offs were $2.8 million and included a $1.1 partial write down of a specific credit relationship, which has
been subsequently paid off in January 2021, a charge-off of $0.6 million to a specific commercial credit during the first quarter and $0.9 million related to a group of small business lines of credit in our Greater Delaware Valley market. Commercial loan recoveries increased $0.5 million and included $0.2 million related to the group of small business lines of credit in the Greater Delaware Valley market and $0.2 million on a separate credit. We charged-off $3.3 million of commercial loans in 2019 substantially all of which were in the fourth quarter. Included in this amount was $2.3 million related to certain small business lines of credit in our Greater Delaware Valley market and $1.0 million of other commercial loan relationships.
The allowance for loan losses, as a percentage of loans, net of unearned income, was 1.26 percent at the end of 2020, 1.17 percent at the end of 2019, respectively. Excluding PPP loans that do not carry an allowance for losses due to a 100 percent government guarantee, the ratio equaled 1.38 percent at December 31, 2020.
Past due loans not satisfied through repossession, foreclosure or related actions are evaluated individually to determine if all or part of the outstanding balance should be charged against the allowance for loan losses account. Any subsequent recoveries are credited to the allowance account. Net loans charged-off decreased $2.1 million to $2.7 million in 2020 from $4.8 million in 2019. Net charge-offs, as a percentage of average loans outstanding, equaled 0.13 percent in 2020 and 0.26 percent in 2019.
Allocation of the allowance for loan losses (Dollars in thousands)
The allocation of the allowance for loan losses for the past five years is summarized as follows:
The allowance for loan losses account increased $4.6 million to $27.3 million at December 31, 2020, compared to $22.7 million at December 31, 2019. The specific portion of the allowance for impairment of loans individually evaluated under FASB ASC 310 increased $0.4 million to $1.2 million at December 31, 2020, from $0.8 million at December 31, 2019 and the formula portion of the allowance for loans collectively evaluated for impairment under FASB ASC 450, increased $4.2 million to $26.1 million at December 31, 2020, from $21.9 million at December 31, 2019. The increase in the specific portion of the allowance was a result of a decrease in measured impairment for collateral dependent loans. The increase in the formula portion was primarily the result of a significant increase in volume and an increase in the historical loss factor for commercial loans, due to the increase in charge-offs during 2019.
The coverage ratio, the allowance for loan losses, as a percentage of nonperforming loans, is an industry ratio used to test the ability of the allowance account to absorb potential losses arising from nonperforming loans. The coverage ratio was 277.0 percent at December 31, 2020 and 225.0 percent at December 31, 2019. We believe that our allowance was adequate to absorb probable credit losses at December 31, 2020.
Deposits:
Our deposit base is the primary source of funds to support our operations. We offer a variety of deposit products to meet the needs of our individual and commercial customers. Total deposits grew $465.6 million or 23.6 percent to $2.4 billion at the end of 2020. The increase in deposits is due to organic growth in customer relationships throughout all our markets, higher customer savings rates, and PPP loan proceeds retained coupled with additional deposits by our commercial borrowers. Total deposits include $23.0 million of brokered certificates of deposit. Noninterest-bearing deposits grew $159.2 million or 34.4 percent while interest-bearing deposits increased $306.4 million or 20.3 percent in 2020. Noninterest-bearing deposits represented 25.5 percent of total deposits while interest-bearing deposits accounted for 74.5 percent of total deposits at December 31, 2020. Comparatively, noninterest-bearing deposits and interest-bearing deposits represented 23.5 percent and 76.5 percent of total deposits at year end 2019. With regard to noninterest-bearing deposits, personal checking accounts increased $61.1 million or 28.8 percent, while commercial checking accounts increased $98.6 million or 39.3 percent. The increase in noninterest-bearing deposits is essential in attempting to keep our overall cost of funds low given the pressure on our net interest margin from the decrease in short-term market rates.
With regard to interest-bearing deposits, interest-bearing transaction accounts, which include money market accounts and NOW accounts, and savings accounts, increased $356.2 million in 2020. Commercial interest-bearing transaction accounts increased $215.8 million, while personal interest-bearing transaction accounts increased $79.5 million. Savings accounts increased $61.0 million during 2020 as customers saved a higher percentage of the government stimulus in safe liquid accounts. The strong growth in our non-maturity deposits was due to continuing our strategic initiative to grow our public fund deposits and continued organic growth in all our markets. Total time deposits decreased $49.8 million to $319.7 million at December 31, 2020 from $369.5 million at December 31, 2019. The decrease was due to depositors shifting funds to more liquid accounts and the redemption of a few large municipal accounts.
The average amount of, and the rate paid on, the major classifications of deposits for the past three years are summarized as follows:
Deposit distribution (Dollars in thousands)
Total deposits averaged $2.2 billion in 2020 and $1.9 billion in 2019, increasing $291.8 million or 15.1 percent comparing 2020 to 2019. Average noninterest-bearing deposits increased $120.8 million, while average interest-bearing accounts grew $171.0 million. Average interest-bearing transaction deposits, including money market and NOW, and savings accounts, increased $183.6 million while average total time deposits decreased $12.6 million when comparing 2020 and 2019.
Our cost of interest-bearing deposits decreased 30 basis points to 0.71 percent in 2020 from 1.01 percent in 2019. Specifically, the cost of money market accounts decreased 50 basis points to 0.81 percent from 1.31 percent, NOW accounts decreased 17 basis points and the cost of time deposits decreased 50 basis points to 1.40 percent comparing 2020 and 2019. The decreases to the cost of our interest-bearing deposits was the result of our initiative to reduce premium rates being paid on core deposit relationships and the reduction of stated rates across all deposit products. The reductions are directly related to the FOMC’s decision to decrease the target federal funds rate 225 basis points from July
2019 to March 2020, first in response to economic slowdown and most recently due to the COVID-19 crisis. We expect our cost of funds to continue to decline as time deposits mature and reinvest into lower rates and we continue to lower all our interest-bearing deposit rates to mitigate compression to our net interest margin.
Volatile deposits, time deposits $100 or more, averaged $200.3 million in 2020, a decrease of $30.3 million or 13.2 percent from $230.6 million in 2019. Our average cost of these funds decreased 70 basis points to 1.46 percent in 2020, from 2.16 percent in 2019. This type of funding is susceptible to withdrawal by the depositor as they are particularly price sensitive and are therefore not considered to be a strong source of liquidity.
Maturities of time deposits $100 thousand or more, which entirely consist of certificates of deposits, for the past three years are summarized as follows:
Maturity distribution of time deposits $100 thousand or more (Dollars in thousands)
In addition to deposit gathering, we have a secondary source of liquidity through existing credit arrangements with the FHLB-Pgh. During the first four months of 2020 we relied on this type of funding due to seasonal outflows of municipal deposits. As deposit balances surged during the final six months of 2020 due to government stimulus and increases in commercial and municipal accounts, short-term borrowings with the FHLB were paid down. At year end 2020, we maintained a high on-balance sheet liquidity position and expect limited utilization of the credit facility during 2021. For a further discussion of our borrowings and their terms, refer to the notes entitled, “Short-term borrowings” and “Long-term debt,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report.
Subordinated Debt:
On June 1, 2020, the Company sold $33,000 aggregate principal amount of Subordinated Notes due 2030 (the “2020 Notes”) to accredited investors. The 2020 Notes are intended to be treated as Tier 2 capital for regulatory capital purposes.
The 2020 Notes bear interest at a rate of 5.375% per year for the first five years and then float based on a benchmark rate (as defined), provided that the interest rate applicable to the outstanding principal balance during the period the 2020 Notes are floating will at no time be less the 4.75%. Interest will be payable semi-annually in arrears on June 1 and December 1 of each year, beginning on June 1, 2020, for the first five years after issuance and will be payable quarterly in arrears thereafter on March 1, June 1, September 1, and December 1. The 2020 Notes will mature on June 1, 2030 and are redeemable in whole or in part, without premium or penalty, at any time on or after June 1, 2025 and prior to June 1, 2030. Additionally, if all or any portion of the 2020 Notes cease to be deemed Tier 2 Capital, the Company may redeem, in whole and not in part, at any time upon giving not less than ten days’ notice, an amount equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the principal amount outstanding plus accrued but unpaid interest to but excluding the date fixed for redemption.
Holders of the 2020 Notes may not accelerate the maturity of the 2020 Notes, except upon the bankruptcy, insolvency, liquidation, receivership or similar proceeding by or against the Company.
Market Risk Sensitivity:
Market risk is the risk to our earnings and/or financial position resulting from adverse changes in market rates or prices, such as interest rates, foreign exchange rates or equity prices. Our exposure to market risk is primarily IRR associated with our lending, investing and deposit gathering activities. During the normal course of business, we are not exposed to
foreign exchange risk or commodity price risk. Our exposure to IRR can be explained as the potential for change in our reported earnings and/or the market value of our net worth. Variations in interest rates affect the underlying economic value of our assets, liabilities and off-balance sheet items. These changes arise because the present value of future cash flows, and often the cash flows themselves, change with interest rates. The effects of the changes in these present values reflect the change in our underlying economic value, and provide a basis for the expected change in future earnings related to interest rates. Interest rate changes affect earnings by changing net interest income and the level of other interest-sensitive income and operating expenses. IRR is inherent in the role of banks as financial intermediaries. However, a bank with a high degree of IRR may experience lower earnings, impaired liquidity and capital positions, and most likely, a greater risk of insolvency. Therefore, banks must carefully evaluate IRR to promote safety and soundness in their activities.
The FOMC, in response to the uncertainty of the pandemic, cut the federal funds target rate 150 basis points during the first quarter of 2020 to a targeted range of 0.00 to 0.25 percent after the target rate 75 basis points during the second half of 2019 due to economic weakness. The timing and the magnitude of future monetary policy actions that will impact the current interest rate environment are uncertain. Given these conditions, IRR and the ability to effectively manage it, are extremely critical to both bank management and regulators. The FFIEC through its advisory guidance reiterates the importance of effective corporate governance, policies and procedures, risk measuring and monitoring systems, stress testing and internal controls related to the IRR exposure of depository institutions. According to the advisory, the bank regulators believe that the current financial market and economic conditions present significant risk management challenges to all financial institutions. Although the bank regulators recognize that some degree of IRR is inherent in banking, they expect institutions to have sound risk management practices in place to measure, monitor and control IRR exposure. The advisory states that the adequacy and effectiveness of an institution’s IRR management process and the level of IRR exposure are critical factors in the bank regulators’ evaluation of an institution’s sensitivity to changes in interest rates and capital adequacy. Material weaknesses in risk management processes or high levels of IRR exposure relative to capital will require corrective action. We believe our risk management practices with regard to IRR were suitable and adequate given the level of IRR exposure at December 31, 2020.
The Asset/Liability Committee (“ALCO”), comprised of members of our bank’s board of directors, senior management and other appropriate officers, oversees our IRR management program. Specifically, ALCO analyzes economic data and market interest rate trends, as well as competitive pressures, and utilizes several computerized modeling techniques to reveal potential exposure to IRR. This allows us to monitor and attempt to control the influence these factors may have on our rate sensitive assets (“RSA”), rate sensitive liabilities (“RSL”) and overall operating results and financial position.
With respect to evaluating our exposure to IRR on earnings, we utilize a gap analysis model that considers repricing frequencies of RSA and RSL. Gap analysis attempts to measure our interest rate exposure by calculating the net amount of RSA and RSL that reprice within specific time intervals. A positive gap occurs when the amount of RSA repricing in a specific period is greater than the amount of RSL repricing within that same time frame and is indicated by a RSA/RSL ratio greater than 1.0. A negative gap occurs when the amount of RSL repricing is greater than the amount of RSA and is indicated by a RSA/RSL ratio less than 1.0. A positive gap implies that earnings will be impacted favorably if interest rates rise and adversely if interest rates fall during the period. A negative gap tends to indicate that earnings will be affected inversely to interest rate changes.
Our interest rate sensitivity gap position, illustrating RSA and RSL at their related carrying values, is summarized as follows. The distributions in the table are based on a combination of maturities, call provisions, repricing frequencies and prepayment patterns. Adjustable-rate assets and liabilities are distributed based on the repricing frequency of the instrument. Mortgage instruments are distributed in accordance with estimated cash flows, assuming there is no change in the current interest rate environment.
Interest rate sensitivity (Dollars in thousands)
At December 31, 2020, we had cumulative one-year RSA/RSL ratio of 1.39, a positive gap. At December 31, 2019, we had cumulative one-year RSA/RSL of 0.98, a negative gap. As previously mentioned, a positive gap indicates that if interest rates increase, our earnings would likely be favorably impacted. Given the current economic conditions and the action of the FOMC to cut short-term rates to near zero during the first quarter of 2020 and their commitment to hold rates near zero for the foreseeable future, the focus of ALCO has been to maintain a well-balanced IRR position in order to safeguard future earnings during this historical low-rate environment and from potential risk to falling interest rates. During 2020 ALCO took steps to reduce our positive gap position and guard against rates unchanged or down through the origination of fixed rate loans and the investment in longer term, fixed rate municipal securities and longer duration U.S. government-sponsored mortgage-backed securities. Additionally, an initiative to reduce funding costs was executed to mitigate the adverse impact to net interest income from the low rates ALCO will continue to focus efforts on strategies in 2021 in an attempt to maintain a positive gap position between RSA and RSL. However, these forward-looking statements are qualified in the aforementioned section entitled “Forward-Looking Discussion” in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis.
The change in our cumulative one-year ratio from the previous year-end resulted from a $427.4 million or 46.0 percent increase in RSA partially offset by a $30.6 million or 3.2 percent increase in RSL maturing or repricing within one year. The increase in RSA resulted primarily from a $247.7 million increase in total loans, net of unearned income, resulting from an increase in commercial lending, which primarily involves loans with adjustable-rate terms that reprice in the near term. An increase of $183.0 million in federal funds sold from a surge in non-maturity deposits and a cautious approach to adding longer term assets at historically low rates also resulted in the higher RSA when comparing 2020 to 2019.
With respect to the $30.6 million increase in RSL maturing or repricing within a twelve month time horizon, non-maturity deposits increased $181.0 million due to customers seeking liquid accounts and saving at a higher percentage due to the economic uncertainty of the pandemic. The growth in deposits resulted in lower short-term borrowings of $102.1 million. Time deposits $100 thousand or more also declined when comparing year end 2020 to 2019 as a number of large accounts matured and customers sought more liquid alternatives.
Static gap analysis, although a credible measuring tool, does not fully illustrate the impact of interest rate changes on future earnings. First, market rate changes normally do not equally or simultaneously affect all categories of assets and liabilities. Second, assets and liabilities that can contractually reprice within the same period may not do so at the same time or to the same magnitude. Third, the interest rate sensitivity table presents a one-day position and variations occur daily as we adjust our rate sensitivity throughout the year. Finally, assumptions must be made in constructing such a table. For example, the conservative nature of our Asset/Liability Management Policy assigns personal NOW accounts to the “Due after three months but within twelve months” repricing interval. In reality, these accounts may reprice less frequently and in different magnitudes than changes in general market interest rate levels.
We utilize a simulation model to address the failure of the static gap model to address the dynamic changes in the balance sheet composition or prevailing interest rates and to enhance our asset/liability management. This model creates pro forma net interest income scenarios under various interest rate shocks. Given instantaneous and parallel shifts in general market rates of plus 100 basis points, our projected net interest income for the 12 months ending December 31, 2021, would increase at 4.3 percent from model results using current interest rates.
We will continue to monitor our IRR position in 2021 and anticipate employing deposit and loan pricing strategies and directing the reinvestment of loan and investment payments and prepayments in order to maintain our target IRR position.
Financial institutions are affected differently by inflation than commercial and industrial companies that have significant investments in fixed assets and inventories. Most of our assets are monetary in nature and change correspondingly with variations in the inflation rate. It is difficult to precisely measure the impact inflation has on us, however, we believe that our exposure to inflation can be mitigated through our asset/liability management program.
Liquidity:
Liquidity management is essential to our continuing operations as it gives us the ability to meet our financial obligations as they come due, as well as to take advantage of new business opportunities as they arise. Our financial obligations include, but are not limited to, the following:
● Funding new and existing loan commitments;
● Payment of deposits on demand or at their contractual maturity;
● Repayment of borrowings as they mature;
● Payment of lease obligations; and
● Payment of operating expenses.
Our liquidity position is impacted by several factors which include, among others, loan origination volumes, loan and investment maturity structure and cash flows, demand for core deposits and certificate of deposit maturity structure and retention. We manage these liquidity risks daily, thus enabling us to monitor fluctuations in our position and to adapt our position according to market influence and balance sheet trends. We also forecast future liquidity needs and develop strategies to ensure adequate liquidity at all times.
Historically, core deposits have been our primary source of liquidity because of their stability and lower cost, in general, than other types of funding. Providing additional sources of funds are loan and investment payments and prepayments and the ability to sell both available-for-sale securities and mortgage loans held for sale. As a final source of liquidity, we have available borrowing arrangements with various financial intermediaries, including the FHLB-Pgh. At December 31, 2020, our maximum borrowing capacity with the FHLB-Pgh was $807.0 million of which $64.8 million was outstanding in borrowings and $218.4 million outstanding in the form of irrevocable standby letters of credit. We believe our liquidity is adequate to meet both present and future financial obligations and commitments on a timely basis.
We maintain a contingency funding plan to address liquidity in the event of a funding crisis. Examples of some of the causes of a liquidity crisis include, among others, natural disasters, pandemics, war, events causing reputational harm and severe and prolonged asset quality problems. The plan recognizes the need to provide alternative funding sources in times of crisis that go beyond our core deposit base. As a result, we have created a funding program that ensures the availability of various alternative wholesale funding sources that can be used whenever appropriate. Identified alternative funding sources include:
● FHLB-Pgh liquidity contingency line of credit;
● Federal Reserve discount window;
● Internet certificates of deposit;
● Brokered deposits;
● Institutional Deposit Corporation deposits;
● Repurchase agreements; and
● Federal funds purchased.
We have increased our borrowing capacity at the Federal Reserve by establishing a borrower-in-custody of collateral arrangement that enables us to pledge certain loans, not being used as collateral at the FHLB-Pgh, as collateral for borrowings at the Federal Reserve. At December 31, 2020 our borrowing capacity at the Federal Reserve related to this program was $156.6 million and there were no amounts outstanding. Additionally, we may utilize the Federal Reserve’s Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility (“PPPLF”) by pledging PPP loans as collateral. At December 31, 2020, $189.7 million would be available to borrow for a term equal to the maturity date of the loan pledged. However, no new extensions of credit will be made under the PPPLF after March 31, 2021 unless the Federal Reserve Board and the Department of Treasury determine to extend the PPPLF. There are no amounts outstanding under the PPPLF at December 31, 2020.
Based on our liquidity position at December 31, 2020, we do not anticipate the need to utilize any of these sources in the near term.
We employ a number of analytical techniques in assessing the adequacy of our liquidity position. One such technique is the use of ratio analysis to illustrate our reliance on noncore funds to fund our investments and loans maturing after 2020. At December 31, 2020, our noncore funds consisted of time deposits in denominations of $100 thousand or more, short-term borrowings, and long-term and subordinated debt. Large denomination time deposits are particularly not considered to be a strong source of liquidity since they are very interest rate sensitive and are considered to be highly volatile. At December 31, 2020, our net noncore funding dependence ratio, the difference between noncore funds and short-term investments to long-term assets, was 2.8 percent. Our net short-term noncore funding dependence ratio, noncore funds maturing within one year, less short-term investments to long-term assets equaled negative 1.3 percent due to our short-term investments being greater than the non-core funding. Comparatively, our ratios equaled 17.8 percent and 14.4 percent at the end of 2019, which indicates a significant decrease in our reliance on noncore funds in 2020. Moreover, our basic liquidity surplus ratio, defined as liquid assets less short-term potentially volatile liabilities as
a percentage of total assets, increased to 8.7 percent at December 31, 2020, from 5.7 percent at December 31, 2019. We believe that by supplying adequate volumes of short-term investments and implementing competitive pricing strategies on deposits, we can ensure adequate liquidity to support future growth.
The Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows present the change in cash and cash equivalents from operating, investing and financing activities. Cash and cash equivalents consist of cash on hand, cash items in the process of collection, noninterest-bearing and interest-bearing deposits with other banks and federal funds sold. Cash and cash equivalents increased $197.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash and cash equivalents decreased $1.5 million. During 2020, cash provided by operating and financing activities more than offset cash used in investing activities.
Operating activities provided net cash of $37.2 million in 2020 and $37.1 million in 2019. Net income, adjusted for the effects of noncash expenses such as depreciation, amortization and accretion of tangible and intangible assets and investment securities, and the provision for loan losses, is the primary source of funds from operations.
Net cash provided by financing activities equaled $361.1 million in 2020. Net cash provided by financing activities was $146.2 million in 2019. Deposit gathering, which is our predominant financing activity, increased in both 2020 and 2019. Deposit gathering provided a net cash inflow in 2020 of $465.6 million and $96.5 million in 2019. Short-term borrowings decreased net cash by $102.2 million in 2020 while a net increase in short-term borrowings of $65.6 million increased net cash provided by financing activities in 2019. Deposit gathering in 2020 was also partially offset by a $18.0 million net decrease in long-term debt as well as cash dividends paid of $10.5 million. The issuance of $33.0 million of subordinated debt in 2020 also contributed to the increase. In 2019, deposit gathering was partially offset by a net $5.2 million repayments of long-term debt and cash dividends paid of $10.1 million.
Our primary investing activities involve transactions related to our investment and loan portfolios. Net cash used in investing activities totaled $201.2 million in 2020. Net cash used in investing activities was $184.7 million in 2019. Net cash used in lending activities was $241.3 million in 2020, an increase from $120.0 million in 2019. Activities related to our investment portfolio provided net cash of $43.0 million in 2020 and used cash of $56.6 million in 2019.
We anticipate maintaining a relatively stable liquidity position in 2021. Our continued growth in the expanding Lehigh Valley and King of Prussia markets coupled with our maturing Lebanon County office and expected growth in Doylestown, Bucks County is expected to produce strong loan demand throughout 2021. We expect to fund such demand through deposit gathering initiatives, payments and prepayments on loans and investments and advances from the FHLB. Moreover, if economic conditions were to weaken, as they did during 2020, it may result in increased interest in bank deposits, as consumers seek safety for their balances. However, we cannot predict the economic climate or the savings habits of consumers. Should economic conditions continue to improve, deposit gathering may be negatively impacted as depositors seek alternative investments or increase spending. Regardless of economic conditions and stock market fluctuations, we believe that through constant monitoring and adherence to our liquidity plan, we will have the means to provide adequate cash to fund our normal operations in 2021.
Capital Adequacy:
We believe a strong capital position is essential to our continued growth and profitability. We strive to maintain a relatively high level of capital to provide our depositors and stockholders with a margin of safety. In addition, a strong capital base allows us to take advantage of profitable opportunities, support future growth and provide protection against any unforeseen losses.
Our ALCO reviews our capital position, generally, quarterly. As part of its review, the ALCO considers: (i) the current and expected capital requirements, including the maintenance of capital ratios in excess of minimum regulatory guidelines; (ii) potential changes in the market value of our securities due to interest rates changes and effect on capital; (iii) projected organic and inorganic asset growth; (iv) the anticipated level of net earnings and capital position, taking into account the projected asset/liability position and exposure to changes in interest rates; (v) significant deteriorations in asset quality; and (vi) the source and timing of additional funds to fulfill future capital requirements.
Based on the recent regulatory emphasis placed on banks to assure capital adequacy, our board of directors annually reviews and approves a capital plan. Among other specific objectives, this comprehensive plan: (i) attempts to ensure that we and Peoples Bank remain well capitalized under the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action; (ii) evaluates our capital adequacy exposure through a comprehensive risk assessment; (iii) incorporates periodic stress testing in accordance with the Federal Reserve Board’s Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (“SCAP”); (iv) establishes event triggers and action plans to ensure capital adequacy; and (v) identifies realistic and readily available alternative sources for augmenting capital if higher capital levels are required.
Bank regulatory agencies consider capital to be a significant factor in ensuring the safety of a depositor’s accounts. These agencies have adopted minimum capital adequacy requirements that include mandatory and discretionary supervisory actions for noncompliance. Our and Peoples Bank’s risk-based capital ratios are strong and have consistently exceeded the minimum regulatory capital ratios required for adequately capitalized institutions. Our ratio of Tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets and off-balance sheet items was 12.2 percent and 11.9 percent at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our Total capital ratio was 15.1 percent and 13.0 percent at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in the total capital ratio is due to the issuance of $33.0 million of subordinated debt which qualified as Tier 2 capital. Our and Peoples Bank’s common equity Tier I capital to risk-weighted assets ratios were 12.2 percent and 13.7 percent at December 31, 2020 and 11.9 percent and 11.6 percent at December 31, 2019. Our Leverage ratio, which equaled 9.3 percent at December 31, 2020 and 10.1 percent at December 31, 2019, exceeded the minimum of 4.0 percent for capital adequacy purposes. Peoples Bank reported Tier 1 capital, Total capital and Leverage ratios of 13.7 percent, 15.0 percent and 10.1 percent at December 31, 2020, and 11.6 percent, 12.8 percent and 9.9 percent at December 31, 2019. Based on the most recent notification from the FDIC, Peoples Bank was categorized as well capitalized at December 31, 2020. There are no conditions or events since this notification that we believe have changed Peoples Bank’s category. For a further discussion of these risk-based capital standards and supervisory actions for noncompliance, refer to the note entitled, “Regulatory matters,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements to this Annual Report.
Stockholders’ equity was $316.9 million or $43.92 per share at December 31, 2020, and $299.0 million or $40.47 per share at December 31, 2019. Stockholders’ equity grew $17.9 million in 2020 as net income and a decrease in accumulated other comprehensive loss offset the payment of dividends and the Company’s repurchase of its shares.
We declared dividends of $1.44 per share in 2020, $1.37 per share in 2019, and $1.31 per share in 2018. The dividend payout ratio, dividends declared as a percent of net income, equaled 35.8 percent in 2020, 39.4 percent in 2019 and 38.9 percent in 2018. Our board of directors intends to continue paying cash dividends in the future and has declared a cash dividend in the first quarter of 2021 of $0.37 per share. Our ability to declare and pay dividends in the future is based on our operating results, financial and economic conditions, capital and growth objectives, dividend restrictions and other relevant factors. We rely on dividends received from our subsidiary, Peoples Bank, for payment of dividends to stockholders. Peoples Bank’s ability to pay dividends is subject to federal and state regulations. For a further discussion on our ability to declare and pay dividends in the future and dividend restrictions, refer to the note entitled, “Regulatory matters,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report.
Since 2014, our Board of Directors has adopted various common stock repurchase plans whereby we were authorized to repurchase shares of our outstanding common stock through open market purchases. During 2020 we repurchased and retired 181,417 shares for $6.9 million under the then current plan. We purchased and retired 14,428 shares for $0.6 million during 2019. There were no shares purchased or retired in 2018.
Review of Financial Performance:
Net income totaled $29.4 million or $4.00 per diluted share in 2020 an increase of 14.1% when compared to $25.7 million or $3.47 per diluted share in 2019. The increase in earnings in 2020 is the result of higher pre-provision net interest income of $4.3 million due primarily to lower funding costs, higher noninterest income of $1.5 million and lower noninterest expense of $0.7 million which were partially offset by an increase of $1.3 million to the provision for loan losses and a $1.7 million increase to the income tax provision. The results for 2020 include a $0.9 million net gain on the sale of debt securities included in noninterest income. Return on average assets (“ROAA”) and return on average equity
(“ROAE”) were 1.09 percent and 9.48 percent for the year ended December 31, 2020. ROAA was 1.10 percent and ROAE was 8.87 percent for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Tax-equivalent net interest income, a non-GAAP measure, was $81.1 million in 2020 and $77.2 million in 2019. Our net interest margin equaled 3.25 percent in 2020 and 3.58 percent in 2019. Noninterest income totaled $16.6 million in 2020 and $15.1 million in 2019. Noninterest expense was $54.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $55.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our productivity is measured by the operating efficiency ratio, a non-GAAP measure, defined as noninterest expense less amortization of intangible assets divided by the total of tax-equivalent net interest income and noninterest income. Our operating efficiency ratio was 56.0 percent in 2020 and 59.6 percent in 2019.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures (Dollars in thousands)
The following are non-GAAP financial measures which provide useful insight to the reader of the consolidated financial statements but should be supplemental to GAAP used to prepare Peoples’ financial statements and should not be read in isolation or relied upon as a substitute for GAAP measures. In addition, Peoples’ non-GAAP measures may not be comparable to non-GAAP measures of other companies. The tax rate used to calculate the fully-taxable equivalent (FTE) adjustment was 21% for 2020, 2019, and 2018.
The following table reconciles the non-GAAP financial measures of FTE net interest income for the years ended 2020, 2019 and 2018:
The efficiency ratio is noninterest expenses, less amortization of intangible assets, as a percentage of FTE net interest income plus noninterest income less gains on equity securities and gains on sale of assets. The following table reconciles the non-GAAP financial measures of the efficiency ratio to GAAP for the years ended 2020, 2019, and 2018:
Net Interest Income:
Net interest income is the fundamental source of earnings for commercial banks. Moreover, fluctuations in the level of net interest income can have the greatest impact on net profits. Net interest income is defined as the difference between interest revenue, interest and fees earned on interest-earning assets, and interest expense, the cost of interest-bearing liabilities supporting those assets. The primary sources of earning assets are loans and investment securities, while interest-bearing deposits and borrowings comprise interest-bearing liabilities. Net interest income is impacted by:
● Variations in the volume, rate and composition of earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities;
● Changes in general market interest rates; and
● The level of nonperforming assets.
Changes in net interest income are measured by the net interest spread and net interest margin. Net interest spread, the difference between the average yield earned on earning assets and the average rate incurred on interest-bearing liabilities, illustrates the effects changing interest rates have on profitability. Net interest margin, net interest income as a percentage of average earning assets, is a more comprehensive ratio, as it reflects not only the spread, but also the change in the composition of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. Tax-exempt loans and investments carry pretax yields lower than their taxable counterparts. Therefore, in order to make the net interest margin analysis more comparable, tax-exempt income and yields are reported in this analysis on a tax-equivalent basis using the prevailing federal statutory tax rate.
Similar to all banks, we consider the maintenance of an adequate net interest margin to be of primary concern. The current economic environment has been very challenging for the banking industry given the adverse impact of the pandemic and interest rates at historical lows. In addition to market rates and competition, nonperforming asset levels are of particular concern for the banking industry and may place additional pressure on net interest margins. Nonperforming assets may stabilize or worsen given the uncertainty of the national and global economies, particularly the labor markets. No assurance can be given as to how general market conditions will change or how such changes will affect net interest income. Therefore, we believe through prudent deposit and loan pricing practices, careful investing, and constant monitoring of nonperforming assets, our net interest margin will remain strong.
We analyze interest income and interest expense by segregating rate and volume components of earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. The impact changes in the interest rates earned and paid on assets and liabilities, along with changes in the volumes of earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, have on net interest income are summarized as follows. The net change or mix component, attributable to the combined impact of rate and volume changes within earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities’ categories, has been allocated proportionately to the change due to rate and the change due to volume.
Net interest income changes due to rate and volume (Dollars in thousands)
Tax-equivalent net interest income, a non-GAAP measure, was $81.1 million in 2020 and $77.2 million in 2019. Interest and net fees earned on the PPP loans totaled $3.8 million in 2020. There was a positive volume variance that was partially offset by a negative rate variance. The growth in average earning assets exceeded that of interest-bearing liabilities, and resulted in additional tax-equivalent net interest income, a non-GAAP measure, of $9.3 million. A rate variance resulted in a decrease in net interest income of $5.3 million as assets repriced quicker than liabilities.
Average earning assets increased $340.6 million to $2.5 billion in 2020 from $2.2 billion in 2019 and accounted for a $11.7 million increase in interest income. Average loans, net increased $257.5 million, including $148.3 million of PPP loans, which caused interest income to increase $11.5 million. Average taxable investments increased $46.3 million comparing 2020 and 2019, which resulted in increased interest income of $1.0 million while average tax-exempt investments decreased $33.1 million, which resulted in a decrease to interest income of $1.1 million.
Average interest-bearing liabilities grew $204.4 million to $1.8 billion in 2020 from $1.6 billion in 2019 resulting in a net increase in interest expense of $2.4 million. Large denomination time deposits averaged $30.3 million less in 2020 and caused interest expense to decrease $0.6 million. An increase of $17.7 million in average time deposits less than $100 thousand increased interest expense by $0.2 million. In addition, interest-bearing transaction accounts, including money market, NOW and savings accounts grew $183.6 million, which in aggregate caused a $1.5 million increase in interest expense. Short-term borrowings averaged $20.8 million more and increased interest expense $0.4 million while long-term debt averaged $6.7 million less and decreased interest expense by $0.2 million comparing 2020 and 2019. The issuance of $33.0 million of subordinated debt during June 2020 caused interest expense to increase $1.0 million.
An unfavorable rate variance occurred, as the tax-equivalent yield on earning assets decreased 59 basis points while there was a 33 basis point decrease in the cost of funds. As a result, tax-equivalent net interest income decreased $5.3 million comparing 2020 and 2019. The tax-equivalent yield on earning assets was 3.82 percent in 2020 compared to 4.41 percent in 2019 resulting in a decrease in interest income of $11.3 million. With the tax-equivalent yield on the investment portfolio
decreasing 11 basis points to 2.36 percent in 2020 from 2.47 percent in 2019, interest income decreased $0.1 million. The tax-equivalent yield on the loan portfolio decreased 55 basis points to 4.16 percent in 2020 from 4.71 percent in 2019 and resulted in a decrease to interest income of $11.1 million.
A favorable rate variance was experienced in the cost of funds. We experienced decreases in the rates paid on all major categories of interest-bearing liabilities. Specifically, the cost of money market and NOW accounts decreased 50 basis points and 17 basis points comparing 2020 and 2019. These decreases resulted in a decrease in interest expense of $2.7 million. With regard to time deposits, the average rate paid for time deposits less than $100 thousand decreased 13 basis points while time deposits $100 thousand or more decreased 70 basis points, which together resulted in a $1.6 million decrease in interest expense. The average rate paid on short-term borrowings decreased 160 basis points in 2020 when compared to 2019, causing a $1.2 million decrease in interest expense. Interest expense decreased $0.4 million from a 90 basis point decrease in the average rate paid on long-term debt.
The average balances of assets and liabilities, corresponding interest income and expense and resulting average yields or rates paid are summarized as follows. Averages for earning assets include nonaccrual loans. Investment averages include available-for-sale securities at amortized cost. Income on investment securities and loans is adjusted to a tax-equivalent basis, a non-GAAP measure, using the prevailing federal statutory tax rate of 21.0 percent in 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Summary of net interest income (Dollars in thousands)
Note: Average balances were calculated using average daily balances. Interest income on loans includes fees of $3,833 in 2020, $1,622 in 2019 and $1,528 in 2018. The increase in 2020 is primarily due to net fees from PPP loans.
Provision for Loan Losses:
We evaluate the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses account on a quarterly basis utilizing our systematic analysis in accordance with procedural discipline. We take into consideration certain factors such as composition of the loan portfolio, volume of nonperforming loans, volumes of net charge-offs, prevailing economic conditions and other relevant factors when determining the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses account. We make monthly provisions to the allowance for loan losses account in order to maintain the allowance at an appropriate level. The provision for loan losses equaled $7.4 million in 2020 and $6.1 million in 2019. The higher provision for loan losses in 2020 resulted from changes made during the first six months to the qualitative factors, which related to economic decline resulting from the adverse impact of the COVID-19 crisis. Based on our most recent evaluation at
December 31, 2020, we believe that the allowance was adequate to absorb any known or potential losses in our portfolio as of such date.
Noninterest Income:
Our noninterest income increased $1.5 million or 10.1 percent to $16.6 million in 2020 from $15.1 million in 2019. The increase in 2020 was driven primarily by higher mortgage banking revenue of $1.0 million due to increased refinance activity from low market rates which resulted in higher volume of loans sold into the secondary market. We also realized a $0.9 million net gain on the sale of investment securities in 2020 while the 2019 results included gains of $0.2 million. Commercial loan interest rate swap revenue was higher by $0.5 million due to an increased number and volume of transactions during 2020 compared to 2019. Service charges, fees and commissions decreased $0.4 million due to lower service charges on consumer and commercial deposit accounts of $0.8 million from a noticeable reduction in transaction volumes related to COVID-19. Bank owned life insurance (BOLI) death benefit proceeds included in service charges, fees and commissions for 2020 totaling $0.6 million partially offset the reduction. Merchant revenue declined $0.1 million or 15.3% and wealth management revenue declined $0.2 million or 15.9% due to lower transaction volumes in part to COVID-19.
Noninterest Expense:
In general, our noninterest expense is categorized into three main groups, including employee-related expense, occupancy and equipment expense and other expenses. Employee-related expenses are costs associated with providing salaries, including payroll taxes and benefits to our employees. Occupancy and equipment expenses, the costs related to the maintenance of facilities and equipment, include depreciation, general maintenance and repairs, real estate taxes, rental expense offset by any rental income and utility costs. Other expenses include general operating expenses such as marketing, other taxes, stationery and supplies, contractual services, insurance, including FDIC assessment and loan collection costs. Several of these costs and expenses are variable while the remainder is fixed. We utilize budgets and other related strategies in an effort to control the variable expenses.
The major components of noninterest expense for the past three years are summarized as follows:
Noninterest expense (Dollars in thousands)
Salaries and employee benefits expense constitute the majority of our noninterest expenses accounting for 54.9 percent of the total noninterest expense. Salaries and employee benefits expense decreased $1.2 million or 3.9 percent to $30.1 million in 2020 from $31.4 million in 2019. Salaries and payroll taxes decreased $1.0 million or 3.9 percent and employee benefits expense decreased $0.2 million or 4.1 percent. The lower salary expense in 2020 was primarily due to deferred loan origination cost benefit which increased $1.4 million due to our origination of PPP loans in 2020. This higher benefit was partially offset by increases due to annual performance-based salary adjustments and additional lending professionals in our expansion markets. Employee benefits expense was lower due to lower health insurance costs and lower pension expense.
Occupancy and equipment expense increased $0.9 million or 7.8 percent to $12.8 million in 2020 from $11.9 million in 2019 due specifically to a 16.3 percent increase in equipment expense. The increase in equipment-related expenses was due in part to an investment in a software solution to streamline our PPP loan origination process, additional computer hardware to enable a larger percentage of our workforce to work remotely, and an investment in a new mobile/digital banking solution.
Other expenses, which consist of merchant transaction expense, FDIC insurance and assessments, professional fees and outside services, other taxes, stationary and supplies, advertising, amortization of intangible assets and all other expenses were $11.9 million in 2020 and $12.4 million in 2019. FDIC insurance and assessments was higher by $0.2 million or 34.1 percent primarily attributed to the receipt of a credit in 2019 related to the Deposit Insurance Fund’s (DIF) minimum reserve ratio assessment. Professional fees and outside services increased $0.3 million due to legal work related to loan workouts and PPP loans. Advertising expenses decreased $0.4 million and other expenses, which include employee education, travel and entertainment expenses, decreased $0.4 million due to COVID-19.
Income Taxes:
Our income tax expense was $4.8 million in 2020 and $3.2 million in 2019. We utilize loans and investments of tax-exempt organizations to mitigate our tax burden, as interest revenue from these sources is not taxable by the federal government. As a result, our effective tax rate was 14.1 percent in 2020 and 10.9 percent in 2019.
The effective tax rate in 2020 and 2019 was also influenced by the recognition of investment tax credits related to our limited partnership investments in elderly and low- to- moderate-income residential housing programs which allow us to mitigate our tax burden. By utilizing these credits, we reduced our income tax expense by $1.1 million in both 2020 and 2019. We anticipate investment tax credits from these investments to be $1.1 million again in 2021. Over the next five years, we will recognize aggregate tax credits from our investments in these projects of $3.4 million.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 2019 versus 2018
(Dollars in thousands, except per share data)
Operating Environment:
The United States economy continued to show signs of expansion in 2019, as the real gross domestic product (“GDP”), the value of all goods and services produced in the nation, grew at an annual rate of 2.1 percent (estimated) in the fourth quarter. This followed third quarter growth of 2.1 percent in real GDP. The economy grew at a solid 2.3 percent for all of 2019. GDP grew at a rate of 2.9 percent in 2018 by comparison. The Federal Reserve Board’s Federal Open Market Committee (“FOMC”) decreased the federal funds rate three times in 2019 ending the year at a range of 1.50 percent to 1.75 percent. In lowering the key target range for the federal funds rate, the FOMC noted that the labor market remained strong and that economic activity had been rising at a moderate rate. Job gains had been solid and the unemployment rate has remained low. On the inflation front, it remains below the target rate of 2.0 percent and expectations for longer-term inflation remained little changed. The median forecast was for a federal funds rate of 1.3 percent by year-end 2020, implying that there would have been one additional rate cut in 2020.
On a national level, employment conditions improved in 2019. The civilian labor force increased 1.4 million, while the number of people employed increased 2.0 million in 2019. As a result, the annual unemployment rate for the U.S. fell in 2019 when compared to 2018. All sectors of employment, reported employment gains from the end of 2018.
National, Pennsylvania, New York and our market area’s non-seasonally-adjusted annual unemployment rates in 2019 and 2018, are summarized as follows:
Employment conditions improved for both the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and New York State in 2019 as evidenced by a decrease in their respective unemployment rates. With respect to the markets we serve, the unemployment rate decreased in nine of the thirteen counties in which we have branches or ATM locations. The unemployment rate remained the same year over year in two of the remaining counties and increased nominally in the other two counties. The lowest unemployment rate in 2019, for all of the counties we serve, was Montgomery County at 3.3 percent.
With respect to the banking industry, net income for all FDIC-insured banks in 2019 totaled $233.1 billion, a decrease of $3.6 billion or 1.5 percent from 2018. Approximately 64.3 percent of all institutions reported higher net income in 2019, while only 3.6 percent reported net losses, up slightly from last year’s reported 3.2 percent unprofitable institutions. Loan loss provisions of $55.0 billion in 2019 were $5.0 billion or 10.0 percent more than banks set aside in 2018. Net interest income increased for the sixth year in a row, by $5.5 billion or 1.0 percent. Noninterest income was $1.7 billion or 0.6 percent below the level of 2018. Realized gains on sales of investments were $4.0 billion compared to $328.0 million in
2018. Total noninterest expense increased $6.6 billion or 1.4 percent comparing 2019 and 2018. The return on average assets for 2019 was 1.29 percent compared to 1.35 percent in 2018.
Review of Financial Position:
Total assets, loans and deposits were $2.5 billion, $1.9 billion and $2.0 billion, respectively, at December 31, 2019. Total assets, loans and deposits grew 8.1 percent, 6.3 percent and 5.1 percent, respectively, compared to 2018 year-end balances.
The loan portfolio consisted of $1.5 billion of business loans, including commercial and commercial real estate loans, and $403.9 million in retail loans, including residential mortgage and consumer loans at December 31, 2019. Total investment securities were $338.6 million at December 31, 2019, including $330.5 million of investment securities classified as available-for sale and $7.7 million classified as held-to-maturity. Total deposits consisted of $463.2 million in noninterest-bearing deposits and $1.5 billion in interest-bearing deposits at December 31, 2019.
Stockholders’ equity equaled $299.0 million, or $40.47 per share, at December 31, 2019, and $278.6 million, or $37.66 per share, at December 31, 2018. Our equity to asset ratio was 12.08 percent and 12.17 percent at those respective period ends. Dividends declared for the 2019 amounted to $1.37 per share representing 39.4 percent of net income.
Nonperforming assets equaled $10.5 million or 0.54 percent of loans, net and foreclosed assets at December 31, 2019, an increase in balance but lower percentage when compared to $10.0 million or 0.55 percent at December 31, 2018. The allowance for loan losses equaled $22.7 million or 1.17 percent of loans, net, at December 31, 2019, compared to $21.4 million or 1.17 percent at year-end 2018. Loans charged-off, net of recoveries equaled $4.8 million or 0.26 percent of average loans in 2019, compared to $1.8 million or 0.10 percent of average loans in 2018.
Investment Portfolio:
Primarily, our investment portfolio provides a source of liquidity needed to meet expected loan demand and generates a reasonable return in order to increase our profitability. Additionally, we utilize the investment portfolio to meet pledging requirements and reduce income taxes. At December 31, 2019, our portfolio consisted primarily of short-term U.S. Treasury and government agency securities, which provide a source of liquidity and intermediate-term, tax-exempt state and municipal obligations, which mitigate our tax burden.
Investment securities increased $60.3 million, to $338.6 million at December 31, 2019, from $278.3 million at December 31, 2018. At December 31, 2019, the investment portfolio consisted of $330.5 million of investment securities classified as available-for-sale and $7.7 million classified as held-to-maturity. Investment cash flow was directed back into the investment portfolio primarily during the third and fourth quarters of 2019. Additionally during the fourth quarter, $55.0 of residential mortgage-backed securities were purchased with overnight borrowings to mitigate interest rate risk in a flat or down rate environment. Security purchases totaled $124.5 million in 2019, with purchases consisting of longer term taxable and tax-exempt municipal securities and mortgage-backed securities. Investment purchases in 2018 amounted to $32.7 million.
Repayments of investment securities totaled $58.2 million in 2019 and $32.0 million in 2018. During 2019, the Company sold $9.7 million of low-yielding short-term municipal bonds resulting in a gain of $23 thousand. The proceeds were used to reinvest back into longer duration and higher yielding bonds. There were no sales of investment securities during 2018. We continually analyze the investment portfolio with respect to its exposure to various risk elements.
Investment securities averaged $279.4 million and equaled 13.0 percent of average earning assets in 2019, compared to $281.7 million and 13.8 percent of average earning assets in 2018. The tax-equivalent yield on the investment portfolio decreased thirteen basis points to 2.47 percent in 2019 from 2.60 percent in 2018. The decrease in the tax-equivalent yield is due primarily to cash flow from maturing and called bonds being reinvested into lower market rates.
Loan Portfolio:
Total loans increased $115.0 million or 6.3 percent in 2019 to $1.9 billion at December 31, 2019. Business loans, including commercial loans and commercial real estate loans, were $1.5 billion or 79.2 percent of total loans at December 31, 2019, and $1.4 billion or 76.9 percent at year-end 2018. Residential mortgages and consumer loans totaled $403.9 million or 20.8 percent of total loans at year-end 2019 and $421.3 million or 23.1 percent at year-end 2018. Loan growth remained strong throughout 2019. Total loans grew at an annual rate of 6.3 percent in 2019 which includes $18.2 million of run-off in our indirect automobile portfolio due to pricing changes. The majority of the increase in loans in 2019 was primarily attributable to the continued growth fostered by our entrance into the Lehigh Valley market during the fourth quarter of 2014 by establishing a community banking office with a dedicated team of commercial and retail lenders. We have expanded our presence in the greater Lehigh Valley with the addition of two community banking offices, the most recent during the third quarter of 2017, complemented with additional lending teams to continue the growth. Additional growth was attained through our entrance into the King of Prussia market initially by establishing a loan production office and then by opening a retail branch in the fourth quarter of 2016. The remainder of such growth was generated from improved demand for business lending in existing markets. Based on the customer service oriented philosophy of our organization along with the commitment of these employees, we continue to be well received in these new markets as we are in our existing markets.
Loans averaged $1.9 billion in 2019, compared to $1.8 billion in 2018. Taxable loans averaged $1.7 billion, while tax-exempt loans averaged $139.0 million in 2019. Due to improving loan demand, the loan portfolio continues to play the prominent role in our earning asset mix. As a percentage of earning assets, average loans equaled 86.6 percent in 2019, an increase from 86.1 percent in 2018.
Asset Quality:
Our nonperforming assets increased $559 thousand or 5.6 percent at December 31, 2019 when compared to the end of 2018, however, we experienced improvement in our asset quality ratios as evidenced by a decrease in nonperforming assets as a percentage of loans, net and foreclosed assets to 0.54 percent from 0.55 percent, and nonperforming loans as a percentage of loans, net to 0.52 percent from 0.53 percent. The increase in balances resulted from a $1.6 million increase in nonaccrual loans due to the addition of one large commercial relationship and an increase in foreclosed assets of $0.1 million. A decrease of $0.6 million in troubled debt restructured loans due to the charge-off of $0.3 million of commercial real estate loans coupled with principal payments received on outstanding loans and a decrease of $0.6 million of accruing loans past due ninety days partially offset the increases. For a further discussion of assets classified as nonperforming assets and potential problem loans, refer to the note entitled, “Loans, net and the allowance for loan losses,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements to this Annual Report.
We maintain the allowance for loan losses at a level we believe adequate to absorb probable credit losses related to individually evaluated loans, as well as probable incurred losses inherent in the remainder of the loan portfolio as of the balance sheet date. The balance in the allowance for loan losses account is based on past events and current economic conditions. We employ the FFIEC Interagency Policy Statement, as amended, and GAAP in assessing the adequacy of the allowance account. Under GAAP, the adequacy of the allowance account is determined based on the provisions of FASB Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 310 for loans specifically identified to be individually evaluated for impairment and the requirements of FASB ASC 450, for large groups of smaller-balance homogeneous loans to be collectively evaluated for impairment.
The allowance for loan losses increased $1.3 million to $22.7 million at December 31, 2019, from $21.4 million at the end of 2018. The increase resulted from a provision for loan losses of $6.1 million less net loans charged-off of $4.8 million. The charge-offs for fiscal 2019 primarily occurred in the fourth quarter. We charged-off $3.3 million of commercial loans in 2019 substantially all of which were in the fourth quarter. Included in this amount was $2.3 million related to certain small business lines of credit in our Greater Delaware Valley market and $1.0 million of other commercial loan relationships.
Past due loans not satisfied through repossession, foreclosure or related actions are evaluated individually to determine if all or part of the outstanding balance should be charged against the allowance for loan losses account. Any subsequent recoveries are credited to the allowance account. Net loans charged-off increased $3.0 million to $4.8 million in 2019 from $1.8 million in 2018. Net charge-offs, as a percentage of average loans outstanding, equaled 0.26 percent in 2019 and 0.10 percent in 2018.
The allocated element of the allowance for loan losses account increased $1.3 million to $22.7 million at December 31, 2019, compared to $21.4 million at December 31, 2018. The specific portion of the allowance for impairment of loans individually evaluated under FASB ASC 310 decreased $402 thousand to $777 thousand at December 31, 2019, from $1.2 million at December 31, 2018 and the formula portion of the allowance for loans collectively evaluated for impairment under FASB ASC 450, increased $1.7 million to $21.9 million at December 31, 2019, from $20.2 million at December 31, 2018. The decrease in the specific portion of the allowance was a result of a decrease in measured impairment for collateral dependent loans. The increase in the formula portion was primarily the result of a significant increase in volume and an increase in the historical loss factor for commercial loans, due to the increase in charge-offs during 2019.
There was no unallocated element of the total allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2019. As is inherent with all estimates, the allowance for loan losses methodology is subject to a certain level of imprecision as it provides reasonable, but not absolute, assurance that the allowance will be able to absorb probable losses, in their entirety, as of the financial statement date. Factors, among others, including judgments made in identifying those loans considered impaired, appraisals of collateral values and measurements of certain qualitative factors, all cause this imprecision and support the establishment of the unallocated element.
The coverage ratio, the allowance for loan losses account, as a percentage of nonperforming loans, is an industry ratio used to test the ability of the allowance account to absorb potential losses arising from nonperforming loans. The coverage ratio was 225.0 percent at December 31, 2019 and 222.9 percent at December 31, 2018. We believe that our allowance was adequate to absorb probable credit losses at December 31, 2019.
Deposits:
Our deposit base is the primary source of funds to support our operations. We offer a variety of deposit products to meet the needs of our individual and commercial customers. Total deposits grew $96.5 million or 5.1 percent to $2.0 billion at the end of 2019. Total deposits include $23.0 million of brokered certificates of deposit. Noninterest-bearing deposits grew $53.0 million or 12.9% while interest-bearing deposits increased $43.5 million or 3.0% in 2019. Noninterest-bearing deposits represented 23.5 percent of total deposits while interest-bearing deposits accounted for 76.5 percent of total deposits at December 31, 2019. Comparatively, noninterest-bearing deposits and interest-bearing deposits represented 21.9 percent and 78.1 percent of total deposits at year end 2018. With regard to noninterest-bearing deposits, personal checking accounts increased $10.4 million or 5.1 percent, while commercial checking accounts increased $42.7 million or 20.5 percent. The increase in noninterest-bearing deposits is essential in attempting to keep our overall cost of funds low given the pressure on our net interest margin from the increase in short-term market rates.
With regard to interest-bearing deposits, interest-bearing transaction accounts, which include money market accounts and NOW accounts, and savings accounts, increased $10.2 million in 2019. Commercial interest-bearing transaction accounts decreased $3.4 million, while personal interest-bearing transaction accounts increased $21.5 million. Savings accounts decreased $7.9 million during 2019 as price sensitive depositors shifted balances to more attractive premium rates being offered on time deposits by us and our competitors. The strong growth in our non-maturity deposits was due to continuing our strategic initiative to grow our public fund deposits and our continued penetration in our expansion markets. Total time deposits increased $33.3 million to $369.5 million at December 31, 2019 from $336.2 million at December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily due to rate conscious consumer and commercial depositors seeking higher yields.
Total deposits averaged $1.9 billion in 2019 and $1.8 billion in 2018, increasing $165.7 million or 9.4 percent comparing 2019 to 2018. Average noninterest-bearing deposits increased $39.4 million, while average interest-bearing accounts
grew $126.3 million. Average interest-bearing transaction deposits, including money market and NOW, and savings accounts, increased $50.1 million while average total time deposits increased $76.2 million when comparing 2019 and 2018.
Our cost of interest-bearing deposits increased 33 basis points to 1.01 percent in 2019 from 0.68 percent in 2018. Specifically, the cost of money market accounts increased 45 basis points to 1.31 percent from 0.86 percent and NOW accounts increased 15 basis points while the cost of time deposits increased 54 basis points to 1.90 percent comparing 2019 and 2018. The increases to the cost of interest-bearing transaction deposits and time deposits was the result of the increase in short-term market rates resulting from the FOMC’s action to raise the targeted federal funds rate four times during 2018 and the continued elevated short term market rates as the yield curve remained flat despite the FOMC’s action in the second half of 2019 to cut the federal funds rate three times. In response to the FOMC’s actions in 2019, we have decreased rates on time deposits and engaged in an initiative to reduce premium rates being paid to retain our core deposit relationships both in our legacy market and expansion markets in order to reduce our overall deposit costs.
Volatile deposits, time deposits $100 or more, averaged $230.6 million in 2019, an increase of $83.5 million or 56.8 percent from $147.1 million in 2018. Our average cost of these funds increased 63 basis points to 2.16 percent in 2019, from 1.53 percent in 2018. This type of funding is susceptible to withdrawal by the depositor as they are particularly price sensitive and are therefore not considered to be a strong source of liquidity.
Market Risk Sensitivity:
With respect to evaluating our exposure to IRR on earnings, we utilize a gap analysis model that considers repricing frequencies of RSA and RSL. Gap analysis attempts to measure our interest rate exposure by calculating the net amount of RSA and RSL that reprice within specific time intervals. A positive gap occurs when the amount of RSA repricing in a specific period is greater than the amount of RSL repricing within that same time frame and is indicated by a RSA/RSL ratio greater than 1.0. A negative gap occurs when the amount of RSL repricing is greater than the amount of RSA and is indicated by a RSA/RSL ratio less than 1.0. A positive gap implies that earnings will be impacted favorably if interest rates rise and adversely if interest rates fall during the period. A negative gap tends to indicate that earnings will be affected inversely to interest rate changes.
At December 31, 2019, we had cumulative one-year RSA/RSL ratio of 0.98, a slightly negative gap. At December 31, 2018, we had cumulative one-year RSA/RSL of 1.07, a positive gap. As previously mentioned, a negative gap indicated that if interest rates increase, our earnings would likely be adversely impacted. Given the then current economic conditions and the action of the FOMC to cut short-term rates during the second half of 2019 and the uncertainty of future actions to either cut or raise short-term rates in 2020, the focus of ALCO had been to maintain a well-balanced IRR position in order to safeguard future earnings from potential risk to falling interest rates. During 2019 ALCO took steps to reduce the magnitude of our positive gap position and guard against rates unchanged or down through the origination of five year fixed rate loans and the investment in longer term, fixed rate municipal securities and longer duration U.S. government-sponsored mortgage-backed securities.
The change in our cumulative one-year ratio from the 2018 year-end resulted from a $168.5 million or 21.7 percent increase in RSL coupled with a $91.9 million or 11.0 percent increase in RSA maturing or repricing within one year. The increase in RSL resulted primarily from a $102.0 million increase in time deposits $100 thousand or more and an increase in short-term borrowings of $65.6 million. The majority of the increase in the time deposit balances was due to rate sensitive customers seeking higher rates with terms less than twelve months. The increase in short-term borrowings was due to purchasing $55.0 million of mortgage-backed securities with short-term funding during the fourth quarter of 2019.
With respect to the increase in RSA maturing or repricing within a twelve month time horizon, loans, net increased $64.3 million while investment securities increased $22.5 million. The increase in total loans, net of unearned income, resulted from an increase in commercial lending, which primarily involves loans with adjustable-rate terms that reprice in the near term. The increase in investment securities was due to higher prepayment estimates as a result of the FOMC’s action to cut the targeted federal funds rate during 2019 and the flat yield curve.
Liquidity:
We employ a number of analytical techniques in assessing the adequacy of our liquidity position. One such technique is the use of ratio analysis to illustrate our reliance on noncore funds to fund our investments and loans maturing after 2019. At December 31, 2019, our noncore funds consisted of time deposits in denominations of $100 thousand or more, short-term borrowings and long-term debt. Large denomination time deposits are particularly not considered to be a strong source of liquidity since they are very interest rate sensitive and are considered to be highly volatile. At December 31, 2019, our net noncore funding dependence ratio, the difference between noncore funds and short-term investments to long-term assets, was 17.8 percent. Our net short-term noncore funding dependence ratio, noncore funds maturing within one year, less short-term investments to long-term assets equaled 14.4 percent. Comparatively, our ratios equaled 15.0 percent and 6.3 percent at the end of 2018, which indicated an increase in our reliance on noncore funds in 2019. Moreover, our basic liquidity surplus ratio, defined as liquid assets less short-term potentially volatile liabilities as a percentage of total assets, increased to 5.7 percent at December 31, 2019, from 4.1 percent at December 31, 2018. We believe that by supplying adequate volumes of short-term investments and implementing competitive pricing strategies on deposits, we can ensure adequate liquidity to support future growth.
The Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows present the change in cash and cash equivalents from operating, investing and financing activities. Cash and cash equivalents consist of cash on hand, cash items in the process of collection, noninterest-bearing and interest-bearing deposits with other banks and federal funds sold. Cash and cash equivalents decreased $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2018, cash and cash equivalents decreased $4.9 million. During 2019, cash provided by operating and financing activities were more than offset by cash used in investing activities.
Operating activities provided net cash of $37.1 million in 2019 and $32.6 million in 2018. Net income, adjusted for the effects of noncash expenses such as depreciation, amortization and accretion of tangible and intangible assets and investment securities, and the provision for loan losses, is the primary source of funds from operations.
Net cash provided by financing activities equaled $146.2 million in 2019. Net cash provided by financing activities was $97.3 million in 2018. Deposit gathering, which is our predominant financing activity, increased in both 2019 and 2018. Deposit gathering provided a net cash inflow in 2019 of $96.5 million and $156.0 million in 2018. Short-term borrowings increased net cash by $65.6 million in 2019 while a net decrease in short-term borrowings of $37.2 million reduced net cash provided by financing activities in 2018. Deposit gathering in 2019 was also partially offset by a $5.2 million net decrease in long-term debt as well as cash dividends paid of $10.1 million. In 2018, deposit gathering was partially offset by $11.8 million repayments of long-term debt and cash dividends paid of $9.7 million.
Our primary investing activities involve transactions related to our investment and loan portfolios. Net cash used in investing activities totaled $184.7 million in 2019. Net cash used in investing activities was $134.8 million in 2018. Net cash used in lending activities was $120.0 million in 2019, a decrease from $141.3 million in 2018. Activities related to our investment portfolio used net cash of $66.3 million in 2019 and $0.7 million in 2018.
Capital Adequacy:
Bank regulatory agencies consider capital to be a significant factor in ensuring the safety of a depositor’s accounts. These agencies have adopted minimum capital adequacy requirements that include mandatory and discretionary supervisory actions for noncompliance. Our and Peoples Bank’s risk-based capital ratios are strong and have consistently exceeded the minimum regulatory capital ratios required for adequately capitalized institutions. Our ratio of Tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets and off-balance sheet items was 11.9 percent and 12.0 percent at December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Our Total capital ratio was 13.0 percent and 13.1 percent at December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Our and Peoples Bank’s common equity Tier I capital to risk-weighted assets ratios were 11.9 percent and 11.6 percent at December 31, 2019 and 12.0 percent and 11.6 percent at December 31, 2018. Our Leverage ratio, which equaled 10.1 percent at December 31, 2019 and 10.0 percent at December 31, 2018, exceeded the minimum of 4.0 percent for capital adequacy purposes. Peoples Bank reported Tier 1 capital, Total capital and Leverage ratios of 11.6 percent, 12.8 percent and 9.9 percent at December 31, 2019, and 11.6 percent, 12.8 percent and 9.8 percent at
December 31, 2018. Based on the most recent notification from the FDIC, Peoples Bank was categorized as well capitalized at December 31, 2019. For a further discussion of these risk-based capital standards and supervisory actions for noncompliance, refer to the note entitled, “Regulatory matters,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements to this Annual Report.
Stockholders’ equity was $299.0 million or $40.47 per share at December 31, 2019, and $278.6 million or $37.66 per share at December 31, 2018. Stockholders’ equity grew $20.4 million in 2019 as net income and a decrease in accumulated other comprehensive loss partially offset the payment of dividends.
Review of Financial Performance:
Net income was $25.7 million or $3.48 per share in 2019 and $24.9 million or $3.37 per share in 2018. The increase in earnings in 2019 is the result of higher net interest income of $4.2 million due to growth of our earning assets and higher noninterest income of $1.5 million which were partially offset by an increase of $1.9 million in the provision for loan losses and higher noninterest expenses of $3.2 million. The results for 2018 include a $0.3 million net gain on the sale of our credit card portfolio. Return on average assets (“ROAA”) and return on average equity (“ROAE”) were 1.10 percent and 8.87 percent for the year ended December 31, 2019. ROAA was 1.12 percent and ROAE was 9.21 percent for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Tax-equivalent net interest income, a non-GAAP measure, was $77.2 million in 2019 and $73.0 million in 2018. Our net interest margin equaled 3.58 percent in 2019 and 3.59 percent in 2018. Noninterest income totaled $15.1 million in 2019 and $13.7 million in 2018. Noninterest expense was $56.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $52.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. Our productivity is measured by the operating efficiency ratio, a non-GAAP measure, defined as noninterest expense less amortization of intangible assets divided by the total of tax-equivalent net interest income and noninterest income. Our operating efficiency ratio was 59.6 percent in 2019 and 59.8 percent in 2018.
Net Interest Income:
Tax-equivalent net interest income, a non-GAAP measure, was $77.2 million in 2019 and $73.0 million in 2018. There was a positive volume variance that was partially offset by a negative rate variance. The growth in average earning assets exceeded that of interest-bearing liabilities, and resulted in additional tax-equivalent net interest income, a non-GAAP measure, of $4.8 million. A rate variance resulted in a decrease in net interest income of $0.7 million.
Average earning assets increased $119.2 million to $2,154.5 million in 2019 from $2,035.3 million in 2018 and accounted for a $5.1 million increase in interest income. Average loans, net increased $112.4 million, which caused interest income to increase $5.2 million. Average taxable investments increased $21.6 million comparing 2019 and 2018, which resulted in increased interest income of $483 thousand while average tax-exempt investments decreased $23.8 million, which resulted in a decrease to interest income of $739 thousand.
Average interest-bearing liabilities rose $52.5 million to $1,600.2 million in 2019 from $1,547.7 million in 2018 resulting in a net increase in interest expense of $248 thousand. Large denomination time deposits averaged $83.6 million more in 2019 and caused interest expense to increase $1.6 million. A decrease of $7.4 million in average time deposits less than $100 thousand reduced interest expense by $92 thousand. In addition, interest-bearing transaction accounts, including money market, NOW and savings accounts grew $50.1 million, which in aggregate caused a $547 thousand increase in interest expense. Short-term borrowings averaged $70.9 million less and decreased interest expense $1.7 million while long-term debt averaged $2.9 million less and decreased interest expense by $78 thousand comparing 2019 and 2018.
An unfavorable rate variance occurred, as the tax-equivalent yield on earning assets increased 17 basis points while there was a 26 basis point increase in the cost of funds. As a result, tax-equivalent net interest income decreased $688 thousand comparing 2019 and 2018. The tax-equivalent yield on earning assets was 4.41 percent in 2019 compared to 4.24 percent
in 2018 resulting in an increase in interest income of $3.6 million. With the tax-equivalent yield on the investment portfolio decreasing 13 basis points to 2.47 percent in 2019 from 2.60 percent in 2018, interest income decreased $180 thousand. The tax-equivalent yield on the loan portfolio increased 20 basis points to 4.71 percent in 2019 from 4.51 percent in 2018 and resulted in an increase to interest income of $3.8 million.
An unfavorable rate variance was experienced in the cost of funds. We experienced increases in the rates paid on all major categories of interest-bearing liabilities with the exception of savings accounts. Specifically, the cost of money market and NOW accounts increased 45 basis points and 15 basis points comparing 2019 and 2018. These increases resulted in an increase in interest expense of $2.1 million. The cost of savings accounts remained level at 13 basis points and had no significant change in interest expense. With regard to time deposits, the average rate paid for time deposits less than $100 thousand increased 27 basis points while time deposits $100 thousand or more increased 63 basis points, which together resulted in a $1.5 million increase in interest expense. The average rate paid on short-term borrowings increased 56 basis points in 2019 when compared to 2018, causing a $617 thousand increase in interest expense. Interest expense increased $71 thousand from a 15 basis point increase in the average rate paid on long-term debt.
Provision for Loan Losses:
We evaluate the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses account on a quarterly basis utilizing our systematic analysis in accordance with procedural discipline. We take into consideration certain factors such as composition of the loan portfolio, volume of nonperforming loans, volumes of net charge-offs, prevailing economic conditions and other relevant factors when determining the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses account. We make monthly provisions to the allowance for loan losses account in order to maintain the allowance at an appropriate level. The provision for loan losses equaled $6.1 million in 2019 and $4.2 million in 2018. The higher provision for loan losses in 2019 was a direct result of significant loan growth and an increase in charge-offs, which created an increase in our calculated allowance. As previously discussed, the increase in charge-offs in 2019 was primarily related to commercial loans and specifically to small business lines of credit originated in our Greater Delaware Valley market. Based on our evaluation at December 31, 2019, we believe that the allowance was adequate to absorb any known or potential losses in our portfolio as of such date.
Noninterest Income:
Our noninterest income increased $1.5 million or 10.7 percent to $15.1 million in 2019 from $13.7 million in 2018. The increase in 2019 was driven primarily by higher service charges, fees, and commissions which includes an increase in fee income of $1.7 million generated from the higher number and increased volume of commercial loan interest rate swap transactions originated in 2019 versus 2018. Excluding the swap revenue, service charges, fees, and commissions decreased $339 thousand or 4.5 percent comparing 2019 and 2018, due in part to death benefit proceeds on a bank owned life insurance (BOLI) policy totaling $368 thousand in 2018 with no comparable amount in 2019, and a lower dividend on our FHLB-Pgh stock of $96 thousand due to lower borrowing volume in 2019. We realized a $23 thousand net gain on the sale of debt securities in 2019 while the 2018 results include a $291 thousand net gain on the sale of our credit card portfolio. Merchant services revenue increased $164 thousand or 20.3 percent in 2019 when compared to 2018 due to higher pricing. Commissions and fees on fiduciary activities increased $51 thousand or 2.5 percent comparing 2019 and 2018 due to market appreciation and increased business. Wealth management income increased $77 thousand or 5.3 percent comparing 2019 to 2018 due to increased growth. Mortgage banking income decreased $27 thousand or 4.3 percent in 2019 compared to 2018 as the volume of saleable loans originated declined.
Noninterest Expense:
Noninterest expense was $55.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $52.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Salaries and employee benefits expense constitute the majority of our noninterest expenses accounting for 56.4 percent of the total noninterest expense in 2019. Salaries and employee benefits expense increased $3.0 million or 10.4 percent
to $31.4 million in 2019 from $28.4 million in 2018. Salaries and payroll taxes increased $2.4 million or 10.1 percent, while employee benefits expense increased $594 thousand or 12.2 percent. Annual performance-based salary adjustments as well as costs associated with our expansion into south central Pennsylvania and the addition of seasoned lending and support personnel in the region provided the majority of the increase.
Occupancy and equipment expense increased $1.0 million or 9.3 percent to $11.9 million in 2019 from $10.9 million in 2018. Specifically, equipment-related costs increased $1.3 million or 26.9 percent while building-related costs decreased $242 thousand or 3.9 percent. The increase in equipment-related expenses was driven by costs associated with expansion into the south central Pennsylvania market area and higher depreciation expenses due to the revitalization of two of our branches.
Other expenses, which consist of merchant transaction expense, FDIC insurance and assessments, professional fees and outside services, other taxes, stationary and supplies, advertising, amortization of intangible assets and all other expenses were $12.4 million in 2019 and $13.2 million in 2018. FDIC insurance and assessments was lower by $442 thousand or 40.4 percent as the bank received a FDIC small bank assessment credit of $358 thousand recognized in the second half of 2019. All other expenses, including professional fees and outside services, other taxes, stationery and supplies, advertising, amortization of intangible assets and other expenses totaled $12.4 million in 2019, a decrease of $820 thousand or 6.2 percent, compared to $13.2 million in 2018.
Income Taxes:
Our income tax expense was $3.2 million in 2019 and $3.4 million in 2018. We utilize loans and investments of tax-exempt organizations to mitigate our tax burden, as interest revenue from these sources is not taxable by the federal government. As a result, our effective tax rate was 10.9 percent in 2019 and 12.0 percent in 2018.
The effective tax rate in 2019 and 2018 was also influenced by the recognition of investment tax credits related to our limited partnership investments in elderly and low- to moderate-income residential housing programs which allow us to mitigate our tax burden. By utilizing these credits, we reduced our income tax expense by $1.1 million in both 2019 and 2018. We anticipate investment tax credits from these investments to be $1.1 million again in 2020. Over the years 2020-2024, we will recognize aggregate tax credits from our investments in these projects of $4.5 million.