ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
We provide technology-enabled audit, recovery, outsource services, and related analytics services in the United States. Our services help identify improper payments, and in some markets, restructure and recover delinquent or defaulted assets and improper payments for both government and private clients in a broad range of markets. Our clients typically operate in complex and regulated environments and outsource their audit and recovery needs in order to reduce losses on billions of dollars of improper healthcare payments, delinquent state and federal receivables, defaulted student loans, and other receivables. We also provide complex outsource services for clients across our various markets, where we handle many or all aspects of our clients’ recovery processes.
Our revenue model is generally success-based as we earn fees on the aggregate correct audits and/or amount of funds that we enable our clients to recover. Our services do not require any significant upfront investments by our clients and offer our clients the opportunity to recover significant funds otherwise lost. Because our model is based upon the success of our efforts, our business objectives are aligned with those of our clients and we are generally not reliant on their spending budgets. Furthermore, our business model does not require significant capital as we do not purchase loans or obligations.
COVID-19 Pandemic Update
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 outbreak a pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic resulted in various unprecedented national and international measures in an effort to contain the spread of the virus, including restrictions on travel, quarantines, mandatory business shut downs, shelter-in-place and related emergency orders. We took proactive actions early on to protect the health of our employees and their families, including curtailing business travel and encouraging videoconferencing whenever possible, requiring most personnel to work remotely and we restricted access to our offices to personnel who are required to perform critical business continuity activities.
While we continue to believe we have taken steps that will allow us to function in a virtual or remote fashion as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the extent of the COVID-19 pandemic’s effect on our operational and financial performance will continue to depend on future developments. During 2020, several of our customers, including Federal and state governments paused the recovery and audit services that we provide for a number of months. In particular, pursuant to the terms of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) enacted in March 2020, the U.S. Federal government suspended payments, ceased accruing interest, and stopped involuntary collections of payments (e.g., wage garnishments) for student loans owned by the Department of Education through September 30, 2020. The pause on our student loan recovery services has since been extended a few times, with the latest extension through September 30, 2021.
Overall global or localized economic activity continues to contract or does not show signs of improvement, the pause on our student loan recovery services may be further extended, or pauses or suspensions with respect to our other audit and recovery services may be implemented, any of which will have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows. As a result, it is not currently possible to ascertain or predict the overall long-term impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
Uncertainty around the breadth and duration of business disruptions related to COVID-19 pandemic continues, as well as its impact on the U.S. economy, the ongoing business operations of our clients, and the results of our operations and financial condition. While our management team continues to actively monitor the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and may take further actions altering our business operations that we determine are in the best interests of our employees and clients or as required by federal, state, or local authorities, the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our results of operations, financial condition, or liquidity for fiscal year 2021 and beyond cannot be estimated at this point.
The following discussions are subject to the future effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our ongoing business operations.
Sources of Revenues
We derive our revenues from services for clients in a variety of different markets. These markets include our two largest markets, healthcare and student lending, as well as our other markets which include but are not limited to outsourced call center services, delinquent state and federal taxes and federal treasury and other receivables.
(1)Represents student lending, state and municipal tax authorities, IRS, Department of the Treasury, and Premiere Credit of North America.
Healthcare
We derive revenues from our healthcare clients by providing payment integrity services to both commercial and government clients, including auditing, identifying, sometimes recovering improperly paid claims through both automated and manual review of such claims, and coordination-of-benefits. We are paid contingency fees by our clients based on a percentage of the dollar amount of improper claims recovered as a result of our efforts. The revenues we recognize are net of our estimate of claims that we believe will be overturned by appeal following payment by the provider.
For our commercial healthcare business, our business strategy is focused on utilizing our technology-enabled services platform to provide audit, third-party liability recovery and analytical services for private healthcare payers. We have entered into contracts with several private payers, although these contracts are in the early stage of implementation. Revenues from our commercial healthcare clients were $23.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to revenues of $15.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
On October 5, 2017, we announced that we were awarded the MSP CRC contract by the CMS. Under this agreement, we are responsible for coordination-of-benefits claims, which includes identifying and recovering payments in situations where Medicare should not be the primary payer of healthcare claims because a beneficiary has other forms of insurance coverage, such as through an employer group health plan or certain other payers.
On October 26, 2016, CMS awarded two new RAC contracts, for audit Regions 1 and 5. The RAC contract award for Region 1 allows us to continue our audit of payments under Medicare’s Part A and Part B for all provider types other than DMEPOS and home health and hospice within an 11 state region in the Northeast and Midwest. The Region 5 RAC contract provides for the post-payment review of DMEPOS and home health and hospice claims nationally. While audit and recovery activity commenced in April 2017, the volume of audits permitted by CMS under these RAC contracts is limited by a baseline of 0.5% of claims billed by a provider in the previous 12-month period. This baseline may be further adjusted up or down by CMS.
Healthcare providers have the right to appeal a claim and may pursue additional appeals if the initial appeal is found in favor of the healthcare insurer. Our total estimated liability for appeals was approximately $1.0 million as of both December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. This represents our best estimate of the amount probable of being refunded to our healthcare clients following successful appeals of claims for which commissions were previously collected.
Many of our healthcare clients are expanding the scope of services that we provide, and during 2020, we continued to renew contracts by way of competitive procurement. We believe this growth trend will continue as our suite of payment integrity services further matures and scales. Going forward, we anticipate that our healthcare revenues will drive the majority of overall company revenue growth.
Recovery
Recovery market revenues are derived from student lending, state and municipal tax authorities, IRS, Department of the Treasury, and Premiere Credit of North America.
In the spring of 2017, the IRS named us as one of four companies to perform recovery services under its private collection program. This program, authorized under a federal law, calls for the use of private companies to recover outstanding inactive tax receivables on the government's behalf. We were not selected as a provider in connection with the recent IRS procurement process for the contract renewal becoming effective in September 2021. The award is currently under protest by another bidder. In its original procurement letter, the IRS stated that technical factors, when combined, were more important than the commission rate, but the IRS has discretion and does not have to automatically grant an award to the bidder that submits a bid receiving the highest technical rating.
We also service the federal agency market, which consists of government debt subrogated to the Department of the Treasury by numerous different federal agencies, comprising a mix of commercial and individual obligations and a diverse range of receivables. These debts are managed by the Bureau of the Fiscal Service, a bureau of the Department of the Treasury.
For state and municipal tax authorities, we analyze a portfolio of delinquent tax and other receivables placed with us, develop a recovery plan and execute a recovery process designed to maximize the recovery of funds. In some instances, we have also run state tax amnesty programs, which provide one-time relief for delinquent tax obligations, and other debtor management services for our clients. We currently have relationships with numerous state and municipal governments. Delinquent obligations are placed with us by our clients and we utilize a process that is similar to the student loan recovery process for recovering these obligations.
Student lending revenues are contract-based and consist primarily of contingency fees based on a specified percentage of the amount we enable our clients to recover. Our contingency fee percentage for a particular recovery depends on the type of recovery facilitated. There are five potential outcomes to the student loan recovery process from which we generate revenues. These outcomes include full repayment, recurring payments, rehabilitation, loan restructuring and wage garnishment. Of these five potential outcomes, our ability to rehabilitate defaulted student loans is the most significant component of our revenues in this market. Generally, a loan is considered successfully rehabilitated after the student loan borrower has made nine consecutive qualifying monthly payments and our client has notified us that it is recalling the loan. Once we have structured and implemented a repayment program for a defaulted borrower, we (i) earn a percentage of each periodic payment collected up to and including the final periodic payment prior to the loan being considered “rehabilitated” by our clients, and (ii) if the loan is “rehabilitated,” then we are paid a one-time percentage of the total amount of the remaining unpaid balance for each rehabilitated loan. The fees we are paid vary by recovery outcome as well as by contract. For non-government-supported student loans we are generally only paid contingency fees on two outcomes: full repayment or recurring repayments.
We believe the size and the composition of our student loan inventory at any point provides us with a significant degree of revenue visibility for our student loan revenues. In 2020, with the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, student lending placement volumes reduced dramatically as a result of government mandate under the CARES Act to pause student lending recovery activities. We expect this reduction in placement volumes will continue to remain low at least through the end of the most recent extension of the pause on student lending recovery activities to September 30, 2021. While we were able to continue to recognize student loan related revenue throughout 2020 due to our existing in-process borrower rehabilitation agreements, we have not processed many new loan rehabilitations since the pause went into effect. As a result, for 2021, we anticipate that there will be a significant reduction to our annual recovery revenue.
Customer Care / Outsourced Services
We also derive revenues from default aversion and/or first party call center services for certain clients and the licensing of hosted technology solutions to certain clients. For our hosted technology services, we license our system and integrate our technology into our clients’ operations, for which we are paid a licensing fee. Our revenues for these services include contingency fees, fees based on dedicated headcount to our clients and hosted technology licensing fees.
Costs and Expenses
We generally report two categories of operating expenses: salaries and benefits and other operating expense. Salaries and benefits expenses consist primarily of salaries and performance incentives paid and benefits provided to our employees. Other operating expense includes expenses related to our use of subcontractors, other production related expenses, including costs associated with data processing, retrieval of medical records, printing and mailing services, amortization and other outside services, as well as general corporate and administrative expenses.
Factors Affecting Our Operating Results
Our results of operations are influenced by a number of factors, including costs associated with commencing contract operations, allocation of placement volume, claim recovery volume, contingency fees, regulatory matters, client retention and macroeconomic factors.
Costs Associated with Commencing New Client Contracts
When we obtain an engagement with a new client or a new contract with an existing client, it typically takes a long period of time to plan our services in detail, which includes integrating our technology, processes and resources with the client’s operations and hiring new employees, before we receive any revenues from the new client or new contract. Our clients may also experience delays in obtaining approvals or managing protests from unsuccessful bidders, such as the lengthy protests on the most recent contract procurement from the Department of Education, or delays associated with system implementations, such as the delays experienced with the implementation of our first RAC contract with CMS. If we are not able to pay the upfront expenses out of cash from operations or availability of borrowings under our lending arrangements, we may scale back our operations or alter our business plans, either of which could prevent of us from earning future revenues under any such new client or new contract engagements.
Allocation of Placement Volume
Our clients have the right to unilaterally set and increase or reduce the volume of defaulted receivables that we service at any given time. In addition, many of our recovery contracts for defaulted receivables are not exclusive, with our clients retaining multiple service providers to service portions of their portfolios. Accordingly, the number of delinquent receivables that are placed with us may vary from time to time, which may have a significant effect on the amount and timing of our revenues. We believe the major factors that influence the number of placements we receive from our clients include our performance under our existing contracts and our ability to perform well against competitors for a particular client. To the extent that we perform well under our existing contracts and differentiate our services from those of our competitors, we may receive a relatively greater number of placements under these existing contracts and may improve our ability to obtain future contracts from these clients and other potential clients. Further, delays in placement volume, as well as acceleration of placement volume, from any of our large clients may cause our revenues and operating results to vary from quarter to quarter, for example, placements were significantly delayed due to the government mandate under the CARES Act in March 2020 pause on student loan recovery activities.
Claim Recovery Volume
Our audit business reflects the scale of claims which are deemed permissible to audit by clients. Non-permissible claims may include client product lines which are determined to be out of scope, excluded providers or provider groups, changes in policy, or other factors such as geographies disrupted by natural disasters.
Contingency Fees
Our revenues consist primarily of contract-based contingency fees. The contingency fee percentages that we earn are set by our clients or agreed upon during the bid process and may change from time to time either under the terms of existing contracts or pursuant to the terms of contract renewals.
Regulatory Matters
Each of the markets which we serve is highly regulated. Accordingly, changes in regulations that affect the types of loans, receivables and claims that we are able to service or the manner in which any such delinquent loans, receivables and claims can be recovered will affect our revenues and results of operations. For example, the passage of the Student Aid and Fiscal Responsibility Act, or SAFRA, in 2010 had the effect of transferring the origination of all government-supported student loans to the Department of Education, thereby ending all student loan originations guaranteed by the GAs. Loans guaranteed by the GAs represented approximately 70% of government-supported student loans originated in 2009. While the GAs will continue to service existing outstanding student loans for years to come, this legislation means that there will be no further growth in student loans held by GAs. Further, we are seeing a larger amount of defaulted student loans in our GA client portfolios that have been previously rehabilitated and by regulation are not subject to rehabilitation for a second time. In addition, our entry into the healthcare market was facilitated by passage of the Tax Relief and Health Care Act of 2006, which mandated CMS to contract with private firms to audit Medicare claims in an effort to increase the recovery of improper Medicare payments. Any changes to the regulations that affect the student loan industry or the recovery of defaulted student loans or the Medicare program generally or the audit and recovery of Medicare claims could have a significant impact on our revenues and results of operations.
Client Contract Cancellation
Substantially all of our contracts entitle our clients to unilaterally terminate their contractual relationship with us at any time without penalty. If we lose one or more of our significant clients, including if one of our significant clients cancels or does not exercise the renewal option on our contract, if the terms of compensation for our services change or if there is a reduction in the level of placements provided by any of these clients, our revenues could decline.
Macroeconomic Factors
Certain macroeconomic factors influence our business and results of operations. These include the increasing volume of student loan originations in the U.S. as a result of increased tuition costs and student enrollment, the default rate of student loan borrowers, the growth in Medicare expenditures or claims made to private healthcare providers resulting from changes in healthcare costs or the healthcare industry taken as a whole, as well as the fiscal budget tightening of federal, state and local governments as a result of general economic weakness and lower tax revenues.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs and expenses and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. In many instances, we could have reasonably used different accounting estimates, and in other instances changes in the accounting estimates are reasonably likely to occur from period-to-period. Accordingly, actual results could differ significantly from the estimates made by our management. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows will be affected. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Revenue Recognition
We derive our revenues primarily from providing recovery services and healthcare audit services. Revenues are recognized when control of these services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration expect to be entitled to in exchange for those services.
We determine revenue recognition through the following steps:
•Identification of the contract with a customer
•Identification of the performance obligations in the contract
•Determination of the transaction price
•Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
•Recognition of revenue when, or as, the performance obligations are satisfied
We account for a contract when it has approval and commitment from both parties, the rights of the parties are identified, payment terms are identified, the contract has commercial substance and collectability of consideration is probable.
Our contracts generally contain a single performance obligation, delivered over time as a series of services that are substantially the same and have the same pattern of transfer to a client, as the promise to transfer the individual services is not separately identifiable from other promises in the contracts and, therefore, not distinct.
Our contracts are composed primarily of variable consideration. Fees earned under our audit and recovery services contracts consist primarily of contingency fees based on a specified percentage of the amount we enable our clients to recover. The contingency fee percentage for a particular recovery depends on the type of recovery or claim facilitated. In certain contracts, we can earn additional performance-based consideration determined based on its performance relative to a client’s other contractors providing similar services.
We generally either apply the as-invoiced practical expedient where our right to consideration corresponds directly to our right to invoice our clients, or the variable consideration allocation exception where the variable consideration is attributable to one or more, but not all, of the services promised in a series of distinct services that form part of a single performance obligation. As such, we have elected the optional exemptions related to the as-invoiced practical expedient and the variable consideration allocation exception, whereby the disclosure of the amount of transaction price allocated to the remaining performance obligation is not required.
We estimate variable consideration only if we can reasonably measure our progress toward complete satisfaction of the performance obligation using an output method based on reliable information, and recognize such revenue over the performance period only if it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur. Any change made to the measure of progress toward complete satisfaction of our performance obligation is recorded as a change in estimate. We exercise judgment to estimate the amount of constraint on variable consideration based on the facts and circumstances of the relevant contract operations and availability and reliability of data. Although we believe the estimates made are reasonable and appropriate, different assumptions and estimates could materially impact the amount of variable consideration.
Under certain contracts, consideration can include periodic performance-based bonuses which can be awarded based on our performance under the specific contract. These performance-based awards are considered variable and may be constrained by us until there is not a risk of a significant reversal.
For contracts that contain a refund right, these amounts are considered variable consideration, and we estimate our refund liability for each claim and recognize revenue net of such estimate.
We have applied the as-invoiced practical expedient and the variable consideration allocation exception to contracts with performance obligations that have an average remaining duration of less than a year.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following table represents our historical operating results for the periods presented:
Revenues
Total revenues were $155.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $5.5 million or 4%, compared to total revenues of $150.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Healthcare revenues were $68.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $25.2 million, or 58%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Healthcare revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020, increased compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to an increase in revenues earned under our coordination-of-benefits contracts.
Recovery revenues were $73.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an decrease of $16.2 million, or 18%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic that resulted in many of our customers pausing work on our recovery contracts and much lower student loan placement volumes.
Customer Care / Outsourced Services revenues were $14.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $3.5 million, or 20%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to reduced demand for our services as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Salaries and Benefits
Salaries and benefits expense were $100.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $14.5 million, or 13%, compared to salaries and benefits expense of $115.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in salaries and benefits expense was primarily driven by furloughs of employees due to pauses in our services as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Other Operating Expense
Other operating expense was $42.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $5.4 million, or 11%, compared to other operating expense of $47.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in other operating expenses was primarily due to lower activity levels resulting from the pause in recovery services as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Impairment of Goodwill
Impairment of goodwill was $27.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $19.8 million, compared to $7.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The impairments in both years were non-cash charges resulting primarily from the decrease in our stock price and associated market capitalization.
Loss from Operations
As a result of the factors described above, loss from operations was $14.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to loss from operations of $19.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing a decrease in the loss from operations of $5.7 million.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $7.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $7.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing a decrease of 5%. Interest expense decreased due to a lower blended interest rate, which was offset by a higher average outstanding loan balance in 2020 compared to 2019.
Income Taxes
The income tax benefit was $7.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our effective income tax rate increased to 34% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 2% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in the effective tax rate is primarily driven by the net operating loss (“NOL”) carryback benefit recorded as a result of the newly enacted provisions of the CARES Act.
Net Loss
As a result of the factors described above, net loss was $14.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which represents a decrease in net loss of $12.8 million compared to net loss of $26.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash flows from operations, and cash and cash equivalents on hand. Cash and cash equivalents, which includes restricted cash and consists primarily of cash on deposit with banks, totaled $18.3 million as of December 31, 2020, compared to $5.0 million as of December 31, 2019. The $13.3 million increase in the balance of our cash and cash equivalents from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020, was primarily due to $20.7 provided by operating activities, primarily offset by $3.8 million used in investing activities and $3.5 million repayment of notes payable.
Our ability to fund our business plans, capital expenditures and to fund our other liquidity needs depends on our financial and operating performance, which is subject to prevailing economic and competitive conditions and to certain financial, business and other factors beyond our control, and the availability of borrowings under our existing lending facility. We no longer have any remaining borrowing capacity under our existing Credit Agreement. Our current financial projections show that we expect to be able to maintain a level of cash flows from operating activities sufficient to permit us to fund our ongoing and planned business operations and to fund our other liquidity needs. If, however, we are required to obtain additional borrowings to fund our ongoing or future business operations, there can be no assurance that we will be successful in obtaining such additional borrowings or upon terms that are acceptable to us.
The COVID-19 pandemic led certain of our customers to delay the recovery and audit services that we provide during the course of 2020 as a result of the economic hardships faced by a large portion of the population. For example, pursuant to the terms of the CARES Act enacted in March 2020, the U.S. Federal government suspended payments, ceased accruing interest, and stopped involuntary collections of payments (e.g., wage garnishments) for student loans owned by the Department of Education through September 30, 2020, which was most recently extended through September 30, 2021. While some of our customers resumed our audit and recovery services in latter half of 2020, the pause on our student loan recovery services may be extended again, or our audit and recovery services with respect to other clients may similarly be paused, any of which could adversely affect our financial condition and the achievement of our strategic objectives. Conditions in the financial and credit markets may also limit the availability of funding or increase the cost of funding, which could adversely affect our business, financial position and results of operations.
The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business operations cannot be fully estimated at this point and the speed of economic recovery in the markets we serve remains uncertain. While we currently believe our financial projections are attainable, including giving consideration to the ongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, there can be no assurances that our financial results will be recognized in a time frame necessary to meet our ongoing cash requirements. If our cash flows and capital resources are insufficient to fund our planned business operations or to fund our other liquidity needs, we may need to reduce or delay capital expenditures, alter our business plans, curtail the services we provide to our current or future clients, execute additional reductions in workforce (both through furloughs and layoffs), sell assets or operations, seek additional capital, restructure or refinance our indebtedness, any of which could have an adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations.
Our Credit Agreement contains, and any agreements to refinance our debt likely will contain, certain financial covenants, including the maintenance of minimum fixed charge coverage ratio and total debt to EBITDA ratio, as well as restrictive covenants that require us to limit our ability to incur additional debt, including to finance future operations or other capital needs, and to engage in other activities that we may believe are in our long-term best interests, including to dispose of or acquire assets. After considering a variety of potential effects the COVID-19 pandemic could have on our revenues and results of operations, as well as the actions we have already taken and other options available to us, we currently believe we will be in compliance with our covenants for the remainder of the term of the Credit Agreement. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business operations cannot be fully estimated at this point and the speed of economic recovery in the markets we serve is highly uncertain. If conditions change in the future due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic or for other reasons and we expect to be out of compliance as a result, we will likely seek waivers from our lender prior to any covenant violation. Any covenant waiver may lead to increased costs, increased interest rates, additional restrictive covenants and other available lender protections that would be applicable. There can be no assurance that we would be able to obtain any such waivers in a timely manner, or on acceptable terms, or at all. Our failure to comply with these financial covenants or the restrictive covenants may result in an event of default, which, if not cured or waived, could accelerate the maturity of our indebtedness or result in modifications to our credit terms. If our indebtedness is accelerated, we may not have sufficient cash resources to satisfy our debt obligations and we may not be able to continue our operations as planned.
Cash flows from operating activities
Cash provided by operating activities was $20.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to cash used in operating activities of $15.4 million for the same period in 2019. The increase included a net loss of $14.0 million, which was impacted by a non-cash goodwill impairment charge of $27.0 million. Excluding the non-cash impairment charge, net income in 2020 would have been $13.3 million. The remaining factors contributing to the change were due to favorable movements in working capital balance sheet accounts.
Operating activities used $15.4 million of cash during the year ended December 31, 2019. This included a net loss of $26.8 million in 2019, an increase in trade receivables of $6.3 million, which was partially offset by $11.1 million in non-cash adjustments.
Cash flows from investing activities
Cash used in investing activities of $3.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was mainly for capital expenditures related to information technology, data storage, hardware, telecommunication systems and security enhancements to our information technology systems.
Investing activities resulted in cash outflow of $4.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 and was used primarily for capital expenditures related to information technology, hardware, data storage and security enhancements to our operating software.
Cash flows from financing activities
Cash used in financing activities of $3.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to $3.5 million in repayments of notes payable.
Cash provided by financing activities of $18.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily attributable to $21.0 million in additional term loans borrowings under our Credit Agreement, partially offset by $2.5 million repayments of notes payable during the same period.
Restricted Cash
As of December 31, 2020, restricted cash included in current assets on our consolidated balance sheet was $2.3 million. Restricted cash is held in certificates of deposit as collateral for letters of credit issued by a bank on our behalf.
Notes Payable
On August 7, 2017, we, through our wholly-owned subsidiary Performant Business Services, Inc. (the "Borrower"), entered into a credit agreement (as amended, the “Credit Agreement”) with ECMC Group, Inc. ("ECMC"). Before the amendment described below, the Credit Agreement provided for a term loan facility in the initial amount of $44 million (the “Initial Term Loan”) and for up to $15 million of additional term loans (“Additional Term Loans”; and together with the Initial Term Loan, the “Loans”) which original Additional Term Loans were initially able to be drawn until the second anniversary of the funding of the Initial Term Loans, subject to the satisfaction of customary conditions. On August 11, 2017, the Initial Term Loan was advanced (the "Closing Date") and the proceeds were applied to repay all outstanding amounts under our prior credit agreement with Madison Capital Funding LLC as administrative agent ("the Prior Credit Agreement"). On August 31, 2018, we entered into Amendment No. 2 to the Credit Agreement to among other things (i) extend the maturity date of the Initial Term Loan and any Additional Term Loans by one year to August 2021, (ii) expand the Additional Term Loans commitment from $15 million to $25 million, (iii) extend the period during which the Additional Term Loans can be borrowed by one year to August 2020, and (iv) relieve the Borrower from its obligation to comply with the financial covenants in the Credit Agreement during the six fiscal quarters following the Premiere acquisition.
In 2018, the Company borrowed $4 million of the Additional Term Loans under the Credit Agreement. On March 21, 2019, we entered into Amendment No. 3 to the Credit Agreement to among other things relieve the Borrower from its obligation to comply with the financial covenants in the Credit Agreement during the six fiscal quarters following the beginning of the Company’s fourth fiscal quarter of 2018. In 2019, the Company borrowed $21 million, and has borrowed all of the $25 million available as Additional Term Loans.
As of December 31, 2020, $60.9 million was outstanding under the Credit Agreement. While this amount is classified in current liabilities, we have the option to extend the maturity of the Loans for two additional one-year periods, subject to the satisfaction of customary conditions.
The Loans bear interest at the one-month LIBOR rate (subject to a 1% per annum floor) plus a margin which may vary from 5.5% per annum to 10.0% per annum based on our total debt to EBITDA ratio. Our annual interest rate at December 31, 2020 was 6.5% and 11.8% at December 31, 2019. We are required to pay 5% of the original principal balance of the Loans annually in quarterly installments and to make mandatory prepayments of the Loans with a percentage of our excess cash flow which may vary between 75% and 0% depending on our total debt to EBITDA ratio and from the net cash proceeds of certain asset dispositions and debt not otherwise permitted under the Credit Agreement, in each case, subject to the lender's right to decline to receive such payments.
The Credit Agreement contains certain restrictive financial covenants which were not effective until the quarter ending June 30, 2020, at which point, we will be required to (1) achieve a minimum fixed charge coverage ratio of 1.0 to 1.0 through December 31, 2020, 1.25 to 1.0 through June 30, 2021, and 1.25 to 1.0 through June 30, 2022 if the maturity date of the Loans is extended until the fifth anniversary of the Closing Date and (2) maintain a maximum total debt to EBITDA ratio of 6.00 to 1.00. The Credit Agreement also contains covenants that restrict the Company and its subsidiaries’ ability to incur certain types or amounts of indebtedness, incur liens on certain assets, make material changes in corporate structure or the nature of its business, dispose of material assets, engage in a change in control transaction, make certain foreign investments, enter into certain restrictive agreements, or engage in certain transactions with affiliates. The Credit Agreement also contains various customary events of default, including with respect to change of control of the Company or its ownership of the Borrower.
The obligations under the Credit Agreement are secured by substantially all of our subsidiaries’ assets and are guaranteed by the Company and its subsidiaries, other than the Borrower.
Contractual Obligations
The following summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income (Loss)
To provide investors with additional information regarding our financial results, we have disclosed in the table below and within this report adjusted EBITDA and adjusted net income (loss), both of which are non-GAAP financial measures. We have provided a reconciliation below of adjusted EBITDA to net income (loss) and adjusted net income (loss) to net loss, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure to these non-GAAP financial measures.
We have included adjusted EBITDA and adjusted net income (loss) in this report because they are key measures used by our management and board of directors to understand and evaluate our core operating performance and trends and to prepare and approve our annual budget. Accordingly, we believe that adjusted EBITDA and adjusted net income (loss) provide useful information to investors and analysts in understanding and evaluating our operating results in the same manner as our management and board of directors.
Our use of adjusted EBITDA and adjusted net income (loss) has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
•although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future, and adjusted EBITDA does not reflect cash capital expenditure requirements for such replacements or for new capital expenditure requirements;
•adjusted EBITDA does not reflect interest expense on our indebtedness;
•adjusted EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•adjusted EBITDA does not reflect tax payments;
•adjusted EBITDA and adjusted net income (loss) do not reflect the potentially dilutive impact of equity-based compensation;
•adjusted EBITDA and adjusted net income (loss) do not reflect the impact of certain non-operating expenses resulting from matters we do not consider to be indicative of our core operating performance; and
•other companies may calculate adjusted EBITDA and adjusted net income (loss) differently than we do, which reduces its usefulness as a comparative measure.
Because of these limitations, you should consider adjusted EBITDA and adjusted net income (loss) alongside other financial performance measures, including net income (loss) and our other GAAP results.
The following tables present a reconciliation of adjusted EBITDA and adjusted net income (loss) for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 to actual net income (loss) for these periods:
(1)Represents amortization of capitalized intangible assets related to the acquisition of Performant by an affiliate of Parthenon Capital Partners in 2004.
(2)Represents amortization of capitalized financing costs related to our Credit Agreement.
(3)Represents non-cash goodwill impairment charge.
(4)Represents tax adjustments assuming a marginal tax rate of 27.5% .
(5)Represents the change from prior reporting periods in the fair value of the potential earnout consideration payable to ECMC group in connection with the Premiere acquisition.
(6)Represents professional fees related to strategic corporate development activities.
(7)Represents a contract termination settlement from the Department of Education in 2019.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See "New Accounting Pronouncements" in Note 1(t) of the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV - Item 15 of this report.