Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
We believe the following discussion and analysis provides information that is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our consolidated results of operations and financial condition. The discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K. This Management’s Discussion and Analysis will help you understand:
•Key events during 2020;
•Our results of operations for 2020, as well as certain projections for the future;
•Our liquidity and capital resources;
•The impact of recently issued accounting standards on our financial statements; and
•Our critical accounting policies and estimates.
Key Events
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a global pandemic and the President of the United States declared it a national emergency. We continue to closely monitor the impact of the 2019 novel coronavirus, or COVID-19, pandemic on all aspects of our business. Our focus has been, and continues to be, on protecting our employees, while continuing to serve our clients. While the COVID-19 pandemic has not had a material adverse impact on our results of operations to date, the future impacts of the pandemic and any resulting economic impact are largely unknown and rapidly evolving.
Beginning in late March 2020 and continuing through the fourth quarter of 2020, we experienced an increase in demand from certain clients for our services in our PFS Operations segment, as more consumers around the world practiced social distancing, complied with stay-at-home restrictions and many retail stores were closed during the March 2020 to June 2020 period. This generated increased volume of online ordering. This trend continued into the third quarter of 2020 but at a reduced rate from the March 2020 through June 2020 period, and increased, again as we entered our traditional peak season. However, going forward there could be significant volatility in customer demand and buying habits as the pandemic continues and the resulting adverse economic impacts continue or deepen. We have begun experiencing labor rate increases in certain of our markets for fulfillment activities. We believe this will continue and that this could impact our overall fulfillment related costs and staffing. We will continue to monitor such cost increases as well as assess our pricing to address these increased costs.
Both our LiveArea and PFS Operations business segments are engaged in the support of our clients’ direct to consumer online business activity. Due to restrictions on traditional brick and mortar operations introduced by government mandates in 2020, many businesses, including many of our clients, have migrated an incremental amount of their investments and business volumes to their online channel, including both website development and marketing activity as well as the physical movement of
product. This is a trend which has continued through the fourth quarter of 2020. We believe this has resulted in, and at least in the near future is expected to continue to provide us with a strong demand for our service offerings. As the restrictions on brick and mortar operations are lessened, this may lead to reduced demand for the services of LiveArea and PFS Operations as customers return to stores. Despite the unpredictability of volumes brought on by the COVID-19 pandemic, the contracts that had been secured during the pandemic with new clients and extension of contracts with existing clients were made with the intention to support volumes post-COVID-19 that are the same or higher than those pre-COVID-19 pandemic. As a result of the increased volumes that are currently occurring and those potentially expected, we have secured additional warehouse space and headcount to meet the current and expected future volumes for the PFS Operations segment.
We are incurring additional costs related to the enhanced cleaning regimen implemented in our facilities and purchases of personal protective equipment ("PPE") for employees. As of December 31, 2020, we have incurred approximately $1.3 million in costs related to the COVID-19 pandemic, excluding hourly wage rate related labor cost increases and performance based incentives. Included in this $1.3 million, are capital expenditures related to the COVID-19 pandemic which amounted to approximately $0.5 million. Beginning in April 2020, we began receiving requests from a limited number of our clients to assist them with extended payment terms and/or pricing adjustments for a short time period. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, this has not resulted in a material impact to cash flows. We have also begun to see delays in certain limited projects and requests from certain clients to reduce current staffing on our time and materials projects. While we believe this will have a short-term impact on cash flow and revenues, we do not currently anticipate these identified modifications to date will have a material impact to our overall business and financial results. We will continue to monitor these for potential impacts to future cash flow.
As a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, many businesses have or will be experiencing short-term or long-term liquidity issues. Based on our current expectations, we believe we have the appropriate financial structure in place to support our own business operations. However, we do expect increased potential risk from the viability of clients and their ability to make payments on time. We have and will continue to closely monitor our clients’ financial results, payment patterns and business updates in an effort to minimize any potential credit risk impact.
While the COVID-19 pandemic has not yet had a material adverse impact on our operations to date, the extent and duration of future impacts of the pandemic and any resulting economic impact on our business are largely unknown and difficult to predict.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act was enacted and signed into law. The Company has made use of the allowance granted under section 2302 of the CARES Act, which permits employers to forgo timely payment of the employer portions of Social Security and RRTA taxes that would otherwise be due from March 27 through December 31, 2020, without penalty or interest charges. We have elected this option and it has resulted in deferred payments through December 31, 2020 totaling $3.7 million, due in equal payments on December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2022. Similarly, the UK and Belgium governments have granted businesses the option to defer the payment of certain value-added tax ("VAT") amounts. We have elected to take advantage of the options available to us but the effects have been immaterial.
In March 2020, we established a COVID-19 task force, comprised of leaders from a cross function of each of our operational sites and business units. The objectives of the task force are to:
•Gather daily key information from each site regarding risks, opportunities and developments related to the pandemic's impact and Company's response to ensure unfiltered access to information for the Company’s leadership.
•Identify and accumulate data required for decision making at the leadership level, including providing recommended courses of action.
•Coordinate communication plans for all of our geographic locations.
•Access, establish, monitor and adjust our business operations continuity plans for each geographic location.
•Ensure formal tracking of any known or suspected employee cases of COVID-19.
We have taken several precautionary measures designed to help minimize the risk of the spread of the virus to our employees, including suspending all non-essential travel worldwide for our employees, and adjusting our operations wherever necessary to help ensure a safe environment for our staff across business functions.
We have transitioned our professional staff and contact center agents to a work-from-home solution, with only a few exceptions. While all of our distribution facilities are considered essential businesses in the jurisdictions in which they are located and have continued to operate, we have established procedures to ensure the safety of our distribution facility staff, including:
•Employees are not required to come to work if they are not comfortable doing so.
•Employees that are experiencing or have been exposed to anyone exhibiting symptoms of COVID-19 have been told not to come to work and to seek medical attention and/or testing and stay home until they receive a negative test result, have self-quarantined for 14 days and/or receive clearance from a medical professional.
•Performing temperature checks at entry doors. Employees exhibiting any symptoms of COVID-19 or who have an elevated temperature are not allowed in the facility.
•Provide PPE for employees including gloves, face masks and in certain facilities, face shields. We have provided training for proper use of the equipment.
•Require distancing among employees inside of the working areas of the distribution facilities and require that all employees use the greatest social distancing available inside of the facilities with constant enforcement being maintained.
•Provide mobile cleaning stations for employee use at any time and access to hand sanitizer stations.
•Increased and enhanced cleaning regimen in all facilities. Facilities are cleaned on a daily basis, as well as a nightly cleaning that includes disinfectant fogging at some facilities.
•Facilitating virtual focus groups with employees to seek out ways to provide suggestions to the task force.
Overview
PFSweb is a Global Commerce Services Company. We manage the entire customer shopping experience for major branded manufacturers and retailers through two business segments, LiveArea Professional Services ("LiveArea") and PFS Operations. LiveArea is a global customer experience and e-commerce agency, providing a comprehensive set of digital agency services to support, develop and improve business-to-business ("B2B"), business-to-consumer ("B2C"), and business-to-business-to-consumer ("B2B2C") customer experiences both online and in-store. LiveArea services include: NXT Intelligence™, Service Design, Product Innovation, Connected Commerce, Performance Marketing, and Orchestrated Services. Through these services, we envision, build, and launch innovative products and omni-channel commerce solutions powered by data-driven insights to help our clients elevate their customer relationships. The PFS Operations segment provides services to support or improve the physical, post-click experience, such as logistics and fulfillment, customer care, and order-to-cash services including distributed order orchestration and payment services. We offer our services on an à la carte basis or as a complete end-to-end solution. Major brands and other companies turn to us to optimize their customer experiences and enhance their traditional and online business channels, creating commerce without compromise.
Service Fee Model. We refer to our standard seller services financial model as the Service Fee model. In this model, our clients own the inventory, are the merchants of record, and engage us to provide various infrastructure, technology and digital agency services in support of their business operations. We offer our services as an end-to-end solution, which enables our clients to outsource their complete e-commerce needs to a single source and focus on their core competencies, though clients are also able to select individual or groupings of our various service offerings on an à la carte basis.
We currently provide services to clients that operate in a range of vertical markets across B2C, B2B and B2B2C. These services include health, fragrance and beauty products; cosmetics; fashion apparel and accessories; luxury goods; CPG; coins and collectibles; jewelry; home furnishings and housewares; consumer electronics; QSR; telecommunications; technology manufacturing; computer and office products; and others. In the Service Fee model, we typically charge for our services on a time and material basis, a cost-plus basis, a percent of shipped revenue basis, project or retainer basis for our professional services or a per transaction basis, such as a per labor hour basis for web-enabled customer contact center services and a per-item basis for fulfillment services. Additional fees are billed for other services. We price our services based on a variety of factors, including, but not limited to, our labor costs, the depth and complexity of the services provided, the amount of capital expenditures or systems customization required, order volume, geography served and the length of contract.
Many of our service fee contracts involve third-party vendors who provide additional services, such as package delivery. The costs we are charged by these third-party vendors for these services are often passed on to our clients. Our billings for reimbursements of these costs and other ‘out-of-pocket’ expenses include travel, shipping and handling costs and telecommunication charges and are included in pass-through revenue.
Agent (Flash) Model. In our PFS Operations business unit, as an additional service, we offer the Agent, or Flash, financial model, in which our clients maintain ownership of the product inventory stored at our locations as in the Service Fee model. When a customer orders the product from our clients, a “flash” sale transaction passes product ownership to us for each order and we in turn immediately re-sell the product to the customer. The “flash” ownership exchange establishes us as the merchant of record, which enables us to use our existing merchant infrastructure to process sales to end customers, removing the
need for the clients to establish these business processes internally, but permitting them to control the sales process to end customers. In this model, based on the terms of our current client arrangements, we record product revenue net of cost of product revenue as a component of service fee revenue in our consolidated statement of operations.
Retail Model. Our PFS Operations business unit also provides a Retail model which allows us to purchase inventory from the client. We place the initial and replenishment purchase orders with the client and take ownership of the product either upon shipment to or delivery to our facility. In this model, depending on the terms of our client arrangements, we may own the inventory and the accounts receivable arising from our product sales. Under the Retail model, depending upon the product category and sales characteristics, we may require the client to provide product price protection as well as product purchase payment terms, right of return, and obsolescence protection appropriate to the product sales profile. Depending on the terms of our client arrangements in the Retail model, we record in our consolidated statement of operations either: 1) product revenue as a component of product revenue, or 2) product revenue net of cost of product revenue as a component of service fee revenue. In general, we seek to structure client relationships in our Retail model under the net revenue approach to more closely align with our service fee revenue financial presentation and mitigate inventory ownership risk, although we have one client still operating under the gross revenue approach. Freight costs billed to customers are reflected as components of product revenue. This business model generally requires significant working capital, for which we have credit available either through credit terms provided by our clients or under senior credit facilities.
Currently, we are targeting growth within our Retail model through relationships with clients under which we can record service fee revenue in our consolidated statement of operations. These relationships are often driven by the sales and marketing efforts of the manufacturers, retailers, and third-party sales partners. In addition, as a result of certain operational restructuring of its business, our primary client relationship operating in the Retail model, Ricoh, has implemented, and will continue to implement, certain changes in the sale and distribution of Ricoh products. The changes have resulted, and are expected to continue to result, in reduced product revenues and profitability under our Retail model.
Growth is a key element to achieving our future goals, including achieving and maintaining sustainable profitability. Growth in our company is driven by two main elements: new client relationships and organic growth from existing clients. Within our LiveArea segment, we primarily focus our sales efforts on engaging with brands, retailers, manufacturers and partnerships with various software platform companies to perform discrete commerce projects such as website and mobile design, platform selection and platform implementation and system integration efforts, digital marketing, data strategy and technology. In addition, LiveArea’s orchestrated services is a coordinated effort across all service lines and goes beyond a traditional managed services offering. LiveArea’s orchestrated services offering is integrated into an array of services to optimize, manage, and protect commerce technology. Within our PFS Operations segment, we primarily focus our sales efforts on larger contracts with brand-name companies within four primary target markets, health and beauty, home goods and collectibles, fashion, and consumer packaged goods. Within both segments, we focus our sales efforts on both new clients and also on existing clients where we believe opportunity exists to expand a client relationship to include additional services within the segment, across segments and/or across multiple geographies. We continue to monitor and control our costs to focus on profitability. While we are targeting our new service fee contracts to yield incremental gross profit, we also expect to incur incremental investments in technology development, operational and support management and sales and marketing expenses to help generate growth. We also look for growth opportunities across both LiveArea and PFS Operations to explore end-to-end solutions, as well as additional a la carte projects building on our existing relationships.
Our expenses comprise primarily four categories: 1) cost of service fee revenue, 2) cost of product revenue, 3) cost of pass-through revenue and 4) selling, general and administrative expenses.
Cost of service fee revenue - consists primarily of compensation and related expenses for our web-enabled customer contact center services, international fulfillment and distribution services and professional, digital agency and technology services, and other fixed and variable expenses directly related to providing services under the terms of fee based contracts, including certain occupancy and information technology costs and depreciation and amortization expenses.
Cost of product revenue - consists of the purchase price of product sold and freight costs, which are reduced by certain reimbursable expenses. These reimbursable expenses include pass-through customer marketing programs, direct costs incurred in passing on any price decreases offered by vendors to cover price protection and certain special bids, the cost of products provided to replace defective product returned by customers and certain other expenses as defined under the distributor agreements.
Cost of pass-through revenue - the related reimbursable costs for pass-through expenditures are reflected as cost of pass-through revenue.
Selling, General and Administrative expenses - consist of expenses such as compensation, related expenses for sales and marketing staff, distribution costs (excluding freight) applicable to certain Retail model engagements, executive, management
and administrative personnel and other overhead costs, including certain occupancy and information technology costs, and depreciation and amortization expenses and acquisition related, restructuring and other costs.
Monitoring and controlling our available cash balances and our expenses continues to be a primary focus. Our cash and liquidity positions are important components of our financing of both current operations and our targeted growth.
Operating Results
The following table discloses certain financial information for the periods presented, expressed in terms of dollars, dollar change, percentage change and as a percentage of total revenues (in thousands, except percentages):
(1)Includes $1.0 million and no related party revenue as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
(2)Represents the measure as a percent of Service fee revenue.
(3)Represents the measure as a percent of Product revenue, net.
(4)Represents the measure as a percent of Pass-through revenue.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Segment Operating Data
PFS Operations (in thousands, except percentages)
PFS Operations total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $40.2 million compared with 2019. Service fee revenue increased by $35.4 million as compared to 2019. The service fee revenue increase was primarily due to growth from new and existing clients, driven primarily from increased fulfillment activity related to increased online spending as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by certain client terminations and client bankruptcies. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we had service fee revenues totaling approximately $3.2 million related to two clients that filed bankruptcy and subsequently liquidated their operations in 2019. Excluding the decrease from these clients, service fee revenues increased by $38.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Product revenue, net, decreased by $3.7 million due to this revenue stream being primarily dependent on one client, which restructured its operations and discontinued certain product lines. Pass-through revenue, primarily related to freight activity, increased primarily due to incremental activity with both new and existing clients partially offset by the impact of a client's transition of their freight management activities.
PFS Operations gross margin decreased by 0.5% to 17.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 18.4% in 2019. The decreased gross margin is due to a decrease of our service fee margin by 2.0% to 25.5% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 27.5% in the same period of the prior year, primarily as a result of increased fulfillment labor rates and PPE related costs. Additionally, our gross margin for the PFS Operations segment was negatively impacted by reduced technology-related project and order-to-cash management activity. This was somewhat offset by our service fee business, which generates a higher gross margin than the product revenue and pass-through revenue activity representing a larger proportion of our total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019.
Direct operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $2.4 million as compared to 2019. This increase is largely due to increased stock-based compensation expense which increased by $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019. The increased stock compensation expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 arose from the issuance of incremental awards after the approval of a new Stock and Incentive Plan by shareholders on June 30, 2020. Excluding the impact of stock-based compensation, direct operating expenses increased by $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was primarily due to increased personnel related costs (including variable compensation expense), facility costs, and sales and marketing related spend, partially offset by reduced travel related spend.
LiveArea Professional Services (in thousands, except percentages)
(1) Includes $1.0 million and no related party revenue as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
LiveArea Professional Services revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $8.3 million compared to 2019. The increase in revenues were primarily due to a higher level of new and existing client activity, as a result of increased success in booking new projects and engagements during late 2019 and continuing into 2020.
LiveArea Professional Services gross margin decreased by 0.6% to 43.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 44.3% in 2019. The decrease in gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 is primarily attributable to higher than expected costs incurred on certain client projects as well as short term pricing adjustments for a limited number of clients.
Direct operating expenses increased by $5.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to a $2.8 million increase in stock-based compensation for the year ended December 31, 2020. Excluding this expense, direct operating expenses increased by $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which arose primarily as a result of incremental sales and marketing personnel costs and increased variable compensation expense.
Corporate (in thousands, except percentages)
Unallocated corporate expenses increased by $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. This increase was, in part, attributable to increased stock-based compensation of $3.2 million, offset by a $1.6 million reduction in vacation expense for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in vacation expense primarily related to a change in policy to allow for the introduction of a flexible vacation policy in the second quarter of 2020 that is not restricted to time earned by the Company for our US full-time exempt employees. Excluding the impacts of these factors, unallocated corporate expenses increased by $3.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily as a result of increased personnel and property tax related costs.
Income Taxes
During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a tax provision of $2.1 million, comprised primarily of $1.3 million related to the majority of our international operations, $0.3 million related to state income taxes, and $0.5 million associated with the tax amortization of goodwill in relation to one of our prior acquisitions. A valuation allowance has been provided for the majority of our domestic net deferred tax assets, which are primarily related to our net operating loss carryforwards, and for certain foreign deferred tax assets.
The CARES Act, among other things, permits net operating loss ("NOL") carryforwards and carrybacks to offset 100% of taxable income for taxable years beginning before 2021. In addition, the CARES Act allows NOLs incurred in 2018, 2019, and 2020 to be carried back to each of the five preceding taxable years. Due to the Company’s historical NOLs, the NOL carryback provision of the CARES Act will not result in a tax benefit for the Company.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We currently believe our cash position, financing available under our credit facilities and funds generated from operations will satisfy our presently known operating cash needs, our working capital and capital expenditure requirements, our
current debt and lease obligations, and additional loans to our subsidiaries, if necessary, for at least the next twelve months. However, our assumptions and expectations may be impacted by the uncertain duration and extent of the adverse economic conditions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
To obtain additional financing in the future, in addition to our current cash position, we may evaluate various financing alternatives including the sale of equity, utilizing capital or operating leases, borrowing under our credit facilities, expanding our current credit facilities or entering into new debt agreements. No assurances can be given we will be successful in obtaining any additional financing or the terms thereof.
Our cash position decreased in 2020 primarily due to payments made applicable to capital expenditures, partially offset by cash generated from operating activities.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
During 2020, cash provided by operations was $1.8 million, compared to $10.9 million in 2019. Both periods included benefits from cash income generated from operations before changes in operating assets and liabilities. Such benefits were decreased by the net impact of changes in assets and liabilities, primarily related to the amount and timing of client revenue billings and collections as well as vendor purchasing and payment activity. Additionally, in 2020, one of our clients transitioned away from our credit card collections service, which reduced our net cash provided by operating activities by approximately $7.0 million.
We have deferred payment of the employer portions of Social Security and RRTA taxes that would otherwise be due from March 27 through December 31, 2020, by election of the option provided by the CARES Act. This has resulted in deferred payments through December 31, 2020 totaling $3.7 million, due in equal payments on December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2022.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities included capital expenditures of $4.2 million and $3.8 million in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, exclusive of property and equipment acquired under debt and finance leases, which consisted primarily of capitalized software costs and equipment purchases. Capital expenditures have historically consisted of additions to upgrade our management information systems, development of customized technology solutions to support and integrate with our service fee clients and general expansion and upgrades to our facilities, both domestic and foreign. We expect to incur capital expenditures to support new contracts and anticipated future growth opportunities. Based on our current client business activity and our targeted growth plans, we anticipate our total investment in upgrades and additions to facilities and information technology solutions and services for the upcoming twelve months, including costs to implement new clients, will be approximately $7.5 million to $10.0 million, including amounts expected to be financed through debt or finance leases. Additional capital expenditures may be necessary to support the infrastructure requirements of new clients. To maintain our current operating cash position, a portion of these expenditures may be financed through client reimbursements, debt, operating or finance leases or additional equity. We may elect to modify or defer a portion of such anticipated investments in the event that we do not obtain the financing results necessary to support such investments.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
During 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $0.2 million, compared to cash used in financing activities of $9.4 million in 2019. The balances in both periods were primarily due to net borrowing and payment activity on our revolving loan and other debt.
Working Capital
During 2020, our working capital increased to $24.0 million from $14.3 million at December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily related to income generated from operations before working capital changes, plus net borrowings on our revolving debt facility, partially offset by capital expenditures.
To obtain any necessary additional financing in the future, in addition to our current cash position, we continue to evaluate our needs in light of various financing alternatives potentially available including the sale of equity, utilizing capital or operating leases, borrowing under our credit facilities, expanding our current credit facilities or entering into new debt agreements. No assurances can be given we will be successful in obtaining any additional financing or the terms thereof. We currently believe our cash position, financing available under our credit facilities and funds generated from operations will satisfy our presently known operating cash needs, our working capital and capital expenditure requirements, our current debt and lease obligations, and additional loans to our subsidiaries, if necessary, for at least the next twelve months.
Our term and revolving loan facilities described below contain both financial and non-financial covenants. To the extent we fail to comply with our debt covenants, including the financial covenant requirements, and we are not able to obtain a waiver, the lenders would be entitled to accelerate the repayment of any outstanding credit facility obligations, and exercise all other rights and remedies, including sale of collateral. An acceleration of the repayment of our credit facility obligations may have a material adverse impact on our financial condition and results of operations. We can provide no assurance we will have the financial ability to repay all such obligations. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all debt covenants. Further, non-renewal of any of our credit facilities may have a material adverse impact on our business and financial condition.
Inventory Financing
To finance its distribution of Ricoh products in the U.S., Supplies Distributors has a short-term credit facility with IBM Credit LLC (“IBM Credit”) that provides financing for eligible inventory and certain receivables for up to $7.5 million. We have provided a collateralized guarantee to secure the repayment of this credit facility. The IBM Credit facility does not have a stated maturity and both parties have the ability to exit the facility following a 90-day notice.
This credit facility contains various restrictions upon the ability of Supplies Distributors and its subsidiaries to, among other things, merge, consolidate, sell assets, incur indebtedness, make loans, investments and payments to related parties (including entities directly or indirectly owned by PFSweb, Inc.), provide guarantees, make investments and loans, pledge assets, make changes to capital stock ownership structure and pay dividends, as well as financial covenants, such as annualized revenue to working capital, net profit after tax to revenue and total liabilities to tangible net worth, as defined, and are secured by all of the assets of Supplies Distributors, as well as a collateralized guaranty of PFSweb. Additionally, we are required to maintain a subordinated loan to Supplies Distributors of no less than $1.0 million and are restricted with regard to transactions with related parties, indebtedness, and changes to capital stock ownership. Furthermore, we are obligated to repay any over-advance made to Supplies Distributors or its subsidiaries under these facilities if they are unable to do so. We have also provided a guarantee of substantially all of the obligations of Supplies Distributors and its subsidiaries to IBM and Ricoh.
Debt and Finance Lease Obligations
U.S. Credit Agreement. In August 2015, we entered into a credit agreement (“Credit Agreement”) with Regions Bank, as agent for itself and one or more future lenders (the “Lenders”). Under the Credit Agreement, and subject to the terms set forth therein, the Lenders provided us with a revolving loan facility for up to $32.5 million and a term loan facility for up to $30 million. Borrowings under the Credit Agreement accrued interest at a variable rate based on prime rate or Libor, plus an applicable margin.
On November 1, 2018, we entered into Amendment No.1 to our credit agreement with Regions Bank (the “Amended Facility”). The Amended Facility provides for an increase in availability of our revolving loans to $60.0 million, with the ability for a further increase of $20.0 million to $80.0 million, and the elimination of the term loan. Amounts outstanding under the term loan were reconstituted as revolving loans. The Amended Facility also extends the maturity date to November 1, 2023.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the weighted average interest rate on the revolving loan facility was 2.52% and 3.96%, respectively. In connection with the Amended Facility, the Company paid $0.3 million of fees, which are being amortized through the life of the Amended Facility and are reflected as a net reduction in debt. The Amended Facility is secured by a lien on substantially all of the operating assets of the US entities and a pledge of 65% of the shares of certain of our foreign subsidiaries. The Amended Facility contains cross default provisions, various restrictions upon the Company’s ability to, among other things, merge, consolidate, sell assets, incur indebtedness, make loans and payments to subsidiaries, affiliates and related parties, make capital expenditures, make investments and loans, pledge assets, make changes to capital stock ownership structure, as well as financial covenants, as defined, of a minimum consolidated fixed charge ratio and a maximum consolidated leverage ratio.
Master Lease Agreements. The Company has various agreements that provide for leasing or financing transactions of equipment and other assets and will continue to enter into such arrangements as needed to finance the purchasing or leasing of certain equipment or other assets. Borrowings under these agreements, which generally have terms of three to five years, are generally secured by the related equipment, and in certain cases, by a Company parent guarantee.
Other than our capital and operating lease commitments, we do not have any other material financial commitments, although future client contracts may require capital expenditures and lease commitments to support the services provided to such clients.
Debt Covenants
Certain of our credit facilities contain various financial and non-financial covenants, including covenants that restrict our ability to incur additional indebtedness, create or permit liens on assets, engage in mergers or consolidations, and place restrictions on the transfer of assets or the payment of dividends between us and our subsidiaries.
To the extent we fail to comply with our debt covenants, including the financial covenant requirements and we are not able to obtain a waiver, the lenders would be entitled to accelerate the repayment of any outstanding credit facility obligations, and exercise all other rights and remedies, including sale of collateral. An acceleration of the repayment of our credit facility obligations may have a material adverse impact on our financial condition and results of operations. We can provide no assurance we will have the financial ability to repay all such obligations. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all debt covenants. Further, non-renewal of any of our credit facilities may have a material adverse impact on our business and financial condition.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
There are no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 “Significant Accounting Policies” to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of Part II of this 10-K for our discussion about new accounting pronouncements adopted and those pending.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. These accounting principles require us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of our financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. While we do not believe the reported amounts would be materially different, application of these policies involves the exercise of judgment and the use of assumptions as to future uncertainties and, as a result, actual results could differ from these estimates. If there is a significant unfavorable change to current conditions, it could result in a material adverse impact to our business, operating results and financial condition. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. All of our significant accounting policies are disclosed in the notes to our consolidated financial statements.
We have defined a critical accounting estimate as one that is both important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and requires us to make difficult, subjective or complex judgments or estimates about matters that are uncertain. During the past two years, we have not made any material changes in accounting methodology used to establish the critical accounting estimates discussed below. The following represent certain critical accounting policies that require us to exercise our business judgment or make significant estimates. In addition, there are other items within our consolidated financial statements that require estimation but are not deemed critical as defined above.
Revenue Recognition
We derive revenue primarily from services provided under contractual arrangements with our clients or from the sale of products under our distributor agreements. We recognize revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers ("ASC 606"), when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our clients and customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services.
We will often enter into contracts with clients and customers that contain multiple promises to transfer control of multiple products and/or services. To the extent a contract includes provisioning multiple products or services, we apply judgment to determine whether promised deliverables are capable of being distinct and are distinct in the context of the contract. If these criteria are not met, sales of different products or services are accounted for as a combined performance obligation. For arrangements with multiple distinct performance obligations, we allocate consideration among the performance obligations based on their relative standalone selling price. Standalone selling price is the price at which we would sell a promised good or service separately to our client and customers.
The Company may execute more than one contract or agreement with a single customer. The separate contracts or agreements may be viewed as one combined arrangement or separate agreements for revenue recognition purposes. In order to reach appropriate conclusions regarding whether such agreements should be combined, the Company evaluates whether the agreements were negotiated as a package with a single commercial objective, whether the amount of consideration to be paid in one agreement depends on the price and/or performance of another agreement, or whether the good or services promised in the agreements represent a single performance obligation. The conclusions reached can impact the identification of distinct performance obligations, allocation of the transaction price to each performance obligation and the timing of revenue recognition related to those arrangements
Our service fee revenue primarily relates to our order to cash, fulfillment, customer care, consulting, design, digital marketing and technology services.
We typically charge our service fee revenue on either a cost-plus basis, a percent of shipped revenue basis, a time and materials basis, project or retainer basis for our professional services, or a per transaction basis, such as a per item basis for fulfillment services or a per labor hour basis for web-enabled customer contact center services. Additional fees are billed for other services. For technology and digital agency services, we typically charge on a fixed cost basis based on an estimated maximum number of professional service labor hours or bill for each professional labor hour at a per hour price.
Within our PFS Operations unit, our performance obligations typically consist of standing ready to provide a service over a contract term. As such, our performance obligations within service fee revenue across the company are generally transferred to clients over time. A time-elapsed output measure is used to determine progress, with individual time increments representing a single series performance obligation. Variable consideration charged within these contracts is allocated to the individual reporting period in which the service was provided. Within our LiveArea Professional Services unit, our contracts are structured so that the amount the Company has a right to invoice corresponds directly with the value of our performance to date, we will elect the ‘as-invoiced’ practical expedient and recognize revenue as we have a right to invoice. If our contract is not structured such that it meets the criteria for this practical expedient, then we use an input measure of progress based on labor hours incurred to date to measure our progress to completion. The Company has determined that the above methods provide a faithful depiction of the transfer of services to the customer.
We perform set-up and integration services to support our fulfillment activities. When we determine these set-up and integration services do not meet the criteria for recognition as a separate performance obligation, any start up fees received represent a non-refundable up-front fee and are allocated to the other performance obligations within that contract. The Company recognizes revenue for non-refundable upfront implementation fees on a straight-line basis over the period between the initiation of the services through the end of the contract term. Related costs are capitalized as costs to fulfill the contract and are recognized over the expected performance period.
For contracts recognized over time, we recognize the estimated loss to the extent the project has been completed based on actual hours incurred compared to the total estimated hours. A loss is recognized when the current estimate of the consideration we expect to receive, modified to include any variable consideration, is less than the current estimate of total costs for the contract.
In instances where revenue is derived from sales of third-party vendor services, we record revenue on a gross basis when we are a principal to the transaction and net of costs when we are acting as an agent between the customer or client and the vendor. Whether we are the principal or agent in the transaction is determined by whether we control the service being provided.
Depending on the terms of the customer arrangement, product revenue is recognized at a point in time when control transfers to the customer. This is either upon shipment of the product or when the customer receives the product. Product revenue is reported net of estimated variable consideration related to returns and allowances, which are estimated based upon historical return information. Management also considers any other current information and trends in making estimates. If actual sales returns, allowances and discounts are greater than estimated by management, additional expense may be incurred.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
The determination of the collectability of amounts due from our clients and customers requires us to use estimates and make judgments regarding future events and trends, including monitoring our clients’ and customers’ payment history and current credit worthiness to determine that collectability is reasonably assured, as well as consideration of the overall business climate in which our clients and customers operate. Inherently, these uncertainties require us to make frequent judgments and estimates regarding our clients and customers’ ability to pay amounts due to us to determine the appropriate amount of valuation allowances required for doubtful accounts. Provisions for doubtful accounts are recorded when it becomes evident the client or customer will not make the required payments at either contractual due dates or in the future. These provisions may be based on discussions with the client or customer or the age of the amount due.
In our Retail model, we also maintain an allowance for uncollectible vendor receivables, which arise from inventory returns to vendors, vendor rebates, price protections and other promotions. We determine the sufficiency of the vendor receivable allowance based upon various factors, including payment history and vendor communication. Amounts received from vendors may vary from amounts recorded because of potential non-compliance with certain elements of vendor programs. If our estimated allowances for uncollectible accounts or vendor receivables subsequently prove insufficient, an additional allowance may be required.
We believe our allowances for doubtful accounts are adequate to cover anticipated losses under current conditions; however, uncertainties regarding changes in the financial condition of our clients and customers, either adverse or positive, could impact the amount and timing of any additional provisions for doubtful accounts that may be required.
Stock Compensation
We utilize our Employee Stock and Incentive Plan (the “Employee Plan”) to help attract, retain and incentivize qualified executives, key employees and non-employee directors to increase our shareholder value and help build and sustain growth. The Employee Plan provides for the granting of incentive awards in a variety of forms, such as the award of an option, stock appreciation right, restricted stock award, restricted stock unit, deferred stock unit, among other stock-based awards.
Compensation cost is measured based on the grant date fair value of the award. Depending on the conditions associated with the vesting of the award, compensation cost is recognized on a straight-line or graded basis, net of estimated forfeitures, over the requisite service period of each award.
We estimate the fair value of each option grant on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. For certain of the awards that have a market condition, we estimate the compensation cost using a Monte-Carlo simulation. The estimated fair value for awards involves assumptions for expected dividend yield, stock price volatility, risk-free interest rates and the expected life of the award.
If, in the future, we determine that another method of estimating an award’s fair value is more reasonable, or, if another method for calculating these input assumptions is prescribed by authoritative guidance, and, therefore, should be used to estimate expected volatility or expected term, the fair value calculated for our stock-based compensation could change significantly.
Income Taxes
The liability method is used for determining our income taxes, under which current and deferred tax liabilities and assets are recorded in accordance with enacted tax laws and rates. Under this method, the amounts of deferred tax liabilities and assets at the end of each period are determined using the tax rate expected to be in effect when taxes are actually paid or recovered. Valuation allowances are established to reduce deferred tax assets to their net realizable value when it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. In determining the need for valuation allowances, we have considered and made judgments and estimates regarding estimated future taxable income. These estimates and judgments include some degree of uncertainty and changes in these estimates and assumptions could require us to adjust the valuation allowances for our deferred tax assets. The ultimate realization of our deferred tax assets depends on the generation of sufficient taxable income in the applicable taxing jurisdictions. Although we believe our estimates and judgments are reasonable, actual results may differ, which could be material.
Because we operate in multiple countries, we are subject to the jurisdiction of multiple domestic and foreign tax authorities. Determination of taxable income in any jurisdiction requires the interpretation of the related tax laws and regulations and the use of estimates and assumptions regarding significant future events such as the amount, timing and character of deductions, permissible revenue recognition methods under the tax law and the sources and character of income and tax credits. Changes in tax laws, regulations, foreign currency exchange restrictions or our level of operations or profitability in each taxing jurisdiction could have an impact on the amount of income taxes that we provide during any given year.
Long-Lived Assets, Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Long-lived assets include property, intangible assets, goodwill and certain other assets. We make judgments and estimates in conjunction with the carrying value of these assets, including amounts to be capitalized, depreciation and amortization methods and useful lives. Additionally, we review long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. We review goodwill for impairment at least annually, on October 1. We record impairment losses in the period in which we determine the carrying amount is not recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to future net cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. This may require us to make judgments regarding long-term forecasts of our future revenues and costs related to the assets subject to review.