Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Management's Discussion and Analysis
Forward-Looking Statements
Certain statements in this report, other than purely historical information, including estimates, projections, statements relating to our business plans, objectives, and expected operating results, and the assumptions upon which those statements are based, are “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Forward-looking statements may appear throughout this report, including without limitation, the following sections: “Management's Discussion and Analysis,” “Risk Factors” and "Notes 4, 8 and 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements." These forward-looking statements generally are identified by the words “believe,” “project,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “intend,” “strategy,” “future,” “opportunity,” “plan,” “may,” “should,” “will,” “would,” “will be,” “will continue,” “will likely result,” and similar expressions. Forward-looking statements are based on current expectations and assumptions, which are subject to risks and uncertainties that may cause results to differ materially from those expressed or implied in the forward-looking statements. We undertake no obligation to update or revise publicly any forward-looking statements, whether because of new information, future events or otherwise, except to the extent required by law.
Risks and uncertainties to which our forward-looking statements are subject include, without limitation: (1) the ability to successfully manage global financial risks, including foreign currency fluctuations, currency exchange or pricing controls and localized volatility; (2) the ability to successfully manage local, regional or global economic volatility, including reduced market growth rates, and to generate sufficient income and cash flow to allow the Company to effect the expected share repurchases and dividend payments; (3) the ability to manage disruptions in credit markets or to our banking partners or changes to our credit rating; (4) the ability to maintain key manufacturing and supply arrangements (including execution of supply chain optimizations and sole supplier and sole manufacturing plant arrangements) and to manage disruption of business due to various factors, including ones outside of our control, such as natural disasters, acts of war or terrorism, or disease outbreaks; (5) the ability to successfully manage cost fluctuations and pressures, including prices of commodities and raw materials, and costs of labor, transportation, energy, pension and healthcare; (6) the ability to stay on the leading edge of innovation, obtain necessary intellectual property protections and successfully respond to changing consumer habits, evolving digital marketing and selling platform requirements, and technological advances attained by, and patents granted to, competitors; (7) the ability to compete with our local and global competitors in new and existing sales channels, including by successfully responding to competitive factors such as prices, promotional incentives and trade terms for products; (8) the ability to manage and
maintain key customer relationships; (9) the ability to protect our reputation and brand equity by successfully managing real or perceived issues, including concerns about safety, quality, ingredients, efficacy, packaging content, supply chain practices, or similar matters that may arise; (10) the ability to successfully manage the financial, legal, reputational and operational risk associated with third-party relationships, such as our suppliers, contract manufacturers, distributors, contractors and external business partners; (11) the ability to rely on and maintain key company and third party information and operational technology systems, networks and services, and maintain the security and functionality of such systems, networks and services and the data contained therein; (12) the ability to successfully manage uncertainties related to changing political conditions and potential implications such as exchange rate fluctuations and market contraction; (13) the ability to successfully manage current and expanding regulatory and legal requirements and matters (including, without limitation, those laws and regulations involving product liability, product and packaging composition, intellectual property, labor and employment, antitrust, privacy and data protection, tax, environmental, due diligence, risk oversight, and accounting and financial reporting) and to resolve new and pending matters within current estimates; (14) the ability to manage changes in applicable tax laws and regulations including maintaining our intended tax treatment of divestiture transactions; (15) the ability to successfully manage our ongoing acquisition, divestiture and joint venture activities, in each case to achieve the Company’s overall business strategy and financial objectives, without impacting the delivery of base business objectives; (16) the ability to successfully achieve productivity improvements and cost savings and manage ongoing organizational changes, while successfully identifying, developing and retaining key employees, including in key growth markets where the availability of skilled or experienced employees may be limited; and (17) the ability to successfully manage the demand, supply, and operational challenges associated with a disease outbreak, including epidemics, pandemics, or similar widespread public health concerns (including the COVID-19 outbreak). A detailed discussion of risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results and events to differ materially from those projected herein, is included in the section titled "Economic Conditions and Uncertainties" and the section titled "Risk Factors" (Part I, Item 1A) of this Form 10-K.
The purpose of Management's Discussion and Analysis (MD&A) is to provide an understanding of Procter & Gamble's financial condition, results of operations and cash flows by focusing on changes in certain key measures from year to year. The MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying Notes. The MD&A is organized in the following sections:
•Overview
•Summary of 2021 Results
The Procter & Gamble Company 13
•Economic Conditions and Uncertainties
•Results of Operations
•Segment Results
•Cash Flow, Financial Condition and Liquidity
•Significant Accounting Policies and Estimates
•Other Information
Throughout the MD&A we refer to measures used by management to evaluate performance, including unit volume growth, net sales, net earnings, diluted net earnings per share and operating cash flow. We also refer to a number of financial measures that are not defined under accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (U.S. GAAP), consisting of organic sales growth, core earnings per share (Core EPS), adjusted free cash flow and adjusted free cash flow productivity. Organic sales growth is net sales growth excluding the impacts of acquisitions, divestitures and foreign exchange from year-over-year comparisons. Core EPS is diluted net earnings per share from continuing operations excluding certain items that are not judged to be part of the Company's sustainable results or trends. Adjusted free cash flow is operating cash flow less capital spending, transitional tax payments related to the U.S. Tax Act and tax payments related to the Merck OTC consumer healthcare acquisition. Adjusted free cash flow productivity is the ratio of adjusted free cash flow to net earnings excluding certain one-time items. We believe these measures provide our investors with additional information
about our underlying results and trends, as well as insight to some of the metrics used to evaluate management. The explanation at the end of the MD&A provides more details on the use and the derivation of these measures, as well as reconciliations to the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measures.
Management also uses certain market share and market consumption estimates to evaluate performance relative to competition despite some limitations on the availability and comparability of share and consumption information. References to market share and consumption in the MD&A are based on a combination of vendor purchased traditional brick-and-mortar and online data in key markets as well as internal estimates. All market share references represent the percentage of sales of our products in dollar terms on a constant currency basis, relative to all product sales in the category. The Company measures quarter and fiscal-year-to-date market shares through the most recent period for which market share data is available, which typically reflects a lag time of one or two months as compared to the end of the reporting period. Management also uses unit volume growth to evaluate and explain drivers of changes in net sales. Organic volume growth reflects year-over-year changes in unit volume excluding the impacts of acquisitions and divestitures and certain one-time items, if applicable, and is used to explain changes in organic sales.
OVERVIEW
Procter & Gamble is a global leader in the fast-moving consumer goods industry, focused on providing branded consumer packaged goods of superior quality and value to our consumers around the world. Our products are sold in more than 180 countries and territories primarily through mass merchandisers, e-commerce, grocery stores, membership club stores, drug stores, department stores, distributors, wholesalers, specialty beauty stores (including airport duty-free stores), high-frequency stores, pharmacies, electronics stores and professional channels. We also sell direct to consumers. We have on-the-ground operations in approximately 70 countries.
Our market environment is highly competitive with global, regional and local competitors. In many of the markets and industry segments in which we sell our products, we compete against other branded products, as well as retailers' private-label brands. Additionally, many of the product segments in which we compete are differentiated by price tiers (referred to as super-premium, premium, mid-tier and value-tier products). We believe we are well positioned in the industry segments and markets in which we operate, often holding a leadership or significant market share position.
14 The Procter & Gamble Company
Organizational Structure
Our organizational structure is comprised of Sector Business Units (SBUs), Enterprise Markets (EMs), Corporate Functions (CF) and Global Business Services (GBS).
Sector Business Units
The Company's ten product categories are organized into six SBUs. The SBUs are responsible for global brand strategy, new product upgrades and innovation, marketing plans and supply chain. They have direct profit responsibility for markets representing the large majority of the Company's sales and earnings (referred to as Focus Markets) and are responsible for innovation plans, supply plans and operating frameworks to drive growth and value creation in the remaining markets (referred to as Enterprise Markets). Effective September 2021, the Company will be organized into five SBUs as Baby and Feminine Care will combine with Family Care into one SBU to leverage organizational and business synergies. Under U.S. GAAP, the categories underlying the SBUs are, and will continue to be, aggregated into five reportable segments: Beauty; Grooming; Health Care; Fabric & Home Care; and Baby, Feminine & Family Care. Throughout the MD&A, we reference business results by region, which are comprised of North America, Europe, Greater China, Latin America, Asia Pacific and India, Middle East and Africa (IMEA). The following provides additional detail on our reportable segments and the ten product categories and brand composition within each segment.
(1) Percent of Net sales and Net earnings for the year ended June 30, 2021 (excluding results held in Corporate).
(2) The Grooming product category is comprised of the Shave Care and Appliances operating segments.
Recent Developments:
During fiscal 2019, the Company completed the acquisition of the over-the-counter (OTC) healthcare business of Merck KGaA (Merck OTC) for approximately $3.7 billion. This business primarily sells OTC consumer healthcare products, mainly in markets in Europe, Latin America and Asia and is included within our personal health care category.
During fiscal 2019, the Company also dissolved our PGT Healthcare partnership, a venture between the Company and Teva Pharmaceutical Industries, Ltd (Teva) in the OTC consumer healthcare business. Pursuant to the agreement, PGT product assets were returned to the original respective parent companies to reestablish independent OTC businesses. This transaction was accounted for as a sale of the Teva portion of the PGT business. The Company recorded an after-tax gain on the sale of $353 million.
Organization Design:
Sector Business Units
Beauty: We are a global market leader amongst the beauty categories in which we compete, including hair care and skin and personal care. We are the global market leader in the retail hair care market with over 20% global market share primarily behind our Pantene and Head & Shoulders brands. In skin and personal care, we offer a wide variety of products, ranging from deodorants to personal cleansing to skin care, such as our Olay brand, which is one of the top facial skin care brands in the world with approximately 6% global market share.
Grooming: We compete in shave care and appliances. In shave care, we are the global market leader in the blades and
The Procter & Gamble Company 15
razors market. Our global blades and razors market share is over 60%, primarily behind our Gillette and Venus brands. Our appliances, such as electric shavers and epilators, are sold primarily under the Braun brand in a number of markets around the world where we compete against both global and regional competitors. We hold over 25% of the male electric shavers market and over 50% of the female epilators market.
Health Care: We compete in oral care and personal health care. In oral care, there are several global competitors in the market and we have the number two market share position with nearly 20% global market share behind our Crest and Oral-B brands. In personal health care, we are a top ten competitor in a large, highly fragmented industry, primarily behind respiratory treatments (Vicks brand) and digestive wellness products (Metamucil and Pepto Bismol brands). As discussed earlier, in fiscal 2019, we dissolved the PGT Healthcare partnership with Teva, and reestablished an independent OTC business. We also acquired Merck OTC as discussed above.
Fabric & Home Care: This segment is comprised of a variety of fabric care products, including laundry detergents, additives and fabric enhancers; and home care products, including dishwashing liquids and detergents, surface cleaners and air fresheners. In fabric care, we generally have the number one or number two market share position in the markets in which we compete and are the global market leader with over 25% global market share, primarily behind our Tide, Ariel and Downy brands. Our global home care market share is nearly 25% across the categories in which we compete, primarily behind our Cascade, Dawn, Febreze and Swiffer brands.
Baby, Feminine & Family Care: In baby care, we are the global market leader and compete mainly in taped diapers, pants and baby wipes with over 20% global market share. We have the number one or number two market share position in most of the key markets in which we compete, primarily behind Pampers, the Company's largest brand, with annual net sales of over $7 billion. We are the global market leader in the feminine care category with 25% global market share, primarily behind our Always and Tampax brands. We also compete in the adult incontinence category in certain markets behind Always Discreet, with nearly 10% market share in the key markets in which we compete. Our family care business is predominantly a North American business comprised primarily of the Bounty paper towel and Charmin toilet paper brands. North America market shares are over 40% for Bounty and approximately 25% for Charmin.
Enterprise Markets
Enterprise Markets are responsible for sales and profit delivery in specific countries, supported by SBU-agreed innovation and supply chain plans, along with scaled services like planning, distribution and customer management.
Corporate Functions
Corporate Functions provides company-level strategy and portfolio analysis, corporate accounting, treasury, tax,
external relations, governance, human resources and legal services.
Global Business Services
Global Business Services provides technology, processes and standard data tools to enable the SBUs, the EMs and CF to better understand the business and better serve consumers and customers. The GBS organization is responsible for providing world-class solutions at a low cost and with minimal capital investment.
Strategic Focus
Procter & Gamble aspires to serve the world’s consumers better than our best competitors in every category and in every country in which we compete and, as a result, deliver total shareholder return in the top one-third of our peer group. Delivering and sustaining leadership levels of shareholder value creation requires balanced top- and bottom-line growth and strong cash generation.
The Company has undertaken an effort to focus and strengthen its business portfolio to compete in categories and with brands that are structurally attractive and that play to P&G's strengths. Our portfolio of businesses consists of ten product categories where P&G has leading market positions, strong brands and consumer-meaningful product technologies.
Within these categories, our strategic choices are focused on winning with consumers. The consumers who purchase and use our products are at the center of everything we do. We win with consumers by delivering superiority across the five key elements of product, packaging, brand communication, retail execution and value equation. Winning with consumers around the world and against our best competitors requires innovation. Innovation has always been, and continues to be, P&G’s lifeblood. Innovation requires consumer insights and technology advancements that lead to product improvements, improved marketing and merchandising programs and game-changing inventions that create new brands and categories.
Productivity improvement is critical to delivering our balanced top- and bottom-line growth, cash generation and value creation objectives. Productivity improvement and sales growth reinforce and fuel each other. Our objective is to drive productivity improvement across all elements of cost, including cost of goods sold, marketing and promotional spending and overhead costs. We plan to use productivity improvements and cost savings to help offset cost increases (including commodity and foreign exchange impacts), reinvest in product and packaging improvements, brand awareness-building advertising and trial-building sampling programs, increased sales coverage and R&D programs as well as to improve operating margins.
We are constructively disrupting our industry and the way we do business, including how we innovate, communicate and leverage new technologies, to create more value.
We are improving operational effectiveness and organizational culture through enhanced clarity of roles and
16 The Procter & Gamble Company
responsibilities, accountability and incentive compensation programs.
We believe these strategies are right for the long-term health of the Company and our objective of delivering total shareholder return in the top one-third of our peer group.
The Company expects the delivery of the following long-term annual financial targets will result in total shareholder returns in the top third of the competitive, fast-moving consumer goods peer group:
•Organic sales growth above market growth rates in the categories and geographies in which we compete;
•Core earnings per share (EPS) growth of mid-to-high single digits; and
•Adjusted free cash flow productivity of 90% or greater.
In periods with significant macroeconomic pressures, such as the current COVID-19 pandemic, we intend to maintain a disciplined approach to investing so as not to sacrifice the long-term health of our businesses to meet short-term objectives in any given year.
SUMMARY OF 2021 RESULTS
•Net sales increased 7% to $76.1 billion on a 3% increase in unit volume. Favorable foreign exchange had a positive 1% impact on net sales. Net sales growth was driven by double digit increases in Health Care and in Fabric & Home Care, a high single digit increase in Beauty, a mid-single digit increase in Grooming and a low single digit increase in Baby, Feminine & Family Care. Organic sales, which exclude the impacts of acquisitions and divestitures and foreign exchange, increased 6% on a 3% increase in organic volume. Organic sales increased high single digits in Health Care and in Fabric & Home Care, increased mid-single digits in Beauty and in Grooming and increased low single digits in Baby, Feminine & Family Care.
•Operating income increased $2.3 billion, or 15% versus year ago to $18.0 billion, driven by the net sales increase and an increase in operating margin.
•Net earnings increased $1.2 billion or 10% versus year ago to $14.4 billion, due to the increase in operating income, partially offset by current year charges of $427 million after tax for the early extinguishment of debt and an increase in the current year effective tax
rate. Foreign exchange impacts negatively affected net earnings by approximately $108 million.
•Net earnings attributable to Procter & Gamble were $14.3 billion, an increase of $1.3 billion or 10% versus the prior year primarily due to the increase in net earnings.
•Diluted net earnings per share (EPS) increased 11% to $5.50 due to the increase in net earnings and a reduction in shares outstanding.
◦ Core EPS, which represents net earnings per share excluding charges for the early extinguishment of debt in the current period and incremental restructuring charges in the base period, increased 11% to $5.66.
•Cash flow from operating activities was $18.4 billion.
◦ Adjusted free cash flow, which is operating cash flow less capital expenditures and certain other impacts, was $15.8 billion.
◦ Adjusted free cash flow productivity, which is the ratio of adjusted free cash flow to net earnings, excluding the charges for early debt extinguishment, was 107%.
The Procter & Gamble Company 17
ECONOMIC CONDITIONS AND UNCERTAINTIES
We discuss expectations regarding future performance, events and outcomes, such as our business outlook and objectives, in annual and quarterly reports, press releases and other written and oral communications. All such statements, except for historical and present factual information, are "forward-looking statements" and are based on financial data and our business plans available only as of the time the statements are made, which may become out-of-date or incomplete. We assume no obligation to update any forward-looking statements as a result of new information, future events or other factors, except as required by law. Forward-looking statements are inherently uncertain and investors must recognize that events could be significantly different from our expectations. For more information on risk factors that could impact our results, please refer to “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K.
Global Economic Conditions. Our products are sold in numerous countries across North America, Europe, Latin America, Asia and Africa, with more than half our sales generated outside the United States. As such, we are exposed to and impacted by global macroeconomic factors, U.S. and foreign government policies and foreign exchange fluctuations. Current global economic conditions continue to be highly volatile due to the COVID-19 pandemic, resulting in market size contractions in certain countries due to economic slowdowns and government restrictions on movement. Other macroeconomic factors also remain dynamic, and any causes of market size contraction, such as greater political unrest or instability in the Middle East, Central & Eastern Europe, certain Latin American markets and the Hong Kong market in Greater China, could reduce our sales or erode our operating margin, in either case reducing our net earnings and cash flows.
Changes in Costs. Our costs are subject to fluctuations, particularly due to changes in commodity prices, transportation costs and our own productivity efforts. We have significant exposures to certain commodities, in particular certain oil-derived materials like resins and paper-based materials like pulp, and volatility in the market price of these commodity input materials has a direct impact on our costs. Disruptions in our manufacturing, supply and distribution operations, including freight container and truck availabilities, due to the COVID-19 pandemic may also impact our costs. If we are unable to manage these impacts through pricing actions, cost savings projects and sourcing decisions, as well as through consistent productivity improvements, it may adversely impact our gross margin, operating margin, net earnings and cash flows. Net sales could also be adversely impacted following pricing actions if there is a negative impact on the consumption of our products. We strive to implement, achieve and sustain cost improvement plans, including outsourcing projects, supply chain optimization and general overhead and workforce optimization. If we are not successful in executing and sustaining these changes, there could be a negative impact on our gross margin, operating margin, net earnings and cash flows.
Foreign Exchange. We have both translation and transaction exposure to the fluctuation of exchange rates. Translation exposures relate to exchange rate impacts of measuring income statements of foreign subsidiaries that do not use the U.S. dollar as their functional currency. Transaction exposures relate to 1) the impact from input costs that are denominated in a currency other than the local reporting currency and 2) the revaluation of transaction-related working capital balances denominated in currencies other than the functional currency. In the past three fiscal years, a number of foreign currencies have weakened versus the U.S. dollar, leading to lower earnings from these foreign exchange impacts. In the current fiscal year, foreign exchange impacts have benefited net sales while negatively impacting earnings due to the mix of currencies in which input costs are denominated. Certain countries currently experiencing significant exchange rate fluctuations include Argentina, Brazil, Russia, Turkey as well as the European Union. These fluctuations have significantly impacted our historical net sales, costs and net earnings and could do so in the future. Increased pricing in response to certain fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates may offset portions of the currency impacts but could also have a negative impact on the consumption of our products, which would affect our net sales, gross margin, operating margin, net earnings and cash flows.
Government Policies. Our net earnings and cash flows could be affected by changes in U.S. or foreign government legislative, regulatory or enforcement policies. For example, any future legislative or regulatory changes in U.S. or non-U.S. tax policy, or any significant change in global tax policy adopted under the current work being led by the OECD for the G20 focused on "Addressing the Challenges of the Digitalization of the Economy." The breadth of the OECD project extends beyond pure digital businesses and is likely to impact all multinational businesses by redefining jurisdictional taxation rights. Our net sales, gross margin, operating margin, net earnings and cash flows may also be impacted by changes in U.S. and foreign government policies related to environmental and climate change matters. Additionally, we attempt to carefully manage our debt, currency and other exposures in certain countries with currency exchange, import authorization and pricing controls, such as Nigeria, Algeria, Egypt, Argentina and Turkey. Further, our net sales, gross margin, operating margin, net earnings and cash flows could be affected by changes to international trade agreements in North America and elsewhere, including any changes related to the United Kingdom's exit from the European Union. Changes in government policies in these areas might cause an increase or decrease in our net sales, gross margin, operating margin, net earnings and cash flows.
COVID-19 Pandemic Disclosures. Our net sales, net earnings and cash flows may be impacted by the U.S. and foreign government policies to manage the COVID-19 pandemic, such as movement restrictions or site closures. The Company’s priorities during the COVID-19 pandemic continue to be protecting the health and safety of our
18 The Procter & Gamble Company
employees; maximizing the availability of products that help consumers with their health, hygiene and cleaning needs; and using our employees’ talents and our resources to help society meet and overcome the current challenges. Because the Company sells products that are essential to the daily lives of consumers, the COVID-19 pandemic has not had a materially negative impact to our consolidated net sales as positive and negative impacts during fiscal 2021 have largely offset each other. We have experienced a significant increase in demand and consumption of certain of our product categories (fabric, home cleaning and hygiene products) primarily in North America, caused in part by changing consumer habits, pantry stocking and retailer inventory replenishment, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, contributing to increases in net sales. At the same time, net sales have been negatively impacted due to the economic slowdown and restricted consumer movements in certain markets in Asia Pacific and Europe, in certain channels, such as professional and in certain categories, such as shave care. In the future, the pandemic may cause reduced demand for our products if it results in a recessionary global economic environment. Demand in certain countries in Latin America, Asia Pacific, and IMEA may be particularly susceptible to recession. It could also lead to volatility in consumer access to our products due to government actions impacting our ability to produce and ship products or impacting consumers’ movements and access to our products. The resumption of normal economic activity as we emerge from the pandemic in certain markets, including North America, could also result in reduced demand due to consumption decreases and consumer pantry destocking (particularly, in home cleaning and hygiene products). We believe that over the long term, there will continue to be strong demand for categories in which we operate, particularly our products that deliver essential health, hygiene and cleaning benefits. However, the timing and extent of demand recovery in certain markets in Asia Pacific, IMEA and Latin America, the resumption of international travel, the timing and impact of potential consumer pantry destocking and product demand volatility caused by future economic trends are unclear. Accordingly, there may be heightened volatility in net sales, net earnings and cash flows during and subsequent to the duration of the pandemic. Our retail customers are also being impacted by the pandemic. Their success in addressing the issues and maintaining their operations could impact consumer access to and, as a result, sales of our products.
Our ability to continue to operate without any significant negative impacts will in part depend on our ability to protect our employees and our supply chain. The Company has endeavored to follow actions recommended by governments and health authorities, including on vaccine administration, to protect our employees worldwide, with particular measures in place for those working in our plants and distribution facilities. We have also worked closely with local and national officials to keep our manufacturing facilities open due to the essential nature of the majority of our products. While we have been able to broadly maintain our operations, we experienced some disruption in our
supply chain in certain markets in Asia Pacific and IMEA in the first months of the pandemic due primarily to the restriction of employee movements, as well as increased transportation and manufacturing costs. We intend to continue to work with government authorities and implement our employee safety measures to ensure that we continue manufacturing and distributing our products during the pandemic. However, uncertainty resulting from the pandemic could result in an unforeseen disruption to our supply chain (for example, a closure of a key manufacturing or distribution facility or the inability of a key material or transportation supplier to source and transport materials) that could impact our operations.
Because the pandemic has not had a material negative impact on our operations, on the demand for our products or the resulting net sales and net earnings, it has also not negatively impacted the Company’s liquidity position. We continue to generate operating cash flows to meet our short-term liquidity needs, and we continue to maintain access to the capital markets enabled by our strong short- and long-term credit ratings. We have also not observed any material impairments of our assets or a significant change in the fair value of assets due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
For additional information on risk factors that could impact our results, please refer to “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The key metrics included in the discussion of our consolidated results of operations include net sales, gross margin, selling, general and administrative costs (SG&A), operating margin, other non-operating items, income taxes and net earnings. The primary factors driving year-over-year changes in net sales include overall market growth in the categories in which we compete, product initiatives, competitive activities (the level of initiatives, pricing and other activities by competitors), marketing spending, retail executions (both in-store and online), and acquisition and divestiture activity, all of which drive changes in our underlying unit volume, as well as our pricing actions (which can also impact volume), changes in product and geographic mix and foreign currency impacts on sales outside the U.S.
Most of our cost of products sold and SG&A are to some extent variable in nature. Accordingly, our discussion of these operating costs focuses primarily on relative margins rather than the absolute year-over-year changes in total costs. The primary drivers of changes in gross margin are input costs (energy and other commodities), pricing impacts, geographic mix (for example, gross margins in North America are generally higher than the Company average for similar products), product mix (for example, the Beauty segment has higher gross margins than the Company average), foreign exchange rate fluctuations (in situations where certain input costs may be tied to a different functional currency than the underlying sales), the impacts of manufacturing savings projects and reinvestments (for example, product or package improvements) and to a lesser
The Procter & Gamble Company 19
extent scale impacts (for costs that are fixed or less variable in nature). The primary components of SG&A are marketing-related costs and non-manufacturing overhead costs. Marketing-related costs are primarily variable in nature, although we may achieve some level of scale benefit over time due to overall growth and other marketing efficiencies. While overhead costs are variable to some extent, we generally experience more scale-related impacts for these costs due to our ability to leverage our organization and systems' infrastructures to support business growth. The main drivers of changes in SG&A as a percentage of net sales are overhead and marketing cost savings, reinvestments (for example, increased advertising), inflation, foreign exchange fluctuations and scale impacts.
For a detailed discussion of the fiscal 2020 year-over-year changes, please refer to the MD&A in Part II, Item 7 of the Company's Form 10-K/A for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020.
Net Sales
Net sales increased 7% to $76.1 billion in fiscal 2021 on a 3% increase in unit volume versus the prior year. Favorable foreign exchange increased net sales by 1%. Favorable pricing had a 1% positive impact on net sales. Mix had a positive 2% impact on net sales driven by the
disproportionate growth of the North America region, the Health Care segment and the Home Care and Appliances categories, all of which have higher than company-average selling prices. Excluding the net impacts of foreign exchange and acquisitions and divestitures, organic sales grew 6% on a 3% increase in organic volume. Net sales increased double digits in Health Care and Fabric & Home Care, increased high single digits in Beauty, increased mid-single digits in Grooming and increased low single digits in Baby, Feminine & Family Care. Organic sales grew high single digits in Health Care and Fabric & Home Care.
On a regional basis, volume increased high single digits in Greater China, increased mid-single digits in North America and IMEA and increased low single digits in Latin America due to innovation, market growth and increased demand, particularly in household cleaning and personal hygiene products. This was partially driven by increased consumption and retailer inventory restocking due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Volume in Europe was unchanged and decreased low single digits in Asia Pacific due to pandemic-related market contraction. Excluding the impact of a minor brand divestiture, organic volume in Europe increased low single digits.
Operating Costs
Gross margin increased 90 basis points to 51.2% of net sales in fiscal 2021. Gross margin benefited from:
•120 basis points from total manufacturing cost savings, net of freight cost increases (100 basis points after including product and packaging reinvestments),
•70 basis points of help from lower restructuring costs versus the base period, and
•60 basis points of positive pricing impacts.
These benefits were offset by an 80 basis-point negative impact from unfavorable product mix (due to the disproportionate growth of the Home Care and Appliances categories which have lower than company-average gross margin and mix within segments due to the growth of lower margin product forms and larger sizes in certain categories), a 40 basis-point negative impact from unfavorable foreign exchange rates and a 20 basis-point negative impact from higher commodity costs.
Total SG&A increased 5% to $21.0 billion, primarily due to an increase in marketing spending and, to a lesser extent, an increase in overhead costs. SG&A as a percentage of net sales decreased 60 basis points to 27.6% due to a decrease in overhead costs and other operating expenses as a percentage of net sales.
•Marketing spending as a percentage of net sales was unchanged, as investments in media and other marketing spending were offset by the positive scale impacts of the net sales increase and savings in agency compensation and production costs.
•Overhead costs as a percentage of net sales decreased 40 basis points due to the positive scale impacts of the net sales increase and productivity savings, partially offset by inflation and other cost increases.
•Other net operating expenses as a percentage of net sales decreased 20 basis points primarily due to a reduction in foreign exchange transactional charges.
20 The Procter & Gamble Company
Productivity-driven cost savings delivered 110 basis points of benefit to SG&A as a percentage of net sales.
Operating margin increased 150 basis points to 23.6% for fiscal 2021 due to both the increase in gross margin and the decrease in SG&A as a percentage of net sales as discussed above.
Non-Operating Items
•Interest expense was $502 million in fiscal 2021, an increase of $37 million versus the prior year due to higher average interest rates for the fiscal year driven by a higher proportion of fixed rate debt.
•Interest income was $45 million in fiscal 2021, a reduction of $110 million versus the prior year due to lower U.S. interest rates.
•Other non-operating income, which consists primarily of divestiture gains and other non-operating items decreased $352 million to $86 million, primarily due to current period charges of $512 million ($427 million after tax) for the early debt extinguishment. Excluding the debt extinguishment charges, other non-operating income increased $160 million primarily due to an unrealized gain on an equity investment that became publicly traded in fiscal 2021 and an increase in net non-operating benefits on defined benefit retirement plans driven by annual updates to actuarial assumptions.
Income Taxes
Income taxes increased to $3.3 billion due to increased earnings and an increase in the effective tax rate. The effective tax rate increased 130 basis points to 18.5% in 2021 due to:
•a 135 basis-point increase related to the prior year tax benefit arising from transactions to simplify our legal entity structure, and
•a 15 basis-point increase from unfavorable impacts from the geographic mix of current year earnings.
These increases are partially offset by:
•a 20 basis-point decrease from discrete impacts related to uncertain tax positions (5 basis-point favorable impact in the current year versus a 15 basis-point unfavorable impact in the prior year period).
Net Earnings
Operating income increased 15%, or $2.3 billion, to $18.0 billion due to the net sales increase and the increase in operating margin, both of which are discussed above.
Earnings before income taxes increased 11%, or $1.8 billion, to $17.6 billion, as the increase in operating income was partially offset by the current period charges of $512 million for the early extinguishment of debt. Net earnings increased 10%, or $1.2 billion, to $14.4 billion due to the increase in earnings before income taxes, partially offset by the increase in the effective income tax rate discussed above. Foreign exchange impacts reduced net earnings by approximately $108 million in fiscal 2021 due to a weakening of certain currencies against the U.S. dollar. This impact includes both transactional charges and translational impacts from converting earnings from foreign subsidiaries to U.S. dollars.
Net earnings attributable to Procter & Gamble increased $1.3 billion, or 10%, to $14.3 billion.
Diluted net EPS increased $0.54, or 11%, to $5.50 due primarily to the increase in net earnings and, to a lesser extent, a reduction in shares outstanding.
Core EPS increased 11% to $5.66. Core EPS represents diluted net EPS from continuing operations excluding the current year charge for the early debt extinguishment and incremental restructuring charges in the base year related to our productivity and cost savings plans. The increase was primarily driven by the increase in net sales and the increase in operating margin, both of which are discussed above.
The Procter & Gamble Company 21
SEGMENT RESULTS
Segment results reflect information on the same basis we use for internal management reporting and performance evaluation. The results of these reportable segments do not include certain non-business unit specific costs which are reported in our Corporate segment and are included as part of our Corporate segment discussion. Additionally, we apply blended statutory tax rates in the segments. Eliminations to adjust segment results to arrive at our consolidated effective tax rate are included in Corporate. See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on items included in the Corporate segment.
(1)Net sales percentage changes are approximations based on quantitative formulas that are consistently applied.
(2)Other includes the sales mix impact from acquisitions and divestitures and rounding impacts necessary to reconcile volume to net sales.
BEAUTY
Beauty net sales increased 8% to $14.4 billion in fiscal 2021 on a 3% increase in unit volume. Favorable foreign exchange impacts increased net sales by 2%. Higher pricing increased net sales by 2%. Favorable product mix added 1% to net sales due to the disproportionate growth of the SK-II brand, which has higher than segment-average selling prices. Organic sales increased 6% on a 3% increase in organic volume. Global market share of the Beauty segment decreased 0.4 points.
•Hair Care net sales increased mid-single digits due to a low single digit increase in volume and increased pricing. Organic sales also increased mid-single digits. Volume growth was driven by a double digit increase in Greater China (due to market growth and increased distribution), a high single digit increase in IMEA (due to innovation and the low base period due to pandemic-related shutdowns) and a mid-single digit increase in Latin America (due to product innovation), partially offset by a low single digit decrease in Europe due to pandemic-related category declines in certain markets. Global market share of the hair care category was unchanged.
•Skin and Personal Care net sales increased high single digits due to a low single digit volume increase, favorable mix due to the disproportionate growth of the super premium SK-II brand, increased pricing and favorable foreign exchange impacts. Organic sales also increased high single digits. Volume increased double digits in Greater China and increased low single digits in North America driven by increased consumption of personal care products due to the pandemic. This volume growth was partially offset by a double digit decrease in IMEA and a low single digit decrease in Asia Pacific due to pandemic-related market contractions. Global market share of the skin and personal care category decreased nearly half a point.
Net earnings increased 17% to $3.2 billion in fiscal 2021 due to the increase in net sales and a 180 basis-point increase in net earnings margin. Net earnings margin increased due to an increase in gross margin and a decrease in SG&A as a percentage of net sales. The gross margin increase was mainly driven by manufacturing cost savings and increased selling prices, partially offset by the negative impacts of unfavorable mix (due to the decline of the skin care category which has higher than segment-average margins and to a lesser extent the disproportionate growth of Latin America and IMEA, which have lower than segment-average margins) and increased commodity costs. SG&A as a percentage of net sales decreased primarily due to the positive scale impacts of the net sales increase.
22 The Procter & Gamble Company
GROOMING
Grooming net sales increased 6% to $6.4 billion in fiscal 2021 on a 3% increase in unit volume. Increased pricing had a 2% positive impact to net sales. Favorable mix had a 1% positive impact to net sales due to the disproportionate growth of the Appliances category, which has higher than segment-average selling prices. Foreign exchange had no net impact on net sales. Organic sales also increased 6%. Global market share of the Grooming segment decreased 0.6 points.
•Shave Care net sales increased low single digits driven by a low single digit increase in volume and increased pricing, partially offset by unfavorable mix impacts due to the disproportionate growth of lower priced products in IMEA and Latin America. Organic sales also increased low single digits. The volume increase was driven by a mid-teens increase in IMEA (due to innovation and a low base period due to pandemic-related shutdowns), a high single digit increase in Greater China (due to innovation and market growth) and low-single digit increases in Latin America (due to innovation and distribution increases in certain markets) and in North America (due to innovation and a lower base period due to pandemic-related consumption declines), partially offset by a mid-single digit decline in Asia Pacific and a low single digit decline in Europe due to pandemic-related consumption declines. Global market share of the shave care category was unchanged.
•Appliances net sales increased more than 20% primarily due to a high teens increase in volume, favorable foreign exchange impacts, favorable mix impact due to the disproportionate growth of premium shaver and styling products and increased pricing. Organic sales also increased more than 20%. Volume increased in all regions led by high teen increases in Europe and Greater China and double digit increases in North America and Asia Pacific, all driven by innovation and increased consumption of at-home grooming and styling products due to the pandemic. Global market share of the appliances category increased more than a point.
Net earnings increased 7% to $1.4 billion in fiscal 2021 due to the increase in net sales and a 30 basis-point increase in net earnings margin. Net earnings margin increased due to a decrease in SG&A as a percentage of net sales partially offset by a decrease in gross margin. Gross margin decreased due to the negative impact of unfavorable mix (due to the disproportionate growth of the appliances category and the IMEA region, both of which have lower than segment-average margins) and unfavorable foreign exchange impacts, partially offset by the positive impacts of manufacturing cost savings and increased selling prices. SG&A as a percentage of net sales decreased primarily due to the positive scale
impacts of the net sales increase and reductions in overhead costs due to productivity savings, partially offset by the impact of a favorable legal settlement in the base period.
HEALTH CARE
Health Care net sales increased 10% to $10.0 billion in fiscal 2021 on a 6% increase in unit volume. Favorable foreign exchange impacts increased net sales by 1%. Favorable product mix increased net sales by 2% due to the disproportionate growth of premium power brush and paste products. Increased pricing had a 1% positive impact on net sales. Organic sales increased 9%. Global market share of the Health Care segment increased 1.8 points.
•Oral Care net sales increased double digits driven by a high-single digit volume increase, favorable mix impacts from the disproportionate growth of premium power brush and paste products, favorable foreign exchange impacts and increased pricing. Organic sales also increased double digits. Volume increased in all regions led by around 20% growth in IMEA, high single digit growth in North America, mid-single digits growth in Greater China and in Asia Pacific and low single digit growth in Europe due to product innovation, increased marketing spending and a low base period in certain markets due to pandemic-related shutdowns. Global market share of the oral care category increased more than a point.
•Personal Health Care net sales increased mid-single digits driven by a mid-single digit increase in volume and increased pricing. Organic sales also increased mid-single digits. Volume increased mid-teens in Asia Pacific, increased double digits in Latin America and in IMEA, and increased mid-single digits in North America due to product innovation, increased marketing spending and increased consumption of certain health care products including supplements and pain relief. Global market share of the personal health care category increased more than a point.
Net earnings increased 12% to $1.9 billion in fiscal 2021 due to the increase in net sales and a 30 basis-point increase in net earnings margin. Net earnings margin increased due a decrease in SG&A as a percentage of net sales partially offset by a decrease in gross margin. Gross margin decreased due to unfavorable mix impacts (due to the decline of higher-margin respiratory products and the disproportionate growth of oral care category, which has lower than segment-average margins) and unfavorable foreign exchange impacts, partially offset by manufacturing cost savings and increased selling prices. SG&A as a percentage of net sales decreased primarily due to the positive scale impacts of the net sales increase, partially offset by increased marketing spending.
The Procter & Gamble Company 23
FABRIC & HOME CARE
Fabric & Home Care net sales increased 10% to $26.0 billion in fiscal 2021 on a 5% increase in unit volume. Favorable foreign exchange impacts increased net sales by 1%. Higher pricing increased net sales by 1%. Positive mix impacts increased net sales by 3% due to the disproportionate growth of the Home Care category and the North America region, both of which have higher than segment-average selling prices. Organic sales increased 9%. Global market share of the Fabric & Home Care segment increased 1 point.
•Fabric Care net sales increased high single digits due to a low single digit increase in volume, favorable foreign exchange impacts and positive mix impacts due to the disproportionate growth of premium products (including scent beads and unit dose) and the North America region, all of which have higher than category-average selling prices. Organic sales increased mid-single digits. Volume grew high single digits in North America and Greater China and grew low single digits in Latin America (all due to product innovation, incremental marketing spending and pandemic-related consumption increases) partially offset by a low single digit decrease in Asia Pacific due to pandemic-related market contraction and competitive activity. Global market share of the Fabric Care category increased more than a point.
•Home Care net sales increased high-teens due to mid-teens volume growth, positive mix impact due to the disproportionate growth of premium dish care and surface cleaning products and the North America region, all of which have higher than category-average selling prices, increased pricing and favorable foreign exchange impacts. Organic sales also increased high-teens. Volume increased in all regions led by high teens growth in North America and Latin America and double digit growth in Europe, all due to consumption increases related to the COVID-19 pandemic, product innovation and incremental marketing spending. Global market share of the Home Care category increased more than a point.
Net earnings increased 11% to $4.6 billion in fiscal 2021 due to the increase in net sales and a 30 basis-point increase in net earnings margin. The net earnings margin increased primarily due to an increase in gross margin, partially offset by an increase in SG&A as a percentage of net sales. The gross margin increase was driven by manufacturing cost savings and increased selling prices, partially offset by unfavorable foreign exchange impacts and unfavorable product mix (due to the disproportionate growth of products
that are premium-priced and profit-accretive but with lower than segment-average margins). SG&A as a percentage of net sales increased due to an increase in marketing spending, partially offset by the positive scale benefits of the net sales increase.
BABY, FEMININE & FAMILY CARE
Baby, Feminine & Family Care net sales increased 3% to $18.9 billion in fiscal 2021 on unit volume that was unchanged. Favorable foreign exchange impacts increased net sales by 1%. Increased pricing was a positive 1% impact to net sales. Positive mix impact increased net sales by 1% due to the growth of the North America region which has higher than segment-average selling prices. Organic sales increased 2%. Global market share of the Baby, Feminine & Family Care segment decreased 0.2 points.
•Baby Care net sales increased low single digits driven by positive mix impact due to the growth of the North America region and premium products, both of which have higher than category-average selling prices, increased pricing and favorable foreign exchange impacts, partially offset by a low single digit decrease in volume. Organic sales were unchanged. The volume decrease was driven by a double digit decline in Greater China (due to competitive activities), mid-single digit declines in Asia Pacific (due to market contraction and competitive activity), Latin America (due to market contraction) and IMEA (due to pandemic-related retailer inventory reductions and market contraction) and a low single digit decline in Europe (due to market contractions and competitive activity in certain markets). These volume declines were partially offset by a low single digit volume increase in North America due to market growth and product innovation. Global market share of the baby care category decreased less than half a point.
•Feminine Care net sales increased mid-single digits due to positive mix impacts (from the disproportionate growth of the North America region and premium products, such as adult incontinence, all of which have higher than category-average selling prices), increased pricing and favorable foreign exchange impacts. Organic sales also increased mid-single digits. Volume was unchanged as mid-single digits increases in North America (due to product innovation) and in IMEA (due to market growth, innovation and low base period due to pandemic-related economic slowdowns) were offset by a mid-single digit volume decrease in Europe (due to pandemic-related consumption declines) and low single digit decreases in Latin America, Greater China and Asia Pacific (all due to pandemic-related consumption
24 The Procter & Gamble Company
declines, competitive activities in certain markets and, to a lesser extent, a high base period due to pandemic-related pantry loading). Market share of the feminine care category increased more than half a point.
•Net sales in Family Care, which is predominantly a North American business, increased mid-single digits driven by a low single digit volume increase and increased pricing in the form of lower consumer promotions, partially offset by unfavorable mix due to the disproportionate growth of large pack sizes, which have lower than category-average selling prices. The volume increase was driven by pandemic-related consumption increases, pantry loading and to a lesser extent, retailer inventory restocking. Organic sales increased low single digits. North America's share of the family care category decreased less than a point.
Net earnings in fiscal 2021 increased 5% to $3.6 billion due to the increase in net sales and a 40 basis-point increase in net earnings margin. Net earnings margin increased due to an increase in gross margin, partially offset by an increase in SG&A as a percentage of sales. The gross margin increase was driven by manufacturing cost savings and higher selling prices, partially offset by unfavorable foreign exchange impacts and unfavorable mix (due to the growth of large sizes which have lower than segment-average margins). SG&A as a percentage of net sales increased marginally due primarily to an increase in marketing spending, partially offset by the positive scale benefits of the net sales increase.
CORPORATE
Corporate includes certain operating and non-operating activities not allocated to specific business segments. These include: the incidental businesses managed at the corporate level; financing and investing activities; certain employee benefit costs; other general corporate items; gains and losses related to certain divested brands; certain asset impairment charges; and certain restructuring-type activities to maintain a competitive cost structure, including manufacturing and workforce optimization. Corporate also includes reconciling items to adjust the accounting policies used in the reportable segments to U.S. GAAP. The most significant ongoing reconciling item is income taxes, to adjust from blended statutory rates that are reflected in the reportable segments to the overall Company effective tax rate.
Corporate net sales increased 12% to $441 million in fiscal 2021 due to an increase in the net sales of the incidental businesses managed at the corporate level. Corporate net loss increased by $153 million in fiscal 2021 primarily due to the $427 million ($512 million before tax) current period charge for early debt extinguishment. Excluding this charge, Corporate had net earnings of $40 million, an improvement of $274 million driven by lower restructuring charges versus the base period and the current period unrealized gain from an equity investment that became publicly traded in fiscal
2021, partially offset by higher interest expense and lower interest income in the current period. Each of these items have been discussed above.
Restructuring Program to Deliver Productivity and Cost Savings
The Company has historically had an ongoing restructuring program with annual spending in the range of $250 to $500 million. In fiscal 2012, the Company initiated a productivity and cost savings plan, in addition to our ongoing restructuring-type activities, to reduce costs and better leverage scale in the areas of supply chain, research and development, marketing and overheads. In fiscal 2017, the Company communicated specific elements of an additional multi-year productivity and cost savings program. The plan was designed to accelerate cost reductions by streamlining decision making, manufacturing and other work processes to both fund the Company's growth strategy and increase the Company's operating margin. The plan was substantially completed in fiscal 2020, with spending totaling approximately $782 million in that year.
Savings generated from the Company's restructuring program are difficult to estimate, given the nature of the activities, the timing of the execution and the degree of reinvestment. However, we estimate that the underlying restructuring costs incurred since 2012 (approximately $8.2 billion), along with other non-manufacturing enrollment reductions since 2012 have delivered approximately $3.7 billion in annual before-tax gross savings. In fiscal 2021, the Company incurred restructuring costs within the range of our historical ongoing level of $250 to $500 million annually.
Restructuring accruals of $278 million as of June 30, 2021 are classified as current liabilities. Approximately 91% of the restructuring charges incurred in fiscal 2021 either have been or will be settled with cash. Consistent with our historical policies for ongoing restructuring-type activities, the resulting charges are funded by and included within Corporate for segment reporting.
In addition to our restructuring programs, we have additional ongoing savings efforts in our supply chain, marketing and overhead areas that yield additional benefits to our operating margins.
Refer to Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more details on the restructuring program and to the Operating Costs section of the MD&A for more information about the total benefit to operating margins from our total savings efforts.
CASH FLOW, FINANCIAL CONDITION AND LIQUIDITY
We believe our financial condition continues to be of high quality, as evidenced by our ability to generate substantial cash from operations and to readily access capital markets at competitive rates.
Operating cash flow provides the primary source of cash to fund operating needs and capital expenditures. Excess operating cash is used first to fund shareholder dividends. Other discretionary uses include share repurchases and
The Procter & Gamble Company 25
acquisitions to complement our portfolio of businesses, brands and geographies. As necessary, we may supplement operating cash flow with debt to fund these activities. The overall cash position of the Company reflects our strong business results and a global cash management strategy that takes into account liquidity management, economic factors and tax considerations.
Cash Flow Analysis
Operating Cash Flow
Operating cash flow was $18.4 billion in 2021, a 6% increase from the prior year. Net earnings, adjusted for non-cash items (depreciation and amortization, loss on early extinguishment of debt, share-based compensation, deferred income taxes and gain on sale of assets) generated approximately $17.9 billion of operating cash flow. Working capital and other impacts generated $506 million of operating cash flow as summarized below.
•An increase in accounts receivable used $342 million of cash primarily due to sales growth and lower relative sales at the end of the base period in certain markets due to COVID-19. The number of days sales outstanding increased approximately 1 day versus prior year.
•Higher inventory used $309 million of cash, primarily due to commodity cost increases and business growth. Inventory days on hand increased approximately 2 days primarily due to these same factors.
•Accounts payable, accrued and other liabilities increased, generating $1.4 billion of cash. About half of this was driven by extended payment terms with our suppliers (see Extended Payment Terms and Supply Chain Financing below). The remaining amount was driven by higher current period marketing spending and to support the increase in inventory. Days payable outstanding is approximately 87 days as of June 30, 2021, an increase of 6 days versus prior year due to these same factors.
•Other net operating assets and liabilities declined, using $369 million of cash, primarily driven by the payment of the current year portion of transitional taxes due related to the U.S. Tax Act repatriation charge ($225 million) and pension related accruals and contributions.
Adjusted Free Cash Flow. We view adjusted free cash flow as an important non-GAAP measure because it is a factor impacting the amount of cash available for dividends, share repurchases, acquisitions and other discretionary investments. It is defined as operating cash flow less capital
expenditures and excluding payments for the transitional tax resulting from the U.S. Tax Act and tax payments related to the Merck acquisition. Adjusted free cash flow is one of the measures used to evaluate senior management and determine their at-risk compensation.
Adjusted free cash flow was $15.8 billion in 2021, an increase of 6% versus the prior year. The increase was primarily driven by the increase in operating cash flows as discussed above. Adjusted free cash flow productivity, defined as the ratio of adjusted free cash flow to net earnings, excluding the charges for early debt extinguishment (which are not considered part of our ongoing operations), was 107% in 2021.
Extended Payment Terms and Supply Chain Financing. Beginning in fiscal 2014, in response to evolving market practices, the Company began a program to negotiate extended payment terms with its suppliers. At the same time, the Company initiated a Supply Chain Finance program (the "SCF") with a number of global financial institutions (the "SCF Banks"). Under the SCF, qualifying suppliers may elect to sell their receivables from the company to a SCF Bank. These participating suppliers negotiate their receivables sales arrangements directly with the respective SCF Bank. While the Company is not party to those agreements, the SCF Banks allow the participating suppliers to utilize the Company’s creditworthiness in establishing credit spreads and associated costs. This generally provides the suppliers with more favorable terms than they would be able to secure on their own. The Company has no economic interest in a supplier’s decision to sell a receivable. Once a qualifying supplier elects to participate in the SCF and reaches an agreement with an SCF Bank, they elect which individual Company invoices they sell to the SCF bank. However, all the Company’s payments to participating suppliers are paid to the SCF Bank on the invoice due date, regardless of whether the individual invoice is sold by the supplier to the SCF Bank. The SCF Bank pays the supplier on the invoice due date for any invoices that were not previously sold to the SCF Bank under the SCF.
The terms of the Company’s payment obligation are not impacted by a supplier’s participation in the SCF. Our payment terms with our suppliers for similar services and materials within individual markets are consistent between suppliers that elect to participate in the SCF and those that do not participate. Accordingly, our average days outstanding are not significantly impacted by the portion of suppliers or related input costs that are included in the SCF. In addition, the SCF is available to both material suppliers, where the underlying costs are largely included in Cost of goods sold, and to service suppliers, where the underlying costs are largely included in SG&A. As of June 30, 2021, approximately 3% of our global suppliers have elected to participate in the SCF. Payments to those suppliers during fiscal year 2021 total approximately $15 billion, which equals approximately 26% of our total Cost of goods sold and SG&A for the period. For participating suppliers, we believe substantially all of their receivables with the
26 The Procter & Gamble Company
Company are sold to the SCF Banks. Accordingly, we would expect that at each balance sheet date, a similar proportion of amounts originally due to suppliers would instead be payable to SCF Banks. All outstanding amounts related to suppliers participating in the SCF are recorded within Accounts payable in our Consolidated Balance Sheets, and the associated payments are included in operating activities within our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. As of June 30, 2021 and 2020, the amount due to suppliers participating in the SCF and included in Accounts payable were approximately $5 billion and $4 billion, respectively.
Although difficult to project due to market and other dynamics, we anticipate incremental cash flow benefits from the extended payment terms with suppliers could increase at a slower rate in fiscal 2022. Future changes in our suppliers’ financing policies or economic developments, such as changes in interest rates, general market liquidity or the Company’s credit-worthiness relative to participating suppliers could impact suppliers’ participation in the SCF and/or our ability to negotiate extended payment terms with our suppliers. However, any such impacts are difficult to predict.
Investing Cash Flow
Net investing activities used $2.8 billion in cash in 2021, primarily due to capital spending. Net investing activities generated $3.0 billion in cash in 2020, mainly due to proceeds from sales and maturities of investment securities, partially offset by capital spending.
Capital Spending. Capital expenditures, primarily to support capacity expansion, innovation and cost efficiencies, were $2.8 billion in 2021 and $3.1 billion in 2020. Capital spending as a percentage of net sales decreased 60 basis points to 3.7% in 2021.
Acquisitions. Acquisition activity used cash of $34 million in 2021, primarily related to a minor Health Care acquisition. Acquisition activity used $58 million in 2020, primarily related to final contractual payments from the fiscal 2019 acquisition of Merck OTC, along with a minor Baby Care acquisition.
Proceeds from Divestitures and Other Asset Sales. Proceeds from asset sales were $42 million in 2021, primarily from fixed asset sales and a minor brand divestiture and $30 million in 2020, primarily from a minor brand divestiture.
Investment Securities. Investments used net cash of $55 million in 2021 primarily from the purchase of investment securities and generated $6.2 billion in 2020 primarily from sales and maturities of investment securities.
Financing Cash Flow
Net financing activities consumed $21.5 billion of cash in 2021, mainly due to treasury stock purchases, dividends to shareholders and net debt reductions, partially offset by the impact of proceeds received from stock option exercises. Net financing activities consumed $8.4 billion in cash in 2020, mainly due to treasury stock purchases and dividends to
shareholders, partially offset by a net debt increase and the impact of stock options.
Dividend Payments. Our first discretionary use of cash is dividend payments. Dividends per common share increased 7% to $3.2419 per share in 2021. Total dividend payments to common and preferred shareholders were $8.3 billion in 2021 and $7.8 billion in 2020. In April 2021, the Board of Directors declared a 10% increase in our quarterly dividend from $0.7907 to $0.8698 per share on Common Stock and Series A and B ESOP Convertible Class A Preferred Stock. This is the 65th consecutive year that our dividend has increased. We have paid a dividend for 131 consecutive years, every year since our incorporation in 1890.
Long-Term and Short-Term Debt. We maintain debt levels we consider appropriate after evaluating a number of factors, including cash flow expectations, cash requirements for ongoing operations, investment and financing plans (including acquisitions and share repurchase activities) and the overall cost of capital. Total debt was $32.0 billion as of June 30, 2021 and $34.7 billion as of June 30, 2020. We used $3.9 billion for net debt reductions, including $512 million for early debt extinguishment costs related to the early retirement of $2.3 billion of debt. In 2020, we generated $4.8 billion from net debt increases, primarily due to the issuance of bonds of $5.0 billion.
Treasury Purchases. Total share repurchases were $11.0 billion in 2021 and $7.4 billion in 2020.
Impact of Stock Options and Other. The exercise of stock options and other financing activities generated $1.6 billion and $2.0 billion of cash in 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Liquidity
At June 30, 2021, our current liabilities exceeded current assets by $10.0 billion, largely due to short-term borrowings under our commercial paper program. We anticipate being able to support our short-term liquidity and operating needs largely through cash generated from operations. The Company regularly assesses its cash needs and the available sources to fund these needs. As of June 30, 2021, the Company had $4.7 billion of cash and cash equivalents related to foreign subsidiaries, primarily in various Western European and Asian countries. We did not have material cash and cash equivalents related to any country subject to exchange controls that significantly restrict our ability to access or repatriate the funds. Under current law, we do not expect restrictions or taxes on repatriation of cash held outside of the U.S. to have a material effect on our overall liquidity, financial condition or the results of operations for the foreseeable future.
We utilize short- and long-term debt to fund discretionary items, such as acquisitions and share repurchases. We have strong short- and long-term debt ratings, which have enabled, and should continue to enable, us to refinance our debt as it becomes due at favorable rates in commercial paper and bond markets. In addition, we have agreements with a diverse group of financial institutions that, if needed, should provide sufficient funding to meet short-term financing requirements.
The Procter & Gamble Company 27
On June 30, 2021, our short-term credit ratings were P-1 (Moody's) and A-1+ (Standard & Poor's), while our long-term credit ratings were Aa3 (Moody's) and AA- (Standard & Poor's), all with a stable outlook.
We maintain bank credit facilities to support our ongoing commercial paper program. The current facility is an $8.0 billion facility split between a $3.2 billion five-year facility and a $4.8 billion 364-day facility, which expire in November 2025 and November 2021, respectively. Both facilities can be extended for certain periods of time as specified in the terms of the credit agreement. These facilities are currently undrawn and we anticipate that they will remain undrawn. These credit facilities do not have
cross-default or ratings triggers, nor do they have material adverse events clauses, except at the time of signing. In addition to these credit facilities, we have an automatically effective registration statement on Form S-3 filed with the SEC that is available for registered offerings of short- or long-term debt securities. For additional details on debt see Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Guarantees and Other Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have guarantees or other off-balance sheet financing arrangements, including variable interest entities, which we believe could have a material impact on our financial condition or liquidity.
Contractual Commitments
The following table provides information on the amount and payable date of our contractual commitments as of June 30, 2021.
(1)Represents the U.S. federal tax liability associated with the repatriation provisions of the U.S. Tax Act. Does not include any provisions made for foreign withholding taxes on expected repatriations as the timing of those payments is uncertain.
(2)As of June 30, 2021, the Company's Consolidated Balance Sheet reflects a liability for uncertain tax positions of $803 million, including $176 million of interest and penalties. Due to the high degree of uncertainty regarding the timing of future cash outflows of liabilities for uncertain tax positions beyond one year, a reasonable estimate of the period of cash settlement beyond twelve months from the balance sheet date of June 30, 2021 cannot be made.
(3)Represents future pension payments to comply with local funding requirements. These future pension payments assume the Company continues to meet its future statutory funding requirements. Considering the current economic environment in which the Company operates, the Company believes its cash flows are adequate to meet the future statutory funding requirements. The projected payments beyond fiscal year 2023 are not currently determinable.
(4)Primarily reflects future contractual payments under various take-or-pay arrangements entered into as part of the normal course of business. Commitments made under take-or-pay obligations represent minimum commitments with suppliers and are in line with expected usage. This includes service contracts for information technology, human resources management and facilities management activities that have been outsourced. While the amounts listed represent contractual obligations, we do not believe it is likely that the full contractual amount would be paid if the underlying contracts were canceled prior to maturity. In such cases, we generally are able to negotiate new contracts or cancellation penalties, resulting in a reduced payment. The amounts do not include other contractual purchase obligations that are not take-or-pay arrangements. Such contractual purchase obligations are primarily purchase orders at fair value that are part of normal operations and are reflected in historical operating cash flow trends. We do not believe such purchase obligations will adversely affect our liquidity position.
28 The Procter & Gamble Company
SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
In preparing our financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP, there are certain accounting policies that may require a choice between acceptable accounting methods or may require substantial judgment or estimation in their application. These include revenue recognition, income taxes, certain employee benefits and goodwill and intangible assets. We believe these accounting policies, and others set forth in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, should be reviewed as they are integral to understanding the results of operations and financial condition of the Company.
The Company has discussed the selection of significant accounting policies and the effect of estimates with the Audit Committee of the Company's Board of Directors.
Revenue Recognition
Our revenue is primarily generated from the sale of finished product to customers. Those sales predominantly contain a single performance obligation and revenue is recognized at a
single point in time when ownership, risks and rewards transfer, which can be on the date of shipment or the date of receipt by the customer. Trade promotions, consisting primarily of customer pricing allowances, in-store merchandising funds, advertising and other promotional activities, and consumer coupons, are offered through various programs to customers and consumers. Sales are recorded net of trade promotion spending, which is recognized as incurred at the time of the sale. Amounts accrued for trade promotions at the end of a period require estimation, based on contractual terms, sales volumes and historical utilization and redemption rates. The actual amounts paid may be different from such estimates. These differences, which have historically not been significant, are recognized as a change in management estimate in a subsequent period.
Income Taxes
Our annual tax rate is determined based on our income, statutory tax rates and the tax impacts of items treated differently for tax purposes than for financial reporting purposes. Also inherent in determining our annual tax rate are judgements and assumptions regarding the recoverability of certain deferred tax balances, primarily net operating loss and other carryforwards, and our ability to uphold certain tax positions.
Realization of net operating losses and other carryforwards is dependent upon generating sufficient taxable income in the appropriate jurisdiction prior to the expiration of the carryforward periods, which involves business plans, planning opportunities and expectations about future outcomes. Although realization is not assured, management believes it is more likely than not that our deferred tax assets, net of valuation allowances, will be realized.
We operate in multiple jurisdictions with complex tax policy and regulatory environments. In certain of these jurisdictions, we may take tax positions that management believes are supportable, but are potentially subject to
successful challenge by the applicable taxing authority. These interpretational differences with the respective governmental taxing authorities can be impacted by the local economic and fiscal environment.
A core operating principle is that our tax structure is based on our business operating model, such that profits are earned in line with the business substance and functions of the various legal entities in the jurisdictions where those functions are performed. However, because of the complexity of transfer pricing concepts, we may have income tax uncertainty related to the determination of intercompany transfer prices for our various cross-border transactions. We have obtained and continue to prioritize the strategy of seeking advance rulings with tax authorities to reduce this uncertainty. We estimate that our current portfolio of advance rulings reduces this uncertainty with respect to over 70% of our global earnings. We evaluate our tax positions and establish liabilities in accordance with the applicable accounting guidance on uncertainty in income taxes. We review these tax uncertainties in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the progress of tax audits, and adjust them accordingly. We have a number of audits in process in various jurisdictions. Although the resolution of these tax positions is uncertain, based on currently available information, we believe that the ultimate outcomes will not have a material adverse effect on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Because there are a number of estimates and assumptions inherent in calculating the various components of our tax provision, certain changes or future events such as changes in tax legislation, geographic mix of earnings, completion of tax audits or earnings repatriation plans could have an impact on those estimates and our effective tax rate. See Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details on the Company's income taxes.
Employee Benefits
We sponsor various postretirement benefits throughout the world. These include pension plans, both defined contribution plans and defined benefit plans, and other postretirement benefit (OPRB) plans, consisting primarily of health care and life insurance for retirees. For accounting purposes, the defined benefit pension and OPRB plans require assumptions to estimate the net projected and accumulated benefit obligations, including the following variables: discount rate; expected salary increases; certain employee-related factors, such as turnover, retirement age and mortality; expected return on assets; and health care cost trend rates. These and other assumptions affect the annual expense and net obligations recognized for the underlying plans. Our assumptions reflect our historical experiences and management's best judgment regarding future expectations. As permitted by U.S. GAAP, the net amount by which actual results differ from our assumptions is deferred. If this net deferred amount exceeds 10% of the greater of plan assets or liabilities, a portion of the deferred amount is included in expense for the following year. The cost or benefit of plan changes, such as increasing or decreasing benefits for prior employee service (prior service
The Procter & Gamble Company 29
cost), is deferred and included in expense on a straight-line basis over the average remaining service period of the employees expected to receive benefits.
The expected return on plan assets assumption impacts our defined benefit expense since many of our defined benefit pension plans and our primary OPRB plan are partially funded. The process for setting the expected rates of return is described in Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. For 2021, the average return on assets assumptions for pension plan assets and OPRB assets was 6.5% and 8.4%, respectively. A change in the rate of return of 100 basis points for both pension and OPRB assets would impact annual after-tax benefit/expense by approximately $140 million.
Since pension and OPRB liabilities are measured on a discounted basis, the discount rate impacts our plan obligations and expenses. Discount rates used for our U.S. defined benefit pension and OPRB plans are based on a yield curve constructed from a portfolio of high quality bonds for which the timing and amount of cash outflows approximate the estimated payouts of the plan. For our international plans, the discount rates are set by benchmarking against investment grade corporate bonds rated AA or better. The average discount rate on the defined benefit pension plans of 1.7% represents a weighted average of local rates in countries where such plans exist. A 100 basis point change in the discount rate would impact annual after-tax benefit expense by approximately $210 million. The average discount rate on the OPRB plan of 3.2% reflects the higher interest rates generally applicable in the U.S., which is where a majority of the plan participants receive benefits. A 100 basis point change in the discount rate would impact annual after-tax OPRB expense by approximately $15 million. See Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details on our defined benefit pension and OPRB plans.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Significant judgment is required to estimate the fair value of our goodwill reporting units and intangible assets. Accordingly, we typically obtain the assistance of third-party valuation specialists for significant goodwill reporting units and intangible assets. The fair value estimates are based on available historical information and on future expectations. We typically estimate the fair value of these assets using the income method, which is based on the present value of estimated future cash flows attributable to the respective assets. The valuations used to establish and to test goodwill and intangible assets for impairment are dependent on a number of significant estimates and assumptions, including macroeconomic conditions, overall category growth rates, competitive activities, cost containment and margin progression, Company business plans and the discount rate applied to cash flows.
Indefinite-lived intangible assets and goodwill are not amortized, but are tested at least annually for impairment. Our ongoing annual impairment testing for goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets occurs during the 3 months
ended December 31. Assumptions used in our impairment evaluations, such as forecasted growth rates and cost of capital, are consistent with internal projections and operating plans. We believe these estimates and assumptions are reasonable and comparable to those that would be used by other marketplace participants. Unanticipated market or macroeconomic events and circumstances may occur, which could affect the accuracy or validity of the estimates and assumptions. For example, future changes in the judgments, assumptions and estimates that are used in our impairment testing for goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets, including discount and tax rates or future cash flow projections, could result in significantly different estimates of the fair values. In addition, changes to, or a failure to achieve business plans or deterioration of macroeconomic conditions could result in reduced cash flows or higher discount rates, leading to a lower valuation that would trigger an impairment of the goodwill and intangible assets of these businesses.
We test individual indefinite-lived intangible assets by comparing the book value of each asset to the estimated fair value. Our impairment testing for goodwill is performed separately from our impairment testing of indefinite-lived intangible assets. If the fair value of the reporting unit or indefinite-lived intangible is less than its carrying value, that difference represents an impairment.
Determining the useful life of an intangible asset also requires judgment. Certain brand intangible assets are expected to have indefinite lives based on their history and our plans to continue to support and build the acquired brands. Other acquired intangible assets (e.g., certain brands, all customer relationships, patents and technologies) are expected to have determinable useful lives. Our assessment as to brands that have an indefinite life and those that have a determinable life is based on a number of factors including competitive environment, market share, brand history, underlying product life cycles, operating plans and the macroeconomic environment of the countries in which the brands are sold. Determinable-lived intangible assets are amortized to expense over their estimated lives. An impairment assessment for determinable-lived intangibles is only required when an event or change in circumstances indicates that the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable.
Most of our goodwill reporting units are comprised of a combination of legacy and acquired businesses and as a result have fair value cushions that, at a minimum, exceed two times their underlying carrying values. Certain of our goodwill reporting units, in particular Shave Care and Appliances, are comprised entirely of acquired businesses and as a result have fair value cushions that are not as high as our legacy businesses. The Appliances reporting unit has a fair value that significantly exceeds the underlying carrying value.
During fiscal 2019, a non-cash before- and after-tax impairment charge of $6.8 billion was recognized to reduce the carrying amount of goodwill for the Shave Care reporting unit, and a non-cash, before-tax impairment charge
30 The Procter & Gamble Company
of $1.6 billion ($1.2 billion after-tax) was recognized to reduce the carrying amount of the Gillette indefinite-lived intangible asset to its fair value. The underlying reductions in fair values were due in large part to significant currency devaluations in a number of countries relative to the U.S. dollar, a deceleration of category growth caused by changing grooming habits, primarily in the developed markets, and an increased competitive market environment in the U.S. and certain other markets. As a result of the fiscal 2019 impairment determined by the step two testing (that existed under previous accounting standards), the Shave Care fair value exceeded the carrying value by approximately 20% as of June 30, 2019. Because the impairment testing for intangible assets has historically been a one-step process, the Gillette indefinite-lived intangible asset fair value approximated its carrying value at that date.
During our annual impairment testing during the quarter ended December 31, 2019, we reduced the discount rate used in the valuation based on developments in the macroeconomic environment. As a result of this change and updates to other underlying cash flow projections, the Shave Care fair value exceeded its carrying value by more than 20% and the Gillette indefinite-lived intangible asset's fair value exceeded its carrying value by approximately 5%.
The COVID-19 pandemic that originated during the second half of fiscal 2020 resulted in a reduction in shave incidents by consumers and a weakening of certain currencies relative to the U.S. dollar, which led to a reduction in net sales for Gillette-branded products. This resulted in a triggering event for the Gillette indefinite-lived intangible asset, which caused us to perform an additional impairment assessment for that asset as of June 30, 2020. That assessment indicated that the fair value of the Gillette trade name approximated its carrying value. Accordingly, no impairment charge was recorded during the year ended June 30, 2020. Based on our annual impairment testing during the three months ended December 31, 2020, the Shave Care reporting unit's fair value continued to exceed its carrying value by more than 20% and the Gillette indefinite-lived intangible asset's fair value continued to approximate its carrying value.
The most significant assumptions utilized in the determination of the estimated fair values of the Shave Care reporting unit and the Gillette indefinite-lived intangible asset are the net sales and earnings growth rates (including residual growth rates) and discount rate. The residual growth rate represents the expected rate at which the reporting unit and Gillette brand are expected to grow beyond the shorter-term business planning period. The residual growth rate utilized in our fair value estimates is consistent with the reporting unit and brand operating plans and approximates expected long-term category market growth rates. The residual growth rate is dependent on overall market growth rates, the competitive environment, inflation, relative currency exchange rates and business activities that impact market share. As a result, the residual growth rate could be adversely impacted by a sustained deceleration in category growth, grooming habit changes, devaluation of currencies
against the U.S. dollar or an increased competitive environment. The discount rate, which is consistent with a weighted average cost of capital that is likely to be expected by a market participant, is based upon industry required rates of return, including consideration of both debt and equity components of the capital structure. Our discount rate may be impacted by adverse changes in the macroeconomic environment, volatility in the equity and debt markets or other country specific factors, such as further devaluation of currencies against the U.S. dollar. Spot rates as of the fair value measurement date are utilized in our fair value estimates for cash flows outside the U.S. Another key assumption in our fair value determination of the Gillette indefinite-lived intangible asset is the royalty rate, which is driven by historical and estimated future profitability of the underlying Gillette business. The royalty rate may be impacted by significant adverse changes in long-term operating margins.
While management can and has implemented strategies to address these events in the past, changes in operating plans or adverse changes in the future could reduce the underlying cash flows used to estimate fair values and could result in a decline in fair value that would trigger future impairment charges of the Shave Care reporting unit's goodwill and indefinite-lived intangibles.
The duration and severity of the pandemic could result in additional future impairment charges for the Shave Care reporting unit goodwill and the Gillette indefinite-lived intangible asset. While we have concluded that a triggering event did not occur during the quarter ended June 30, 2021, the Gillette indefinite-lived intangible asset is most susceptible to future impairment risk. Our assessment of the Gillette intangible asset assumes the net sales growth rates will begin to recover from the impact of the pandemic during the next fiscal year. There continues to be a high level of uncertainty relating to how the pandemic will evolve, how governments and consumers will react and progress on the distribution of vaccines. Accordingly, there continues to be risk related to this key assumption. A more prolonged pandemic recovery period could impact the assumptions utilized in the determination of the estimated fair values of Shave Care reporting unit and the Gillette indefinite-lived intangible asset that are significant enough to trigger an impairment. Net sales and earnings growth rates could be negatively impacted by more prolonged reductions or changes in demand for our shave care products, which may be caused by, among other things: the temporary inability of consumers to purchase our products due to illness, quarantine or other travel restrictions, financial hardship, changes in the use and frequency of grooming products or by shifts in demand away from one or more of our higher priced products to lower priced products. In addition, relative global and country/regional macroeconomic factors could result in additional and prolonged devaluation of other countries’ currencies relative to the U.S. dollar. Finally, the discount rate utilized in our valuation model could be impacted by changes in the underlying interest rates and risk premiums included in the determination of the cost of
The Procter & Gamble Company 31
capital. As of June 30, 2021, the carrying values of the Shave Care goodwill and the Gillette indefinite-lived intangible asset were $12.8 billion and $14.1 billion, respectively.
We performed a sensitivity analysis for the Shave Care reporting unit and the Gillette indefinite-lived intangible asset during our annual impairment testing, utilizing reasonably possible changes in the assumptions for the shorter-term and residual growth rates, the discount rate, and the royalty rate to demonstrate the potential impacts to the estimated fair values. The table below provides, in isolation, the estimated fair value impacts related to a 25 basis point increase in the discount rate, a 25 basis point decrease in our shorter-term and residual growth rates, or a 50 basis point decrease in our royalty rate, any of which, in isolation, would result in an impairment of the Gillette indefinite-lived intangible asset.
See Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion on goodwill and intangible asset impairment testing results.
New Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for recently adopted accounting pronouncements and recently issued accounting pronouncements not yet adopted as of June 30, 2021.
OTHER INFORMATION
Hedging and Derivative Financial Instruments
As a multinational company with diverse product offerings, we are exposed to market risks, such as changes in interest rates, currency exchange rates and commodity prices. We evaluate exposures on a centralized basis to take advantage of natural exposure correlation and netting. We leverage the Company's diversified portfolio of exposures as a natural hedge and prioritize operational hedging activities over financial market instruments. To the extent we choose to further manage volatility within our financing operations, as discussed below, we enter into various financial transactions which we account for using the applicable accounting guidance for derivative instruments and hedging activities. These financial transactions are governed by our policies covering acceptable counterparty exposure, instrument types and other hedging practices. See Note 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of our accounting policies for derivative instruments.
Derivative positions are monitored using techniques including market valuation, sensitivity analysis and value-at-risk modeling. The tests for interest rate, currency rate and
commodity derivative positions discussed below are based on the RiskManager™ value-at-risk model using a one-year horizon and a 95% confidence level. The model incorporates the impact of correlation (the degree to which exposures move together over time) and diversification (from holding multiple currency, commodity and interest rate instruments) and assumes that financial returns are normally distributed. Estimates of volatility and correlations of market factors are drawn from the RiskMetrics™ dataset as of June 30, 2021. In cases where data is unavailable in RiskMetrics™, a reasonable proxy is included.
Our market risk exposures relative to interest rates, currency rates and commodity prices, as discussed below, have not changed materially versus the previous reporting period. In addition, we are not aware of any facts or circumstances that would significantly impact such exposures in the near term.
Interest Rate Exposure on Financial Instruments. Interest rate swaps are used to hedge exposures to interest rate movement on underlying debt obligations. Certain interest rate swaps denominated in foreign currencies are designated to hedge exposures to currency exchange rate movements on our investments in foreign operations. These currency interest rate swaps are designated as hedges of the Company's foreign net investments.
Based on our interest rate exposure as of and during the year ended June 30, 2021, including derivative and other instruments sensitive to interest rates, we believe a near-term change in interest rates, at a 95% confidence level based on historical interest rate movements, would not materially affect our financial statements.
Currency Rate Exposure on Financial Instruments. Because we manufacture and sell products and finance operations in a number of countries throughout the world, we are exposed to the impact on revenue and expenses of movements in currency exchange rates. Corporate policy prescribes the range of allowable hedging activity. To manage the exchange rate risk associated with the financing of our operations, we primarily use forward contracts and currency swaps with maturities of less than 18 months.
Based on our currency rate exposure on derivative and other instruments as of and during the year ended June 30, 2021, we believe, at a 95% confidence level based on historical currency rate movements, the impact on such instruments of a near-term change in currency rates would not materially affect our financial statements.
Commodity Price Exposure on Financial Instruments. We use raw materials that are subject to price volatility caused by weather, supply conditions, political and economic variables and other unpredictable factors. We may use futures, options and swap contracts to manage the volatility related to the above exposures.
As of and during the years ended June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020, we did not have any financial commodity hedging activity.
32 The Procter & Gamble Company
Measures Not Defined By U.S. GAAP
In accordance with the SEC's Regulation S-K Item 10(e), the following provides definitions of the non-GAAP measures and the reconciliation to the most closely related GAAP measures. We believe that these measures provide useful perspective of underlying business trends (i.e., trends excluding non-recurring or unusual items) and results and provide a supplemental measure of year-on-year results. The non-GAAP measures described below are used by management in making operating decisions, allocating financial resources and for business strategy purposes. These measures may be useful to investors as they provide supplemental information about business performance and provide investors a view of our business results through the eyes of management. These measures are also used to evaluate senior management and are a factor in determining their at-risk compensation. These non-GAAP measures are not intended to be considered by the user in place of the related GAAP measures, but rather as supplemental information to our business results. These non-GAAP measures may not be the same as similar measures used by other companies due to possible differences in method and in the items or events being adjusted. These measures include:
Organic Sales Growth. Organic sales growth is a non-GAAP measure of sales growth excluding the impacts of acquisitions, divestitures and foreign exchange from year-over-year comparisons. We believe this measure provides investors with a supplemental understanding of underlying sales trends by providing sales growth on a consistent basis. This measure is used in assessing achievement of management goals for at-risk compensation.
The following tables provide a numerical reconciliation of organic sales growth to reported net sales growth:
(1) Acquisition & Divestiture Impact/Other includes the volume and mix impact of acquisitions and divestitures and rounding impacts necessary to reconcile net sales to organic sales.
Adjusted Free Cash Flow. Adjusted free cash flow is defined as operating cash flow less capital spending, tax payments related to the Merck OTC Consumer Healthcare acquisition in 2020 and transitional tax payments resulting from the U.S. Tax Act in 2021 and 2020 (the Company incurred a transitional tax liability of approximately $3.8 billion from the U.S. Tax Act, which is payable over a period of 8 years). Adjusted free cash flow represents the cash that the Company is able to generate after taking into account planned maintenance and asset expansion. We view adjusted free cash flow as an important measure because it is one factor used in determining the amount of cash available for dividends, share repurchases, acquisitions and other discretionary investments.
The following table provides a numerical reconciliation of adjusted free cash flow ($ millions):
(1) Adjustments to Operating Cash Flow include transitional tax payments resulting from the U.S. Tax Act of $225 and $215 in 2021 and 2020, respectively, and tax payments related to the Merck acquisition of $328 in 2020.
Adjusted Free Cash Flow Productivity. Adjusted free cash flow productivity is defined as the ratio of adjusted free cash flow to net earnings excluding the charges for early debt extinguishment (which are not considered part of our ongoing operations). We view adjusted free cash flow productivity as a useful measure to help investors understand P&G’s ability to generate cash. Adjusted free cash flow productivity is used by management in making operating decisions, in allocating financial resources and for budget planning purposes. This measure is used in assessing the achievement of management goals for at-risk compensation. The Company's long-term target is to generate annual adjusted free cash flow productivity at or above 90 percent.
The following table provides a numerical reconciliation of adjusted free cash flow productivity ($ millions):
The Procter & Gamble Company 33
Core EPS. Core EPS is a measure of the Company's diluted net earnings per share from continuing operations adjusted as indicated. Management views this non-GAAP measure as a useful supplemental measure of Company performance over time. Core EPS is also used in assessing the achievement of management goals for at-risk compensation. The table below provides a reconciliation of diluted net earnings per share to Core EPS, including the following reconciling items:
•Charges for early debt extinguishment: During fiscal year 2021, the Company recorded after tax charges of $427 million ($512 million before tax), due to the early extinguishment of certain long-term debt. These charges represent the difference between the reacquisition price and the par value of the debt extinguished.
•Incremental Restructuring: The Company has historically had an ongoing level of restructuring activities. Such activities have resulted in ongoing annual restructuring related charges of approximately $250 - $500 million before tax. Beginning in fiscal 2012, the Company had a strategic productivity and cost savings initiative that resulted in incremental restructuring charges through fiscal 2020. The adjustment to Core earnings includes only the restructuring costs above the normal recurring level of restructuring costs. In fiscal 2021, the Company incurred restructuring costs within our historical ongoing level.
We do not view the above items to be indicative of underlying business results and their exclusion from Core earnings measures provides a more comparable measure of year-on-year results. These items are also excluded when evaluating senior management in determining their at-risk compensation.
(1) Diluted net earnings per share are calculated on Net earnings attributable to Procter & Gamble.
CHANGE VERSUS YEAR AGO
CORE EPS 11 %