Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020 that appear elsewhere in this annual report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include but are not limited to those discussed below and elsewhere in this annual report, particularly in section Item 1A “Risk Factors” of this annual report.
Our audited consolidated financial statements are stated in United States dollars and are prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles.
Results of Operations
The following summary of our results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020.
Revenue for the year ended March 31, 2021 was $61,413,520 versus $130,138,574 for the year ended March 31, 2020. The Company’s revenues were mainly derived from the sale of marine scrubber units and related services. During the year ended March 31, 2021, the Company was in various stages of engineering, delivery, and commissioning of 69 (2020 - 107) marine scrubber units which contributed to revenue of $60,945,254 (2020 - $129,688,156). The decrease in revenue was due to a major client deferring 32 marine scrubber units to 2021. 13 of these units have been cancelled. The remainder are still postponed with an option to either proceed or cancel. Engin contributed to revenue of $468,266 from providing design and engineering services for CSP contracts during the year ended March 31, 2021 (March 31, 2020 - $450,418).
The gross profit margin for the year ended March 31, 2021 was approximately 35% (2020 - 40%).
Due to the current Covid-19 pandemic and the lower than anticipated oil price spread, expenses for the year ended March 31, 2021, were $24,321,962 as compared to $41,529,313 for the year ended March 31, 2020 as the Company reduced its operations team and closed its Norway subsidiary. Management and technical consulting fees decreased significantly also due to the Norway office closure and lower sales. Management and technical consulting fees were comprised of fees paid to third parties for business development efforts, advisory services, as well as amounts paid to the directors of the Company. Advertising, office-based costs, alongside travel costs also decreased due to reduced business activities. Professional fees were mainly comprised of legal, audit, and accounting costs. During the last 12 months, there were more professional fees incurred due to increased complexity of business requirements and acquisition work. Depreciation and amortization expenses increased mainly due to property, equipment, and intangible assets recorded from Engin acquisition in December 2019. Additionally, the delivery of units resulted in a warranty provision being recorded for possible maintenance and claim issues within a prescribed period. For the year ended March 31, 2021, the Company recorded a warranty expense of $1,228,092 (2020 - $1,630,541) related to the estimated expectation of warranty costs.
During the year ended March 31, 2021, we recorded a gain of $3,240,250 (¥22,000,000) related to the re-evaluation of the probability of the contingent consideration associated with the Engin acquisition. The reason was that the required conditions for the final payment were not met by the selling party.
During the year ended March 31, 2021, due to the Covid-19 pandemic conditions and the narrowing oil price spread, we decided to cease operations of our Norway subsidiary. As a result, a gain on disposition of the Norway subsidiary of $239,174 was recognized.
For the year ended March 31, 2021, our company had a net income of $1,181,078 ($0.03 per share) compared to net income of $10,381,420 ($0.23 per share) for the year ended March 31, 2020.
Our financial results for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020 are summarized as follows:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Working Capital Deficit
Cash Flows
As of March 31, 2021, we had $23,436,417 in cash, $41,228,286 in total current assets, $41,180,588 in total current liabilities, and working capital of $47,698, compared to a working capital deficit of $3,530,982 as at March 31, 2020. The Company’s working capital deficit improved as we closed Norway office and the contingent payable for Engin acquisition was removed due to payment condition not being met. The Company’s contract assets, contract liabilities and accruals changed significantly from period to period, depending on the status of equipment deliveries, customer receipts and payments to third party manufacturers.
During the year ended March 31, 2021, we received $3,402,719 from operating activities, whereas we received $23,449,250 on operating activities for the year ended March 31, 2020. Operating cash flows for the year ended March 31, 2021 primarily consist of deposits and instalments received from customers and our corresponding manufacturing outlays. During the year ended March 31, 2021, the company was in various stages of engineering, delivery, and commissioning of 69 (2020 - 107) marine scrubber units. We completed our revenue-generating activities on substantially all of these vessels in 2021.
During the year ended March 31, 2021, we used $1,559,728 in investing activities, whereas we used $4,247,690 in investing activities during the year ended March 31, 2020. Our investing activities for the year ended March 31, 2021 were primarily related to the acquisition of Innoergy, Richborough, and of office equipment.
During the year ended March 31, 2021, we received $1,750 related to financing activities, whereas we spent $614,546 from financing activities during the year ended March 31, 2020. Our financing activity for the year ended March 31, 2021 related to exercise of stock options.
Anticipated Cash Requirements
We do not anticipate requiring additional funds to fund our budgeted expenses over the next 12 months. However, if we do these funds may be raised through asset sales, equity financing, debt financing, or other sources, which may result in further dilution in the equity ownership of our shares.
Our cash requirement estimates may change significantly depending on the nature of our business activities and our ability to raise capital from our shareholders or other sources.
We currently have office locations in the United States, Canada, United Kingdom, China, Hong Kong and Australia. We have hired staff in various regions and rely heavily upon the use of contractors and consultants. Our general and administrative expenses for the year will consist primarily of technical consultants, management, salaries and wages, professional fees, transfer agent fees, bank and interest charges and general office expenses. The professional fees relate to matters such as contract review, business acquisitions, regulatory filings, patent maintenance, and general legal, accounting and auditing fees.
Should we require additional funding over the next twelve months, we would intend to raise new cash requirements from private placements, shareholder loans or possibly a registered public offering (either self-underwritten or through a broker-dealer). If we are unsuccessful in raising enough money through such efforts, we may review other financing possibilities such as bank loans. At this time, we do not have a commitment from any broker-dealer to provide us with financing. There is no assurance that any financing will be available to us or if available, on terms that will be acceptable to us.
As of March 31, 2021, we had $23,436,417 in cash on hand. Our realized and anticipated profits derived from sales of ENVI marine units plus anticipated sales of products and services in our new Batteries and Solar businesses are expected to fund our planned expenditure levels. After careful consideration we believe current operations, anticipated deliveries and expected profit from such deliveries to be sufficient to cover expected cash operating expenses over the next 12 months.
Going Concern
Our financial statements for the year ended March 31, 2021 have been prepared on a going concern basis.
The assessment of the liquidity and going concern requires the Company to make judgments about the existence of conditions or events that raise substantial doubt about the ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date that the consolidated financial statements are issued. This includes judgments about the Company's future activities and the timing thereof and estimates of future cash flows. Significant assumptions used in the Company's forecasted model of liquidity include forecasted sales, costs, and capital expenditures. Changes in the assumptions could have a material impact on the forecasted liquidity and going concern assessment.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no significant off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to stockholders.
Contractual Obligations
As a “smaller reporting company”, we are not required to provide tabular disclosure obligations.
Critical Accounting Policies
Use of Estimates
The preparation of these consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. The Company regularly evaluates estimates and assumptions related to the useful life and recoverability of property and equipment and intangible assets, contract assets and liabilities associated with revenue contracts in progress, contingent consideration on asset acquisition, warranty accruals, going concern, and deferred income tax asset valuation allowances. Our company bases its estimates and assumptions on current facts, historical experience and various other factors that it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the accrual of costs and expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources. The actual results experienced by our company may differ materially and adversely from our company’s estimates. To the extent there are material differences between the estimates and the actual results, future results of operations will be affected.
Intangible Assets
Intangible assets are stated at cost less accumulated amortization and are comprised of patents, customer relationships, plant designs, and software licensing. The patents, which were acquired in 2013, are being amortized on a straight-line over the estimated useful life of 17 years. The other intangible assets, which were acquired in December 2019, are being amortized according to the following table. Intangible assets are reviewed annually for impairment.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets
Our company reviews long-lived assets such as property and equipment and intangible assets with finite useful lives for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstance indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. If the total of the expected undiscounted future cash flows is less than the carrying amount of the asset, a loss is recognized for the excess of the carrying amount over the fair value of the asset.
Revenue Recognition
The Company derives revenue from the sale of emission control equipment and related services as well as providing design and engineering services for Concentrated Solar Power.
Irrespective of the line of business described above, revenue is recognized when control of products or services is transferred to customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to be entitled to in exchange for those promised products or services.
The Company determines revenue recognition through the following five steps:
● identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer;
● identification of the performance obligations in the contract;
● determination of the transaction price;
● allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
● recognition of revenue when, or as, performance obligations are satisfied.
The Company accounts for a contract when it has approval and commitment from both parties, the rights of the parties are identified, payment terms are identified, the contract has commercial substance and collectability of consideration is probable.
As our contracts with customers include multiple performance obligations, judgment is required to determine whether performance obligations specified in these contracts are distinct and should be accounted for as separate revenue transactions for recognition purposes. For such arrangements, revenue is allocated to each performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price. Standalone selling prices are generally determined based on the prices charged to customers or using expected cost-plus margin.
In the case of settlement agreement with customers where no continued performance obligation is required, the Company recognizes revenue based on consideration settled according to the agreement.
Contracts signed with one customer has a significant financing component. The Company provides design, production, and installation services of scrubber units to this customer. 20% of the contract price is payable at least 6 calendar months prior to the dry dock date. The remaining 80% is payable in 24 equal monthly instalments starting at the end of the calendar month following the installation date on a vessel-by-vessel basis. As 80% of the contract price is payable after the last performance obligation towards the scrubber, a significant financing component is separated from revenue and interest income at 5.4% is recorded when payments are received from the customer.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivables consist of trade receivables arising in the normal course of business. The Company establishes an allowance for doubtful accounts that reflects the Company’s best estimate of probable losses inherent in the accounts receivable balance. The Company determines the allowance based on known troubled accounts, historical experience, age, financial information that is publicly accessible and other currently available evidence.
Financial Instruments and Fair Value Measurements
ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures” requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value. ASC 820 establishes a fair value hierarchy based on the level of independent, objective evidence surrounding the inputs used to measure fair value. A financial instrument’s categorization within the fair value hierarchy is based upon the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value measurement. ASC 820 prioritizes the inputs into three levels that may be used to measure fair value:
Level
Level 1 applies to assets or liabilities for which there are quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level
Level 2 applies to assets or liabilities for which there are inputs other than quoted prices that are observable for the asset or liability such as quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets; quoted prices for identical assets or liabilities in markets with insufficient volume or infrequent transactions (less active markets); or model-derived valuations in which significant inputs are observable or can be derived principally from, or corroborated by, observable market data.
Level
Level 3 applies to assets or liabilities for which there are unobservable inputs to the valuation methodology that are significant to the measurement of the fair value of the assets or liabilities.
The Company’s financial instruments consist principally of cash, short term investments, accounts receivable, lease receivable, amounts due from and to related parties, accounts payable and accrued liabilities, and operating lease liability. The recorded values of all financial instruments are at amortized cost which approximate their current fair values because of their nature and respective maturity dates or durations.
Stock-based compensation
The Company records share-based payment transactions for acquiring goods and services from employees and nonemployees in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation, using the fair value method. All transactions in which goods or services are the consideration received for the issuance of equity instruments are measured at grant-date fair value of the equity instruments issued.
The Company uses the Black-Scholes option pricing model to calculate the fair value of stock-based awards. This model is affected by the Company’s stock price as well as assumptions regarding a number of subjective variables. These subjective variables include but are not limited to the Company’s expected stock price volatility over the term of the awards, and actual and projected employee stock option exercise behaviors. The value of the portion of the award that is ultimately expected to vest is recognized as an expense in the consolidated statement of operations over the requisite service period. The majority of the Company’s awards vest upon issuance.
Subsequent to the adoption of ASU 2018-07 - Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting, the accounting for employee and non-employee stock options is now aligned.
Contract Liabilities and Contract Assets
Contractual arrangements with customers for the sale of a scrubber unit generally provide for deposits and instalments through the procurement and design phases of equipment manufacturing. Amounts received from customers, which are not yet recorded as revenues under the Company’s revenue recognition policy are presented as contract liabilities.
Similarly, contractual arrangements with suppliers and manufacturers normally involved with the manufacturing of scrubber units may require advances and deposits at various stages of the manufacturing process. Payments to our manufacturing partners are recorded as contract assets until the equipment is manufactured to specifications and accepted by the customer.
The Company presents the contract liabilities and contract assets on its balance sheet when one of the parties to the revenue contract has performed before the other.
Warranty Provision
The Company reserves a 2% warranty provision on the completion of a contract following the commissioning of marine scrubbers, there being a number of milestone-based stage payments. The specific terms and conditions of those warranties vary depending upon the product sold and geography of sale. The Company’s product warranties generally start from the delivery date and continue for up to twelve to twenty-four months. The Company provides warranties to customers for the design, materials, and installation of scrubber units. The Company has a back-to-back manufacturing guarantee from its major supplier, which covers materials, production, and installation. Factors that affect the Company’s warranty obligation include product failure rates, anticipated hours of product operations and costs of repair or replacement in correcting product failures. These factors are estimates that may change based on new information that becomes available each period. Similarly, the Company also accrues the estimated costs to address reliability repairs on products no longer in warranty when, in the Company’s judgment, and in accordance with a specific plan developed by the Company, it is prudent to provide such repairs. The Company intends to assess the adequacy of recorded warranty liabilities quarterly and adjusts the liability as necessary.
Lease
Leases classified as operating leases, where the Company is the lessee, are recorded as lease liabilities based on the present value of minimum lease payments over the lease term, discounted using the lessor’s rate implicit in the lease for each individual lease arrangement or the Company’s incremental borrowing rate, if the lessor’s implicit rate is not readily determinable. Corresponding right-of-use assets are recognized consisting of the lease liabilities, initial direct costs and any lease incentive payments. Lease liabilities are drawn down as lease payments are made and right-of-use assets are depreciated over the term of the lease. Operating lease expenses are recognized over the term of the lease, consisting of interest accrued on the lease liability and depreciation of the right-of-use asset.