ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Except for the audited historical information contained herein, this report specifies forward-looking statements of management of the Company within the meaning of Section 27a of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21e of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (“forward-looking statements”) including, without limitation, forward-looking statements regarding the Company’s expectations, beliefs, intentions and future strategies. Forward-looking statements are statements that estimate the happening of future events and are not based on historical facts. Forward- looking statements may be identified by the use of forward-looking terminology, such as “could”, “may”, “will”, “expect”, “shall”, “estimate”, “anticipate”, “probable”, “possible”, “should”, “continue”, “intend” or similar terms, variations of those terms or the negative of those terms. The forward-looking statements specified in this report have been compiled by management of the Company on the basis of assumptions made by management and considered by management to be reasonable. Future operating results of the Company, however, are impossible to predict and no representation, guaranty, or warranty is to be inferred from those forward-looking statements. The assumptions used for purposes of the forward-looking statements specified in this report represent estimates of future events and are subject to uncertainty as to possible changes in economic, legislative, industry, and other circumstances. As a result, the identification and interpretation of data and other information and their use in developing and selecting assumptions from and among reasonable alternatives require the exercise of judgment. To the extent that the assumed events do not occur, the outcome may vary substantially from anticipated or projected results, and, accordingly, no opinion is expressed on the achievability of those forward-looking statements. In addition, those forward-looking statements have been compiled as of the date of this report and should be evaluated with consideration of any changes occurring after the date of this report. No assurance can be given that any of the assumptions relating to the forward-looking statements specified in this report are accurate and the Company assumes no obligation to update any such forward-looking statements.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS FOR THE YEARS ENDED JUNE 30, 2019 AND JUNE 30, 2018
Revenues:
The Company received $800,000 from European Plastic Joint Stock Company and $466,634 from Saigon Pho Palace Joint Stock Company, totaling $1,266,634, during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2019 for participation in the energy and real estate compartments of our Philux Global Funds, respectively; however, we did not recognize these amounts as revenues but recorded as sub-fund obligations until these compartments are activated, as compared to $1,672,659 in total revenues for the year ended June 30, 2018.
Operating Expenses:
The Company incurred total operating expenses of $2,410,213 for the year ended June 30, 2019, as compared to $$1,902,966 for the year ended June 30, 2018. The increase of $507,247 includes the recognition of $462,000 as R&D expenses in connection with the Granite mining claims of American Pacific Resources, Inc., an increase of $6,928 in travel expenses, an increase of $14,156 in advertising, and an increase of $25,315 in filing fees between the two fiscal periods.
Income (loss) from operations:
The Company had a loss from operations of $2,410,213 for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2019 as compared to a loss from operations of $230,307 for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2018. This represents an increase of $2,179,906 in loss from operations during the current fiscal year as compared to that of the precious year. This was mainly due to the fact that the Company did not recognize any revenues from sub-fund participation partners while simultaneously incurring comparably more expenses during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2019.
Other income (expense)
The Company had a net other expense of $519,448 for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2019 as compared to a net other expense of $1,796,013 for the prior year. This was primarily due to the fact the Company recognized a total of $2,514,700 as other income as a result of reduction of $61,939 in derivative liabilities in connection with convertible promissory notes, derecognition of other liabilities in the amount of $1,742,891 due to inactivity and statutory limits, and adjustment of discount on convertible notes and correction of value of common stock issued in the amount of $709,870 while incurring $1,897,979 in interest expense and $1,136,169 in other expenses during the current fiscal year.
Net income (loss):
The Company had a net loss of $2,929,661 for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2019, as compared to a net loss of $2,026,320 for the prior year, representing an increase of $903,341 in net loss between the two fiscal years. The net loss per share based on the basic and diluted weighted average number of common shares outstanding for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2019 was $(0.00) as compared to $(0.03) for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2018.
CASH FLOWS
We had in cash and cash equivalents of $71,768 as of June 30, 2019, as compared to $13,937 in cash and cash equivalents as of June 30, 2018, respectively.
Net cash used in our operating activities was $244,324 for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2019 as compared to that of $2,653,481 for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2018, respectively. The underlying reasons for the decrease in net cash used operating activities between the two periods were mainly due to a total decrease in other assets and prepaid expenses in the amount of $2,011,062, an increase of liabilities in the amount of $385,640 and a net loss from operations of $2,929,661 in the current fiscal year as compared to that of $2,2026,320 the previous fiscal year.
There was no cash provided by or used in investing activities during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2019 as compared to a combination of cash and promissory note used investing activities of $25,005,000 for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2018, respectively.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $302,154 for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2019 as compared to cash provided by financing activities of $27,634,050 for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2018, respectively. The net cash provided by financing activities for the current fiscal year came from loans from officers and directors in the amount of $298,420 and $3,734 from stock issuance for cash.
HISTORICAL FINANCING ARRANGEMENTS
SHORT TERM NOTES PAYABLE AND ISSUANCE OF COMMON STOCK
In the course of its business, the Company has obtained short-term loans from individuals and institutional investors and from time to time raised money by issuing restricted common stock of the Company under the auspices of Rule 144. These notes bear interest rates ranging from 0% to 36% per annum. (Notes 11 & 15).
CONVERTIBLE PROMISSORY NOTES
The Company has also from time to time issued convertible promissory notes to various private investment funds for short-term working capital and special projects. Typically these notes bear interest rates from 5% to 12% per annum, mature within one year, are convertible to common stock of the Company at a discount ranging from 42% to 50%, and may be repaid within 180 days at a prepayment premium ranging from 130% to 150%. (Note 11)
COMPANY’S PLAN OF OPERATION FOR THE FOLLOWING 12 MONTHS
In the next twelve months the Company’s goals are to create a number of sub-funds under PHILUX Global Funds SCA, SICAV-RAIF for investment in real estate, renewable energy, agriculture, infrastructure, and healthcare, as well as develop the Asia Diamond Exchange in Vietnam. In addition, the Company will continue to carry out its merger and acquisition program by acquiring target companies for roll-up strategy and also invest in special situations. Moreover, we will provide advisory and consulting services to international clients through our wholly owned subsidiary PHILUX Capital Advisors, Inc. (formerly known as PHI Capital Holdings, Inc.)
FINANCIAL PLANS
MATERIAL CASH REQUIREMENTS: We must raise substantial amounts of capital to fulfill our plans for PHILUX Global Funds and for acquisitions. We intend to use equity, debt and project financing to meet our capital needs for acquisitions and investments.
Management has taken action and formulated plans to meet the Company’s operating needs through June 30, 2021 and beyond. The working capital cash requirements for the next 12 months are expected to be generated from operations, sale of marketable securities and additional financing. The Company plans to generate revenues from its consulting services, merger and acquisition advisory services, and acquisitions of target companies with cash flows.
AVAILABLE FUTURE FINANCING ARRANGEMENTS: The Company may use various sources of funds, including short-term loans, long-term debt, equity capital, and project financing as may be necessary. The Company believes it will be able to secure the required capital to implement its business plan.
EQUITY LINE FACILITY
On March 6, 2017, PHI Group, Inc., a Nevada corporation (the “Company”) and Azure Capital, a Massachusetts Corporation (the “Investor”) entered into an Investment Agreement (the “Investment Agreement”) and a Registration Rights Agreement (the “Registration Rights Agreement”), each dated March 6, 2017 between the Company and the Investor.
Pursuant to the Investment Agreement, the Investor committed to purchase, subject to certain restrictions and conditions, up to $10,000,000 worth of the Company’s common stock, over a period of 36 months from the effectiveness of the registration statement registering the resale of shares purchased by the Investor pursuant to the Investment Agreement. The Company agreed to initially reserve 20,000,000 shares of its Common Stock for issuance to the Investor pursuant to the Investment Agreement. In the event the Company cannot register a sufficient number of shares of its Common Stock for issuance pursuant to the Investment Agreement, the Company will use its best efforts to authorize and reserve for issuance the number of shares required for the Company to perform its obligations in connection with the Investment Agreement as soon as reasonable practical.
The Company may in its discretion draw on the facility from time to time, as and when the Company determines appropriate in accordance with the terms and conditions of the Investment Agreement. The maximum number of shares that the Company is entitled to put to the Investor in any one draw down notice shall not exceed shares with a purchase price of $250,000 or 200% of the average daily volume (U.S. market only) of the Company’s Common Stock for the three (3) Trading Days prior to the applicable put notice date multiplied by the average of the three (3) daily closing prices immediately preceding the put date, calculated in accordance with the Investment Agreement. The Company may deliver a notice for a subsequent put from time to time, after the pricing period for the prior put has been completed.
The purchase price shall be set at ninety-four percent (94%) of the lowest daily volume weighted average price (VWAP) of the Company’s common stock during the five (5) consecutive trading days immediately following the put notice date. On each put notice submitted to the Investor by the Company, the Company shall specify a suspension price for that put. In the event the price of Company’s Common Stock falls below the suspension price, the put shall be temporarily suspended. The put shall resume at such time the price of the Company’s Common Stock is above the suspension price, provided the dates for the pricing period for that particular put are still valid. In the event the pricing period has been complete, any shares above the suspension price due to the Investor shall be sold to the Investor by the Company at the suspension price under the terms of the Investment Agreement. The suspension price for a put may not be changed by the Company once submitted to the Investor.
There are put restrictions applied on days between the draw down notice date and the closing date with respect to that particular put. During such time, the Company shall not be entitled to deliver another draw down notice. In addition, the Investor will not be obligated to purchase shares if the Investor’s total number of shares beneficially held at that time would exceed 4.99% of the number of shares of the Company’s common stock as determined in accordance with Rule 13d-1(j) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. In addition, the Company is not permitted to draw on the facility unless there is an effective registration statement to cover the resale of the shares.
The Investment Agreement also contains customary representations and warranties of each of the parties. The assertions embodied in those representations and warranties were made for purposes of the Investment Agreement and are subject to qualifications and limitations agreed to by the parties in connection with negotiating the terms of the Investment Agreement. The Investment Agreement further provides that the Company and the Investor are each entitled to customary indemnification from the other for, among other things, any losses or liabilities they may suffer as a result of any breach by the other party of any provisions of the Investment Agreement or Registration Rights Agreement (as defined below). Investor should read the Investment Agreement together with the other information concerning the Company that the Company publicly files in reports and statements with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”).
Pursuant to the terms of the Registration Rights Agreement, the Company is obligated to file one or more registrations statements with the SEC within twenty-one (21) days after the date of the Registration Rights Agreement to register the resale by the Investor of the shares of common stock issued or issuable under the Investment Agreement. In addition, the Company is obligated to use all commercially reasonable efforts to have the registration statement declared effective by the SEC within 90 days after the registration statement is filed.
This Investment Agreement was amended on August 3, 2017 to allow for the reservation of 65,445,000 shares of the Company’s Common Stock for issuance to the Investor pursuant to the corrected Investment Agreement.
The Company has filed a S-1 Registration Statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission to include 7,936,600 shares of its Common Stock for issuance in connection with the first tranche of the Equity Line Facility. The S-1 Registration Statement, as amended, was declared effective by the Securities and Exchange Commission on January 11, 2018. As of the day of this report, the Company has not accessed the Equity Line Facility for funding.