Item 7. Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes and other financial information appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements based upon current plans, expectations and beliefs that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. Our fiscal year ends January 31. References to fiscal 2021, 2020, and 2019 refer to the fiscal years ended January 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019.
Basis of Presentation
This management's discussion and analysis discusses our financial condition and results of operations for the years ended January 31, 2021 and 2020. Please refer to Part II, Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended January 31, 2020 for a comparison of the year ended January 31, 2020 to the year ended January 31, 2019.
Financial Highlights
Fiscal 2021
•Total revenue increased 19% to $148.7 million in fiscal 2021, compared with $124.8 million in fiscal 2020.
•Net loss was $27.3 million in fiscal 2021, compared with $20.3 million in fiscal 2020.
•Adjusted EBITDA was positive $3.8 million in fiscal 2021, compared with positive $4.8 million in fiscal 2020.
•Cash provided by operating activities was $2.9 million in fiscal 2021, compared with $0.8 million in fiscal 2020.
•Free cash flow was negative $15.7 million in fiscal 2021 compared with negative $11.5 million in fiscal 2020.
For a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net loss and free cash flow to cash provided by operating activities, and for more information as to how we define and calculate such measures, see the section below titled “Non-GAAP financial measures.”
Overview
We are a leading provider of comprehensive software solutions that transform the healthcare experience by engaging patients in their care and enabling healthcare provider organizations to optimize operational efficiency, improve profitability and enhance clinical care and safety. As evidenced in industry survey reports from KLAS, we have been recognized as a leader based on our integration capabilities with healthcare provider organizations, the broad adoption of our patient intake functionalities, our response to the COVID-19 pandemic and by overall client satisfaction. Through the SaaS-based Phreesia Platform, which we refer to as the Phreesia Platform or our Platform, we offer provider clients a robust suite of solutions to manage the patient intake process and an integrated payments solution for secure processing of patient payments. Our Platform also provides life sciences companies with an engagement channel for targeted and direct communication with patients.
We serve an array of healthcare provider organizations of all sizes, ranging from single-specialty practices, which include internal and family medicine, urology, dermatology, and orthopedics, to large, multi-specialty groups and health systems. Our life sciences revenue is generated from clients in the pharmaceutical, biotechnology and medical device industries.
We derive revenue from (i) subscription fees from healthcare provider organizations for access to the Phreesia Platform and related professional services fees, (ii) payment processing fees based on levels of patient payment volume processed through the Phreesia Platform and (iii) fees from life sciences companies to deliver marketing
content to patients using the Phreesia Platform. We have strong visibility into our business as the majority of our revenue is derived from recurring subscription fees and re-occurring payment processing fees.
We market and sell our products and services to provider clients throughout the United States using a direct sales organization. Our demand generation team develops content and identifies prospects that our sales development team researches and qualifies to generate high-grade, actionable sales programs. Our direct sales force executes on these qualified sales programs, partnering with client services to ensure prospects are educated on the breadth of our capabilities and demonstrable value proposition, with the goal of attracting and retaining clients and expanding their use of our Platform over time. Most of our Platform solutions are contracted pursuant to annual, auto-renewing agreements. Our sales typically involve competitive processes and sales cycles have, on average, varied in duration from three months to six months, depending on the size of the potential client. In addition, through Phreesia University (Phreesia’s in-house training program), events, client conferences and webinars, we help our provider clients optimize their businesses and, as a result, support client retention.
We also sell products and services to pharmaceutical brands and advertising agencies through our direct sales and
marketing teams.
Since our inception, we have not marketed or sold our products internationally. Accordingly, all of our revenue from historical periods has come from the United States, and our current strategy is to continue to focus our sales efforts within the United States.
Our revenue growth has been primarily organic and reflects our significant addition of new provider clients and increased revenue from existing clients. New provider clients are defined as clients that go live in the applicable period and existing provider clients are defined as clients that go live in any period before the applicable period.
Recent developments
COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the ongoing outbreak of a novel strain of coronavirus (COVID-19) a pandemic and the United States declared a national emergency with respect to COVID-19. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic has been widespread and rapidly evolving, and has led to the implementation of various responses over the last year, including government-imposed quarantines, travel restrictions, business and school closures, and other public health safety measures. During the last few months, several vaccines for COVID-19 received FDA approval and are currently being administered across the country. Despite growing vaccination rates, we believe COVID-19 will continue to impact the normal operations of our clients, which are primarily healthcare providers. Because our business relies, in part, on the growth and success of our clients, any disruption to our clients' operations will impact our revenue as follows:
•Subscription and related services: Disruptions to provider operations impact our subscription and related services revenue because of disruptions to sales processes and client implementations.
•Payment processing: Any decline in non-essential and elective patient visits directly impacts the revenue we receive from payment processing tools.
•Life sciences: Because our life sciences revenue is driven by the number of patients receiving targeted messages, a decline in patient visits may impact our revenue earned through patient engagement.
During the third quarter of fiscal 2021, patient visits returned to pre-pandemic levels as restrictions were lifted. During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, patient visits remained stable despite a surge in COVID-19 cases. We have seen positive trends as a result of our ability to use our Platform and solutions to assist our healthcare provider clients as they implement new safety protocols in order to continue to see patients, including minimizing contact during intake of patients, mobile check-in, transitioning patients to telehealth visits and enabling providers to screen patients for COVID-19 risk factors. Our COVID-19 screening module was used in over 45 million patient screenings during fiscal 2021. In addition to patient screenings, health care provider clients are also using our COVID-19 Vaccination Management Solution to manage vaccine delivery and identify vaccine-hesitant patients.
Given the unknown timeline and the near-term uncertainty of COVID-19's impact on our business, there continues to be uncertainty as to the extent to which the global COVID-19 pandemic may adversely impact our business operations, financial performance, and results of operations at this time.
Acquisition of QueueDr
On January 8, 2021, we acquired QueueDr Inc. (QueueDr), a SaaS technology company. Over time, we believe the underlying QueueDr technology will enhance our appointments solutions and the overall value of the Phreesia platform to healthcare providers. The total consideration for the acquisition consists of $5.8 million in cash, $2.1 million of liabilities incurred and $2.2 million in performance-related contingent payments. See Note 17 - Acquisitions in Part II - Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding the acquisition of QueueDr.
Key Metrics
We regularly review the following key metrics to measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate financial projections, make strategic business decisions and assess working capital needs.
•Provider clients. We define provider clients as the average number of healthcare provider organizations that generate revenue each month during the applicable period. In cases where we act as a subcontractor providing white-label services to our partner's clients, we treat the contractual relationship as a single provider client. We believe growth in the number of provider clients is a key indicator of the performance of our business and depends, in part, on our ability to successfully develop and market our Platform to healthcare provider organizations that are not yet clients. While growth in the number of provider clients is an important indicator of expected revenue growth, it also informs our management of the areas of our business that will require further investment to support expected future provider client growth. For example, as the number of provider clients increases, we may need to add to our customer support team and invest to maintain effectiveness and performance of our Platform and software for our provider clients and their patients.
•Average revenue per provider client. We define average revenue per provider client as the total subscription and related services and payment processing revenue generated from provider clients in a given period divided by the average number of provider clients that generate revenue each month during that same period. We are focused on continually delivering value to our provider clients and believe that our ability to increase average revenue per provider client is an indicator of the long-term value of the Phreesia platform.
Additional Information
•Patient payment volume. We believe that patient payment volume is an indicator of both the underlying health of our provider clients’ businesses and the continuing shift of healthcare costs to patients. We measure patient payment volume as the total dollar volume of transactions between our provider clients and their patients utilizing our payment platform, including via credit and debit cards that we process as a payment facilitator as well as cash and check payments and credit and debit transactions for which Phreesia acts as a gateway to other payment processors.
•Payment facilitator volume percentage. We define payment facilitator volume percentage as the volume of credit and debit card patient payment volume that we process as a payment facilitator as a percentage of total patient payment volume. Payment facilitator volume is a major driver of our payment processing revenue.
Results of operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented and as a percentage of revenue for those periods:
Components of statements of operations
Revenue
We generate revenue primarily from providing an integrated SaaS-based software and payment platform for the healthcare industry. We derive revenue from subscription fees and related services generated from our provider clients for access to the Phreesia Platform, payment processing fees based on the levels of patient payment volume processed through the Phreesia Platform, and from digital marketing revenue from life sciences companies to reach, educate and communicate with patients when they are most receptive and actively seeking care.
Our total revenue consists of the following:
•Subscription and related services. We primarily generate subscription fees from our provider clients based on the number of providers that subscribe to and utilize the Phreesia Platform. Our provider clients are typically billed monthly in arrears, though in some instances, provider clients may opt to be billed quarterly or annually in advance. Subscription fees are typically auto-debited from provider clients’ accounts every month. As we target and add larger enterprise provider clients, these clients may choose to contract differently than our typical per provider subscription model. To the extent we charge in an alternative manner with larger enterprise provider clients, we expect that such a pricing model will recur and, combined with our per provider subscription fees, will increase as a percentage of our total revenue.
In addition, we receive certain fees from provider clients for professional services associated with our implementation services as well as travel and expense reimbursements, shipping and handling fees, sales of hardware (PhreesiaPads and Arrivals Kiosks), on-site support and training.
•Payment processing fees. We generate revenue from payment processing fees based on the number of transactions and the levels of patient payment volume processed through the Phreesia Platform. Payment processing fees are generally calculated as a percentage of the total transaction dollar value processed and/or a fee per transaction. Credit and debit patient payment volume processed through our payment facilitator model represented 81% and 82% of our patient payment volume in fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively. The remainder of our patient payment volume is composed of credit and debit transactions for which Phreesia acts as a gateway to another payment processor, and cash and check transactions.
•Life sciences. We generate revenue from the sale of digital marketing solutions to life sciences companies. As we expand our provider client base, we increase the number of new patients we can reach to deliver targeted marketing content on behalf of our life sciences clients.
Cost of revenue (excluding depreciation and amortization)
Our cost of revenue primarily consists of personnel costs, including salaries, benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation for implementation and technical support, and costs to verify insurance eligibility and benefits, infrastructure costs to operate our Platform such as hosting fees and fees paid to various third-party partners for access to their technology.
Payment processing expense
Payment processing expense consists primarily of interchange fees set by payment card networks and that are ultimately paid to the card-issuing financial institution, assessment fees paid to payment card networks, and fees paid to third-party payment processors and gateways. Payment processing expense may increase as a percentage of payment processing revenue if card networks raise pricing for interchange and assessment fees or if we reduce pricing to our clients.
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing expense consists primarily of personnel costs, including salaries, benefits, bonuses, stock-based compensation and commission costs for our sales and marketing personnel. Sales and marketing expense also includes costs for advertising, promotional and other marketing activities, as well as certain fees paid to various third-party partners for sales and lead generation. Advertising is expensed as incurred.
Research and development
Research and development expense consists of costs to develop our products and services that do not meet the criteria for capitalization as internal-use software. These costs consist primarily of personnel costs, including salaries, benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation for our development personnel. Research and development expense also includes product management, life sciences analytics costs, third-party partner fees and third-party consulting fees, offset by any internal-use software development cost capitalized during the same period.
General and administrative
General and administrative expense consists primarily of personnel costs, including salaries, benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation for our executive, finance, legal, security, human resources, information technology and other administrative personnel. General and administrative expense also includes consulting, legal, security, accounting services and allocated overhead. We expect general and administrative expense to continue to increase in absolute dollars as we grow our operations and continue to operate as a public company, although we expect such expense to begin to decline as a percentage of total revenue over time.
Depreciation
Depreciation represents depreciation expense for PhreesiaPads and Arrivals Kiosks, data center and other computer hardware, purchased computer software, furniture and fixtures and leasehold improvements.
Amortization
Amortization primarily represents amortization of our capitalized internal-use software related to the Phreesia Platform as well as amortization of acquired intangible assets.
Other income (expense), net
Our other expense and income line items consist of the following:
•Other income (expense), net. Other income (expense), net consists of foreign currency-related gains and losses, losses on extinguishment of debt and other miscellaneous income (expense).
•Change in fair value of warrant liability. Prior to our initial public offering, the Company had preferred stock warrants that were marked to market based on third-party valuations and the change in fair value was recorded in other income (expense), net. Upon the closing of our IPO, the outstanding warrants to purchase shares of preferred stock automatically converted into warrants to purchase shares of common stock. Upon such conversion, we reclassified the warrants to equity and recorded the then current value of the warrant liability on the date of reclassification to additional paid-in-capital, a component of stockholders’ equity.
•Interest income. Interest income consists of interest earned on our cash and cash equivalent balances. Interest income has not been material to our operations to date.
•Interest expense. Interest expense consists primarily of the interest incurred on our financing obligations as well as amortization of discounts and deferred financing costs.
(Provision for) benefit from income taxes
Based upon our cumulative pre-tax losses in recent years and available evidence, we have determined that it is more likely than not that certain deferred tax assets as of January 31, 2021 will not be realized in the near term. Consequently, we have established a valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets totaling approximately $54.6 million and $35.4 million as of January 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, to recognize only the portion of the deferred tax asset that is more likely than not to be realized. In future periods, if we conclude we have future taxable income sufficient to recognize the deferred tax assets, we may reduce or eliminate the valuation allowance.
Comparison of fiscal 2021 versus fiscal 2020
Revenue (in thousands)
•Subscription and related services. Our subscription and related services revenue from healthcare organizations increased $12.7 million to $69.0 million for fiscal 2021, as compared to $56.4 million for fiscal 2020, primarily due to new provider clients added in fiscal 2021 as well as expansion of and cross-selling to existing provider clients.
•Payment processing fees. Our revenue from patient payments processed through the Phreesia Platform increased $3.4 million to $49.9 million for fiscal 2021, as compared to $46.5 million for fiscal 2020 due to the addition of more provider clients, expansion of existing provider clients, and increased patient financial responsibility for their care, partially offset by the impact of COVID-19, which decreased patient visits.
•Life sciences. Our revenue from life science clients for digital marketing increased $7.8 million to $29.7 million for fiscal 2021, as compared to $21.9 million for fiscal 2020 due to an increase in new digital marketing solutions programs and deeper patient outreach among the existing programs.
Cost of revenue (excluding depreciation and amortization)
Cost of revenue (excluding depreciation and amortization) increased $6.6 million to $23.5 million for fiscal 2021, as compared to $16.8 million for fiscal 2020. The increase resulted primarily from higher headcount and associated compensation cost as well as higher data center costs, both driven by growth in revenue. The timing of investments in headcount and data center costs occur prior to the recognition of related revenue.
Stock compensation incurred related to cost of revenue was $0.6 million and $0.1 million for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively.
Payment processing expense
Payment processing expense increased $1.0 million to $28.9 million in fiscal 2021, as compared to $27.9 million for fiscal 2020. The increase resulted primarily from an increase in patient payments processed through the Phreesia Platform driven by an increase in patient visits over the prior year period, partially offset by certain lower cost payment routing.
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing expense increased $10.6 million to $43.0 million for fiscal 2021, as compared to $32.4 million for fiscal 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to a $9.9 million increase in total compensation costs driven by a growth in sales and marketing headcount to support anticipated growth.
Stock compensation incurred related to sales and marketing expense was $3.5 million and $1.4 million for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively.
Research and development
Research and development expense increased $4.0 million to $22.6 million for fiscal 2021, as compared to $18.6 million for fiscal 2020. The increase resulted primarily from a $3.9 million increase in total compensation costs driven by an increase in headcount to support our product development efforts.
Stock compensation incurred related to research and development expense was $2.0 million and $0.8 million in fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively.
General and administrative
General and administrative expense increased $10.0 million to $40.5 million for fiscal 2021, as compared to $30.5 million for fiscal 2020. The increase resulted primarily from a $9.4 million increase in total compensation costs driven by an increase in headcount to support our growth as a public company.
Stock compensation incurred related to general and administrative expense was $7.4 million and $3.9 million in fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively.
Depreciation
Depreciation expense increased $1.0 million to $9.8 million for fiscal 2021, as compared to $8.8 million for fiscal 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to higher data center depreciation, partially offset by lower PhreesiaPads and Arrivals Kiosks depreciation.
Amortization
Amortization expense increased $1.0 million to $6.1 million for fiscal 2021, as compared to $5.2 million for fiscal 2020. The increase was primarily driven by increased amortization of capitalized internal-use software development costs.
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense), net changed by $1.0 million to income of less than $0.1 million for fiscal 2021 as compared to expense of $1.0 million for fiscal 2020. Fiscal 2020 included a loss recognized on extinguishment of debt of $1.1 million.
Change in fair value of warrant liability
Change in fair value of warrant liability represents the change in fair value of preferred stock warrants from the beginning of fiscal 2020 until the warrants were converted to common stock warrants in connection with the IPO in July 2019. Subsequent to the IPO, we recorded no change in fair value of warrant liability because our common stock warrants were reclassified as equity.
Interest (expense) income, net
Interest expense, net decreased $0.9 million to $1.6 million for fiscal 2021, as compared to $2.4 million for fiscal 2020. The decrease is primarily attributable to lower average debt balances due to repayment of debt with the proceeds of our equity offerings, our debt refinancing in May 2020 that resulted in a lower interest rate as well as an increase in interest income earned on cash held in money market accounts.
(Provision for) benefit from income taxes
(Provision for) benefit from income taxes changed to a provision of less than $0.1 million for fiscal 2021, as compared to a benefit of $1.8 million for fiscal 2020. The current year provision relates primarily to utilization of net operating loss carryforwards and state income taxes, partially offset by a decrease in the Company's valuation allowance in connection with acquisitions, while the prior year benefit relates to a decrease in the valuation allowance for a portion of deferred tax assets and revision of tax positions from prior years that resulted in the elimination of tax liabilities.
Non-GAAP financial measures
Adjusted EBITDA is a supplemental measure of our performance that is not required by, or presented in accordance with, GAAP. Adjusted EBITDA is not a measurement of our financial performance under GAAP and should not be considered as an alternative to net income or loss or any other performance measure derived in accordance with GAAP, or as an alternative to cash flows from operating activities as a measure of our liquidity. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income or loss before interest expense (income), net, provision for (benefit from) income taxes, depreciation and amortization, and before stock-based compensation expense, change in fair value of warrant liability, change in fair value of contingent consideration liabilities and other (income) expense, net.
We have provided below a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net loss, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure. We have presented Adjusted EBITDA in this Annual Report on Form 10-K because it is a key measure used by our management and board of directors to understand and evaluate our core operating performance and trends, to prepare and approve our annual budget, and to develop short and long-term operational plans. In particular, we believe that the exclusion of the amounts eliminated in calculating Adjusted EBITDA can provide a useful measure for period-to-period comparisons of our core business. Accordingly, we believe that Adjusted EBITDA provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results in the same manner as our management and board of directors.
Our use of Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our financial results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are as follows:
•Although depreciation and amortization expense are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect cash capital expenditure requirements for such replacements or for new capital expenditure requirements;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect: (1) changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs; (2) the potentially dilutive impact of non-cash stock-based compensation; (3) tax payments that may represent a reduction in cash available to us; or (4) interest expense (income), net; and
•Other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate Adjusted EBITDA or similarly titled measures differently, which reduces its usefulness as a comparative measure.
Because of these and other limitations, you should consider Adjusted EBITDA along with other GAAP-based financial performance measures, including various cash flow metrics, net loss, and our GAAP financial results. The following table presents a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net loss for each of the periods indicated:
We calculate free cash flow as net cash provided by (used in) operating activities less capitalized internal-use software development costs and purchases of property and equipment.
Additionally, free cash flow is a supplemental measure of our performance that is not required by, or presented in accordance with, GAAP. We consider free cash flow to be a liquidity measure that provides useful information to management and investors about the amount of cash generated by our business that can be used for strategic opportunities, including investing in our business, making strategic investments, partnerships and acquisitions and strengthening our financial position.
The following table presents a reconciliation of free cash flow from net cash provided by operating activities, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, for each of the periods indicated:
Liquidity and capital resources
Since our inception in 2005 and until the completion of our IPO, we financed our operations primarily through the private sale of preferred stock and from various debt arrangements. In July 2019, we completed our IPO in which we and certain of our selling stockholders sold 10,681,423 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $18.00 per share, resulting in aggregate proceeds to us of approximately $130.8 million, net of underwriters’ discounts and commissions, and before deducting offering costs of approximately $6.4 million.
On October 23, 2020, we completed a follow-on offering of its Common Stock, in which we issued and sold 5,750,000 shares of common stock at an issuance price of $32.00 per share resulting in net proceeds of $174,800, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions, and before deducting third-party offering costs of $290.
As of January 31, 2021 and 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $218,781 and $90,315, respectively. Cash and cash equivalents consist of money market accounts and cash on deposit.
We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, along with our available financial resources from our credit facility, will be sufficient to meet our needs for at least the next 12 months. Our future capital requirements and the adequacy of available funds will depend on many factors, including those set forth under “Risk factors.”
In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may be unable to raise the funds on acceptable terms, if at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, operating results and financial condition could be adversely affected.
Silicon Valley Bank facility
In February 2019, we entered into a loan and security agreement with Silicon Valley Bank (SVB), or the First SVB Facility, which provided for a secured term loan facility and a revolving credit facility. On February 28, 2019, we borrowed $20.0 million as a term loan borrowing and used the proceeds to pay the outstanding principal amount under a loan and security agreement with another lender. See Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding the First SVB Facility.
We used a portion of the net proceeds from the IPO to fully repay our revolving line of credit with Silicon Valley Bank, which had an outstanding balance of $17.7 million as of the closing of the IPO on July 22, 2019.
On May 5, 2020, the Company entered into a Second Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement with SVB, or the Second SVB Facility. The Second SVB Facility provides for a revolving line of credit of up to $50.0 million (with options to increase up to $65.0 million). The Company transferred the outstanding balance on the First SVB Facility term loan, plus related prepayment fees, into the revolving credit borrowings outstanding under the Second SVB Facility. The Company incurred $0.5 million of fees in connection with the Second SVB Facility, including $0.4 million of fees to terminate the First SVB Facility and $0.1 million of fees to enter into the Second SVB Facility.
The Company repaid the outstanding balance on the Second SVB Facility in January 2021. As of January 31, 2021, the Company has no outstanding balance on the facility and $50.0 million of available borrowings under the facility.
Borrowings under the Second SVB Facility are payable on May 5, 2025 (the "Maturity Date"). Borrowings under the Second SVB Facility bear interest, which is payable monthly, at a floating rate equal to the greater of the bank's prime rate or 4.5%. The interest rate will be reduced if the Company reaches certain defined Second SVB Facility Adjusted EBITDA levels. As of January 31, 2021, the interest rate on the Second SVB Facility was 4.5%. In addition to principal and interest due under the Second SVB Facility, the Company is required to pay an annual commitment fee of $0.1 million per year. The first facility fee payment of $0.1 million was paid during the year ended January 31, 2021.
In the event that the Company terminates the Second SVB Facility prior to the Maturity Date, the Company will be required to pay a termination fee equal to $0.2 million plus a percent of total borrowing capacity, both of which are reduced based on the amount of time elapsed before the termination.
Any Company obligations under the Second SVB Facility are secured by a first priority security interest in substantially all of the Company's assets, other than intellectual property. The Second SVB Facility includes a financial covenant that requires the Company to achieve specified levels of Adjusted EBITDA, as defined in the Second SVB Facility. This financial covenant will not be effective if the Company maintains certain levels of liquidity as defined. The Company was in compliance with all covenants related to the Second SVB Facility as of January 31, 2021.
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for each of the periods presented:
Operating activities
The primary source of cash from operating activities is cash received from our customers. The primary uses of cash
for operating activities are for payroll, payments to suppliers and employees, payments for operating leases, as well as cash paid for interest on our borrowings and finance leases and cash paid for various sales, property and income
taxes.
During the fiscal years ended January 31, 2021 and 2020, cash provided by operating activities was $2.9 million and $0.8 million, respectively. During fiscal 2021 and 2020, our cash received from customers exceeded cash paid to employees and suppliers in connection with our normal operations.
Investing activities
During the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021, cash used in investing activities was $25.1 million, principally resulting from capital expenditures, the bulk of which consists of hardware used by clients and the purchase of data center equipment of $11.2 million, capitalized internal-use software costs of $7.3 million and $6.5 million used for the acquisition of QueueDr, net of cash acquired. See Note 17 - Acquisitions in Item 8 - Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for additional information regarding the QueueDr acquisition.
During the fiscal year ended January 31, 2020, cash used in investing activities was $12.3 million, principally resulting from capital expenditures of $7.0 million and capitalized internal-use software costs of $5.3 million.
Financing activities
During the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021 net cash provided by financing activities was $150.7 million, consisting of $174.8 million in proceeds from the October 2020 offering of our common stock, net of underwriters' discounts and commissions, $4.4 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock upon the exercise of stock options as well as $2.0 million in proceeds from an insurance financing arrangement, partially offset by $20.7 million used to repay the outstanding principal balance of the Second SVB Facility, $5.0 million used to pay tax withholdings on stock compensation awards, $4.3 million used for principal payments on finance leases and financing arrangements, $0.4 million used for debt and equity issuance and offering costs and $0.2 million for loan facility fee payments. The lender fees incurred in connection with the Second SVB Facility were transferred into the principal balance of the Second SVB Facility. We have included the transfer of the balance of the First SVB Facility and the fees that were transferred in connection with the Second SVB Facility within the supplemental non-cash investing and financing information on our consolidated statements of cash flows included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
During the fiscal year ended January 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $100.3 million. Our financing activities with equity holders consisted of $130.8 million in proceeds from our IPO (net of underwriters’ discounts and commissions), payment of $6.2 million in offering costs, and payment of dividends to holders of our Senior Convertible Preferred Stock in the aggregate amount of $15.0 million paid during the fiscal year ended January 31, 2020. Cash used for financing activities included $38.7 million used to repay borrowings and $1.9 million of principal payments on finance leases, partially offset by $29.9 million of proceeds from borrowings under the First SVB Facility.
Contractual obligations and commitments
The following summarizes our significant contractual obligations as of January 31, 2021:
Off-balance sheet arrangements
As of January 31, 2021 and January 31, 2020, we did not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
Critical accounting policies and estimates
The preparation of the consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires us to make certain estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the balance sheet date, as well as reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Our most significant estimates and judgments involve revenue recognition, the fair value of assets acquired in business combinations, capitalized internal-use software, income taxes, and valuation of our stock-based compensation, including the underlying deemed estimated fair value of our preferred and common stock. Actual results may differ from these estimates. To the extent that there are differences between our estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows will be affected.
We believe that the accounting policies described below involve a greater degree of judgment and complexity. Accordingly, these are the policies we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Revenue recognition
We account for revenue from contracts with clients by applying the requirements of Topic 606, which includes the following steps:
•Identification of the contract, or contracts, with a client.
•Identification of the performance obligations in a contract.
•Determination of the transaction price.
•Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract.
•Recognition of revenue when, or as, performance obligations are satisfied.
Revenues are recognized when control of these services is transferred to our clients, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those services.
The majority of our contracts with clients contain multiple performance obligations. For these contracts, we account for individual performance obligations separately when they are distinct. The transaction price is allocated to the separate performance obligations on a relative standalone selling price basis. We determine the standalone selling prices based on our overall pricing objectives, taking into consideration market conditions and other factors, including other groupings such as client type.
Subscription and related services
In most cases, we generate subscription revenue from clients based on the number of healthcare providers that utilize the Phreesia Platform, PhreesiaPads and Arrivals Kiosks and any other applications. Our provider clients are typically billed monthly in arrears, though in some instances provider clients may opt to be billed quarterly or annually in advance. Subscription fees are typically auto-debited from client’s accounts every month. Revenue for provider licenses is recognized over the term of the respective provider contract. Services revenues are recognized over the respective non-cancelable subscription term because of the continuous transfer of control to the client. Our subscription arrangements are considered service contracts, and the client does not have the right to take possession of the software. In certain arrangements, we lease the PhreesiaPads and Arrivals Kiosks through operating leases to our clients. Accordingly, these revenue transactions are accounted for using Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 842, Leases.
In addition, subscription and related services includes certain fees from clients for professional services associated with implementation services as well as travel and expense reimbursements, shipping and handling fees, sales of hardware (PhreesiaPads and Arrivals Kiosks), on-site support and training. The majority of our professional services for implementation are not distinct from Phreesia’s Platform and are therefore recognized over the term of the contract. Revenue from sales of Phreesia hardware and training are recognized in the period they are delivered to clients.
Payment processing fees
We generate revenue from payment processing fees based on the levels of patient payment volume resulting from credit and debit transactions (dollar value and number of card transactions) processed through Phreesia’s payment facilitator model. Payment processing fees are generally calculated as a percentage of the total transaction dollar value processed and/or a fee per transaction. The remainder of patient payment volume is composed of credit transactions for which Phreesia acts as a gateway to payment processors, and cash and check transactions.
We recognize the payment processing fees when the transaction occurs (i.e., when the processing services are completed). The transaction amount is collected from the cardholder’s bank via our third party payment processing partner and the card networks. The transaction amount is then remitted to our clients approximately two business days after the transaction occurs. At the end of each month, we charge our clients for any payment processing fees owed per our client contractual agreements. Similarly, at the end of each month, we remit payments to third-party payment processors and financial institutions for interchange and assessment fees, processing fees, and bank settlement fees.
We act as the merchant of record for our clients and work with payment card networks and banks so that our clients do not need to manage the complex systems, rules, and requirements of the payment industry. We satisfy our performance obligations and therefore recognize the payment processing fees as revenue upon completion of a transaction. Revenue is recognized net of refunds, which arise from reversals of transactions initiated by our clients.
The payment processing fees collected from clients are recognized as revenue on a gross basis as we are the principal in the delivery of the managed payment solutions to the client. We have concluded we are the principal because as the merchant of record, we control the services before delivery to the client, we are primarily responsible for the delivery of the services to our clients, we have latitude in establishing pricing with respect to the client and other terms of service, we have sole discretion in selecting the third party to perform the settlement, and we assume the credit risk for the transaction processed. We also have the unilateral ability to accept or reject a transaction based on criteria we established.
As the merchant of record, we are liable for settlement of the transactions processed and, accordingly, such costs are included in payment processing fees expense on the statements of operations.
Life sciences
We generate revenue from sales of digital marketing solutions to life sciences companies which is based largely on the delivery of messages at a contracted price per message to targeted patients. Messaging campaigns are sold for a specified number of messages delivered to qualified patients over an expected time frame. Revenue is recognized as the messages are delivered.
Business combinations
We use our best estimates and assumptions to accurately assign fair value to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date. With the assistance of a third-party appraiser, we assessed the fair value of the assets of QueueDr. The fair value of the acquired technology was estimated using the relief from royalty method. The fair value of customer relationships was estimated using a multi period excess earnings method. To calculate fair value, we used cash flows discounted at a rate considered appropriate given the inherent risks associated with each client grouping. Our estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. During the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the fair value of these tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. We continue to collect information and reevaluate these estimates and assumptions quarterly and records any adjustments to our preliminary estimates to goodwill provided that the we are within the measurement period. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the fair value of assets acquired or liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to the statement of operations.
The consideration transferred for business combinations includes the acquisition date fair value of contingent consideration. In connection with the QueueDr acquisition, we recorded contingent consideration liabilities within accrued expenses for amounts payable to the selling shareholders based on collections from QueueDr customers. The fair value of our contingent consideration liabilities are determined using a Monte-Carlo simulation which uses estimated cash flows and likelihoods of contract cancellation to estimate the expected payout based on collections and active status of the underlying customer contracts. The fair value of our contingent consideration liabilities is determined based on inputs which are not readily available in public markets. Therefore, we have categorized the liabilities as Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy. As of January 31, 2021, we have recorded contingent consideration liabilities of $1,286, and the maximum remaining amount payable for the contingent consideration liabilities is $1,549. Changes in the fair value of contingent consideration liabilities are included in general and administrative expense in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations.
Capitalized internal-use software
We capitalize certain costs incurred for the development of computer software for internal use pursuant to ASC Topic 350-40, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other-Internal use software. These costs relate to the development of its Phreesia Platform. We capitalize the costs during the development of the project, when it is determined that it is probable that the project will be completed, and the software will be used as intended. Costs related to preliminary project activities, post-implementation activities, training and maintenance are expensed as incurred. Internal-use software is amortized on a straight-line basis over its estimated useful life, which is generally three years. We evaluate the useful lives of these assets on an annual basis and tests for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances occur that could impact the recoverability of these assets. We exercise judgment in determining the point at which various projects may be capitalized, in assessing the ongoing value of the capitalized costs and in determining the estimated useful lives over which the costs are amortized. To the extent that we change the manner in which we develop and test new features and functionalities related to our solutions, assess the ongoing value of capitalized assets or determine the estimated useful lives over which the costs are amortized, the amount of internal-use software development costs we capitalize and amortize could change in future periods.
Income taxes
An asset and liability approach is used for financial accounting and reporting of current and deferred income taxes. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are computed for temporary differences between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities that will result in taxable or deductible amounts in the future. Such deferred income tax asset and liability computations are based on enacted tax laws and rates applicable to periods in which the differences are expected to affect taxable income or loss. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amounts expected to be realized. We follow ASC 740, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes. ASC 740 clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in a company’s consolidated financial statements and prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. ASC 740 also provides guidance on de-recognition, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in the interim periods, disclosure, and transition.
We have accumulated U.S. federal and state net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $199.1 million, and $124.5 million as of January 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. These carryforwards will begin to expire in 2025. As of
January 31, 2021, the Company's foreign branch had net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $2.5 million, which may be available to offset future income tax liabilities and will expire beginning in 2030.
In assessing the realizability of the net deferred tax asset we consider all relevant positive and negative evidence in determining whether it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred income tax assets will not be realized. The realization of the gross deferred tax assets is dependent on several factors, including the generation of sufficient taxable income prior to the expiration of the net operating loss carryforwards.
Due to uncertainty regarding the ability to realize the benefit of U.S. deferred tax assets primarily relating to net operating loss carryforwards, we have established valuation allowances to reduce deferred the U.S. deferred tax assets to an amount that is more likely than not to be realized. On the basis of this evaluation, we have recorded valuation allowances of $54.6 million and $35.4 million as of January 31, 2021 and 2020.
Under the Tax Reform Act of 1986, or the Act, the net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards are subject to review and possible adjustment by the Internal Revenue Service and state tax authorities. Net operating loss carryforwards could be subject to an annual limitation as the result of certain cumulative changes in the ownership interest of significant shareholders over a three-year period in excess of 50%, as defined under Sections 382 and 383 of the Internal Revenue Code, respectively, as well as similar state provisions. This could limit the amount of tax attributes that can be utilized on a yearly basis to offset future taxable income. The amount of the annual limitation is determined based on the value of the company immediately prior to the ownership change. Subsequent ownership changes may further affect the limitation in future years. We have completed multiple financings since our inception which may have resulted in an ownership change as defined by Sections 382 and 383 of the Internal Revenue code, or could result in change in the future. The Company has not done an analysis to determine whether or not ownership changes, as defined by the Act, have occurred since inception.
We record unrecognized tax benefits as liabilities related to our in accordance with ASC 740 and adjust these liabilities related to our operations when our judgment changes as a result of the evaluation of new information not previously available. We recognize interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions in income tax expense. As of January 31, 2021, we had no accrued interest or penalties related to uncertain tax positions.
Stock-based compensation for market-based performance stock units (PSUs)
We recognize the grant-date fair value of stock-based awards issued as compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the award. We granted market-based performance stock units (PSUs) during fiscal 2021. We estimate the fair value of PSUs as follows:
Each award vests in zero to two shares of common stock based on the Company’s total stockholder return (TSR), relative to a peer group of companies on the Russell 3000 stock index. The Company estimates the fair value of the PSUs using a Monte Carlo Simulation model which projected TSR for Phreesia and each member of the peer group over the three year performance period. The following table summarizes the weighted average assumptions used in the Monte Carlo Simulation to estimate the fair value of the PSUs.
•Correlation coefficient: The correlation coefficient measures the correlation of our stock to the stock of the companies in the peer group. This coefficient is used to project the performance of our stock against our peers to estimate projected performance under the plan.
•Valuation date stock price: The valuation date stock price equals our closing traded stock price on the date of grant.
•Simulation term. The simulation term of PSUs is equal to the vesting term of three years.
•Expected volatility. The expected volatility is based on historical volatilities of peer companies within our industry which were commensurate with the simulation term assumption.
•Risk-free interest rate. The risk-free interest rate is based on the interest rate payable on U.S. Treasury securities in effect at the time of grant for a period that is commensurate with the simulation term.
•Dividend yield. The dividend yield is 0% because we have never paid, and for the foreseeable future do not expect to pay, a dividend on our common stock.
Recent accounting pronouncements
There are no recently issued accounting pronouncements the Company has not yet adopted that will materially impact the Company's consolidated financial statements.