Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References in this section to “we,” “us,” "our" or “the Company” refer to Phunware, Inc. References to “management” or “management team” refer to our officers and directors.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes to those statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. As discussed in the section titled "Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements," the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results and timing of selected events may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including, but not limited to, those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Certain figures, such as interest rates and other percentages, included in this section have been rounded for ease of presentation. Percentage figures included in this section have not in all cases been calculated on the basis of such rounded figures but on the basis of such amounts prior to rounding. For this reason, percentage amounts in this section may vary slightly from those obtained by performing the same calculations using the figures in our consolidated financial statements or in the associated text. Certain other amounts that appear in this section may similarly not sum due to rounding.
Key Events and Recent Developments
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of the novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”) as a pandemic. The outbreak is having an impact on the global economy, resulting in rapidly changing market and economic conditions. The COVID-19 outbreak in the United States has caused business disruption through mandated and voluntary closing of businesses and cancellation of events for which the Company's application transition business serves. Furthermore, the Company’s platform software and services business serves healthcare and hospitals throughout the United States. While the disruption is currently expected to be temporary, there is considerable uncertainty around the duration of the closings and cancellations.
The related financial impact and duration cannot be reasonably estimated at this time. We implemented a work-from-home policy for our employees effective March 16, 2020 and we are taking steps to implement measures to reduce operating expenses. To that end, on March 27, 2020, the Company committed to cost reduction by furloughing 37 persons, or approximately 42% of its workforce. From March 27, 2020 to December 31, 2020, the Company recalled seven employees from furlough and ten voluntary terminated.
Refer to "Liquidity and Capital Resources" below for further discussion on key events and recent developments.
Overview
Phunware, Inc. offers a fully integrated software platform that equips companies with the products, solutions and services necessary to engage, manage and monetize their mobile application portfolios globally at scale. Our Multiscreen-as-a-Service ("MaaS") platform provides the entire mobile lifecycle of applications, media and data in one login through one procurement relationship. Our offerings include:
•Enterprise mobile software development kits (SDKs) including content management, location-based services, marketing automation, business intelligence and analytics, alerts, notifications and messaging, audience engagement, audience monetization;
•Integration of our SDK licenses into existing applications maintained by our customers, as well as custom application development and support services;
•Cloud-based vertical solutions, which are off-the-shelf, iOS- and Android-based mobile application portfolios, solutions and services that address: the patient experience for healthcare, the shopper experience for retail, the fan experience for sports, the traveler experience for aviation, the luxury resident experience for real estate, the luxury guest experience for hospitality, the student experience for education and the generic user experience for all other verticals and applications; and
•Application transactions for mobile audience building, user acquisition, application discovery, audience engagement and audience monetization.
We intend to continue investing for long-term growth. We have invested and expect to continue investing in expanding our ability to market, sell and provide our current and future products and services to customers globally. We also expect to continue investing in the development and improvement of new and existing products and services to address customers' needs. We currently do not expect to be profitable in the near future.
Key Business Metrics
Our management regularly monitors certain financial measures to track the progress of its business against internal goals and targets. We believe that the most important of these measures include backlog and deferred revenue.
Backlog and Deferred Revenue. Backlog represents future amounts to be invoiced under our current customer agreements. At any point in the contract term, there can be amounts that we have not yet been contractually able to invoice. Until such time as these amounts are invoiced, they are not recorded in revenues, deferred revenue, accounts receivable or elsewhere in our consolidated financial statements, and are considered by us to be backlog. We expect backlog to fluctuate up or down from period to period for several reasons, including the timing and duration of customer contracts, varying billing cycles and the timing and duration of customer renewals. We reasonably expect approximately half of our backlog as of December 31, 2020 will be invoiced during the subsequent 12-month period, primarily due to the fact that our contracts are typically one to three years in length.
In addition, our deferred revenue consists of amounts that have been invoiced but have not yet been recognized as revenues as of the end of a reporting period. Together, the sum of deferred revenue and backlog represents the total billed and unbilled contract value yet to be recognized in revenues, and provides visibility into future revenue streams.
The following table sets forth our backlog and deferred revenue:
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Adjusted Gross Profit, Adjusted Gross Margin and Adjusted EBITDA
We report our financial results in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ("GAAP"). We also use certain non-GAAP financial measures that fall within the meaning of Securities and Exchange Commission Regulation G and Regulation S-K Item 10(e), which may provide users of the financial information with additional meaningful comparison to prior period results. Our non-GAAP financial measures include adjusted gross profit, adjusted gross margin and adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization ("EBITDA") (our "non-GAAP financial measures"). Management uses these measures (i) to compare operating performance on a consistent basis, (ii) to calculate incentive compensation for our employees, (iii) for planning purposes including the preparation of our internal annual operating budget and (iv) to evaluate the performance and effectiveness of operational strategies.
Our non-GAAP financial measures should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for, or superior to, financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. They are not measurements of our financial performance under GAAP and should not be considered as alternatives to revenue or net loss, as applicable, or any other performance measures derived in accordance with GAAP and may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures of other businesses. Our non-GAAP financial measures have limitations as analytical tools and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our operating results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations include:
•Non-cash compensation is and will remain a key element of our overall long-term incentive compensation package, although we exclude it as an expense when evaluating its ongoing operating performance for a particular period;
•Our non-GAAP financial measures do not reflect the impact of certain cash charges resulting from matters we consider not to be indicative of ongoing operations, and;
•Other companies in our industry may calculate our non-GAAP financial measures differently than we do, limiting their usefulness as comparative measures.
We compensate for these limitations to our non-GAAP financial measures by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using our non-GAAP financial measures only for supplemental purposes. Our non-GAAP financial measures include adjustments for items that may not occur in future periods. However, we believe these adjustments are appropriate because the amounts recognized can vary significantly from period to period, do not directly relate to the ongoing operations of our business and complicate comparisons of our internal operating results and operating results of other peer companies over time. For example, it is useful to exclude non-cash, stock-based compensation expenses because the amount of such expenses in any specific period may not directly correlate to the underlying performance of our business operations and these expenses can vary significantly across periods due to timing of new stock-based awards. We may also exclude certain discrete, unusual, one-time, or non-cash costs in order to facilitate a more useful period-over-period comparison of our financial performance. Each of the normal recurring adjustments and other adjustments described in this paragraph help management with a measure of our operating performance over time by removing items that are not related to day-to-day operations or are non-cash expenses.
The following table sets forth the non-GAAP financial measures we monitor.
(1)Adjusted gross profit and adjusted gross margin are non-GAAP financial measures. We believe that adjusted gross profit and adjusted gross margin provide supplemental information with respect to gross profit and gross margin regarding ongoing performance. We define adjusted gross profit as net revenues less cost of revenue, adjusted to exclude one-time revenue adjustments, stock-based compensation and amortization of intangible assets. We define adjusted gross margin as adjusted gross profit as a percentage of net revenues.
(2)Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure. We believe adjusted EBITDA provides helpful information with respect to operating performance as viewed by management, including a view of our business that is not dependent on (i)
the impact of our capitalization structure and (ii) items that are not part of day-to-day operations. We define adjusted EBITDA as net loss plus (i) interest expense, (ii) income tax expense, (iii) depreciation, (iv) amortization, and further adjusted for (v) one-time adjustments and (vi) stock-based compensation expense.
Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The following tables set forth a reconciliation of the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure to each of the non-GAAP financial measures discussed above.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue and Gross Profit
There are a number of factors that impact the revenue and margin profile of the services and technology offerings we provide, including, but not limited to, solution and technology complexity, technical expertise requiring the combination of products and types of services provided, as well as other elements that may be specific to a particular client solution.
Platform Subscriptions and Services Revenue. Subscription revenue is derived from software license fees, which comprise subscription fees from customers licensing our Software Development Kits (SDKs), which includes accessing the MaaS platform; application development service revenue from the development of customer applications, or apps, which are built and delivered to customers; and support fees.
Subscription revenue from SDK licenses gives the customer the right to access our MaaS platform. Application development revenue is derived from development services around designing and building new applications or enhancing existing applications. Support revenue is comprised of support and maintenance fees of customer applications, software updates and technical support for application development services for a support term.
From time to time, we also provide professional services by outsourcing employees’ time and materials to customers.
Platform subscriptions and services gross profit is equal to subscriptions and services revenue less the cost of personnel and related costs for our support and professional services employees, external consultants, stock-based compensation and allocated overhead. Costs associated with our development and project management teams are generally recognized as incurred. Costs directly attributable to the development or support of applications relating to platform subscription customers are included in cost of sales, whereas costs related to the ongoing development and maintenance of Phunware’s MaaS platform are expensed in research and development. As a result, platform subscriptions and services gross profit may fluctuate from period to period.
Application Transaction Revenue. We also generate revenue by charging advertisers to deliver advertisements (ads) to users of mobile connected devices. Depending on the specific terms of each advertising contract, we generally recognize revenue based on the activity of mobile users viewing these ads. Fees from advertisers are commonly based on the number of ads delivered or views, clicks or actions by users on mobile advertisements delivered, and we recognize revenue at the time the user views, clicks, or otherwise acts on the ad. We sell ads through several offerings: cost per thousand impressions and cost per click.
Application transaction gross profit is equal to application transaction revenue less cost of revenue associated with application transactions. Application transaction gross profit is impacted by the cost of advertising traffic we pay to our suppliers and amount of traffic which we can purchase from those suppliers. As a result, our application transaction gross profit may fluctuate from period to period due to variable costs of advertising traffic.
Gross Margin
Gross margin measures gross profit as a percentage of revenue. Gross margin is generally impacted by the same factors that affect changes in the mix of subscriptions and services and application transactions.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses include sales and marketing expenses, general and administrative expenses, research and development expenses, depreciation and amortization of acquired intangible assets. Personnel costs are the most significant component of operating expenses and consist of salaries, benefits, bonuses, stock-based compensation and, in sales and marketing expense, commissions. Legal settlements pertaining to litigation brought as a result of the Company's operations is also included in operating expenses.
Sales and Marketing Expense. Sales and marketing expense is comprised of compensation, commission expense, variable incentive pay and benefits related to sales personnel, along with travel expenses, other employee related costs, including stock-based compensation and expenses related to marketing programs and promotional activities. We expect our sales and marketing expense will increase in absolute dollars as we increase our sales and marketing organizations as we plan to increase revenue but may fluctuate as a percentage of our total revenue from period to period.
General and Administrative Expense. General and administrative expense is comprised of compensation and benefits of administrative personnel, including variable incentive pay and stock-based compensation, bad debt expenses and other administrative costs such as facilities expenses, professional fees and travel expenses. We expect to incur additional general and administrative expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including expenses related to compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC and listing standards of Nasdaq, additional insurance expenses, investor relations activities and other administrative and professional services. We also expect to increase the size of our general and administrative function to support the growth of our business. As a result, we expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase in absolute dollars but may fluctuate as a percentage of our total revenue from period to period.
Research and Development Expense. Research and development expenses consist primarily of employee compensation costs and overhead allocation. We believe that continued investment in our platform is important for our growth. As a result, we expect our research and development expenses will increase in absolute dollars as our business grows but may fluctuate as a percentage of revenue from period to period.
Interest Expense
Interest expense includes interest related to our outstanding debt, including amortization of discounts and deferred issuance costs, as well as, factoring fees related to our factoring financing arrangement.
During 2020, we maintained a factoring financing arrangement and our board of directors has authorized various debt offerings. Refer to Note 7 "Factoring Agreement" and Note 8 "Debt" of the notes to consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information on our factoring arrangement and debt offerings, respectively.
We also may seek additional debt financings to fund the expansion of our business or to finance strategic acquisitions in the future, which may have an impact on its interest expense.
Income Tax Expense
We are subject to U.S. Federal income taxes, state income taxes net of federal income tax effect and nondeductible expenses. Our effective tax rate will vary depending on permanent non-deductible expenses and other factors.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Fiscal Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Net Revenue
Total revenue decreased $9.1 million, or (47.8)%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the corresponding period in 2019.
Platform subscriptions and services revenue decreased $8.1 million, or (47.2)% driven by the completion of our statement of work with Fox Networks Group ("Fox") on September 30, 2019. Revenue from Fox was approximately $9.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was partially offset higher revenues from a particular customer in 2020 as compared to 2019. Revenue from this customer was 32% and 8% of our total net revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
See the subheading titled, "Disaggregation of Revenue” in Note 3 “Revenue” of the notes to consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Application transaction revenue decreased 1.0 million, or (53.2)%, primarily because the various decreased or ceased advertising campaigns and decrease in app store revenue.
Cost of Revenue, Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Total gross profit decreased $3.5 million, or (34.4)%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the corresponding period of 2019 primarily attributable to the revenue items described above.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense decreased $1.1 million, or (38.9)% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the corresponding period of 2019 primarily due to $0.6 million of reduced employee compensation costs due to lower headcount and $0.5 million related to other expenditure decreases such as marketing events, contractor spend and travel.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense decreased $42 thousand, or (0.3)%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the corresponding period of 2019 due to decreases of $1.1 million in software and hosting expenses, $0.5 million in professional and contract labor expenses, $0.4 million for payroll and related costs due to a decrease in headcount, $0.2 million in travel expense, $0.2 million in depreciation and amortization expense and $0.5 million in net positive settlements of accounts payable balances previously expensed. These decreases were primarily offset by the increase in stock-based compensation expense of $2.7 million and $0.2 million in bad debt expense.
Research and Development
Research and development expense decreased $1.7 million, or (39.3)% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the corresponding period of 2019 as a result of a decrease of $1.4 million related to employee headcount and contract spend. Other decreases of $0.3 million include expenditures such as stock-based compensation, contractor spend and travel.
Legal Settlement
The legal settlement expense of $4.5 million relates to the settlement of our litigation with Uber as described in detail in Note 9 "Commitments and Contingencies" of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Other income (expense)
Other expense increased $(4.1) million for the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to 2019, primarily due to losses on extinguishment of debt and interest related to our debt borrowings as further described in Note 8 "Debt" of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This is partially
offset by gain in fair value adjustment for warrant liabilities and a decrease in interest related to our factoring financing arrangement due to lower usage.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we held total cash (including restricted cash) of $4,031, all of which was held in the United States.
On October 9, 2020, we entered into a settlement agreement with Uber Technologies, Inc. ("Uber") and certain other parties related to our complaint against Uber, Uber's cross-complaint and amended cross-complaint against us and certain individual defendants. The settlement agreement provides that we will pay to Uber a total sum of $4.5 million in a series of installments. We recorded a charge in the third quarter of 2020 related to the settlement agreement. As of December 31, 2020, we owe $3 million related to the settlement, which will be paid in various installments ending no later than September 30, 2021. For further information related to the Uber settlement agreement, refer to Note 9 "Commitments and Contingencies" of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
As of December 31, 2020, the principal balance of our debt was approximately $10.1 million, from various debt, including a Paycheck Protection Program ("PPP") loan and convertible debt offerings. The debt we believe will have the most significant impact on our future liquidity and capital resources is discussed below. For further information on all our debt outstanding as of December 31, 2020, refer to Note 8 “Debt” of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In April 2020, we received a PPP loan of approximately $2.85 million, which bears interest at a rate of 0.98% per annum. The Paycheck Protection Flexibility Act of 2020, extended the deferral period for loan payments. The Company currently anticipates its first PPP loan payment will be made in the third quarter of 2021. Although we intend to apply for forgiveness, as currently provided for under terms of the PPP loan and the CARES Act, there can be no assurance that any part of our PPP loan will be forgiven. The PPP loan matures in April 2022.
During 2020, we issued a series of convertible notes to an institutional investor. As of December 31, 2020, the unrestricted principal balance of our Series A Convertible Note and Series B Convertible Note (collectively, the "2020 Convertible Notes") was $2.48 million and $3.58 million, respectively. The 2020 Convertible Notes were issued with an original issue discount of 8% and each bear an interest rate of 7% per annum, which further includes a make-whole of interest (for unrestricted principal amounts) from the date of issuance through the maturity date of December 31, 2021. Outstanding principal on the 2020 Convertible Notes is subject to monthly installment payments in cash of 107% of the installment amount due. The noteholder has various redemption rights, such as the right to redeem an amount equal to 40% of the net proceeds from a qualified capital raise, or upon change of control or company default. The noteholder may also convert 2020 Convertible Notes into shares of our common at a current adjusted conversion price of $2.25 per share. Upon consummation of the issuance of the 2020 Convertible Notes, we also issued the note holder a warrant for the purchase of up to 2,160,000 shares of our common stock, which has a current adjusted exercise price of $2.25 per share. We also have the right to redeem the full amount of the outstanding principal under the 2020 Convertible Notes. As of December 31, 2020, the restricted principal balance of the Series A Convertible Note and Series B Convertible Note was $0 and $11.1 million, respectively. Upon issuance of the 2020 Convertible Notes, the noteholder issued an investor note to us, which offsets the combined restricted balances of the 2020 Convertible Notes. In March 2020, the noteholder exercised its right to redeem all amounts outstanding under the investor note. As a result, all principal under the Series B Convertible Note has become unrestricted.
In January 2021, we issued 2,670,121 shares of common stock for aggregate proceeds of $5.1 million, net of $0.2 million of commissions (and before noteholder redemption payment) pursuant to the terms of an at-the-market offering, which has concluded. In February 2021, we also issued 11,761,111 shares of our common stock for aggregate proceeds of $24.7 million in an underwritten public offering, net of $1.7 million of underwriter commissions and other underwriter costs.
As a result of the fundraising events above, the holder of our 2020 Convertible Notes elected to require us to use forty percent (40%) of the net proceeds satisfy obligations under the 2020 Convertible Notes, pursuant to which we paid approximately $11.5 million to the noteholder. In March 2021, the noteholder voluntarily prepaid an aggregate of $10.3 million pursuant to the terms of the investor note. As a result, we received cash proceeds of $10.3 million and the corresponding amount of principal of the Series B Note, representing the entire remaining amount of restricted principal, along with $0.8 million of original issue discount became unrestricted and outstanding. On March 25, 2021, we delivered a Company Optional Redemption Notice to the holder of our Series B Note exercising our right to redeem and fully satisfy all obligations under the Series B Note on April 5, 2021.
Given the financings achieved above, we believe our current cash position is expected to be sufficient to meet our projected operating requirements for at least the next twelve months from the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We have a history of operating losses and negative operating cash flows. As we continue to focus on growing our revenues, we expect these trends to continue into the foreseeable future. Our future capital requirements will depend on many
factors, including our pace of growth, subscription renewal activity, the timing and extent of spend to support development efforts, the expansion of sales and marketing activities and the market acceptance of our products and services. We believe that it is likely we will in the future enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, technologies and intellectual property rights. We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us, or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired and/or on acceptable terms, our business, operating results and financial condition could be adversely affected.
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented:
Operating Activities
Our primary source of cash from operating activities is receipts from the sale of our platform subscriptions and services and application transactions to our customers. Our primary uses of cash from operating activities are payments to employee for compensation and related expenses, publishers and other vendors for the purchase of digital media inventory and related costs, sales and marketing expenses and general operating expenses.
We utilized $(11.0) million of cash from operating activities during 2020 primarily resulting from a net loss of $(22.2) million, as adjusted for non-cash charges related to stock-based compensation of $4.5 million, $2.2 million for amortization of debt discount and deferred financing costs, $0.2 million for bad debt expense, $(0.5) million for accounts payable settlements, $(0.9) million for gain on the change in fair value of warrants and $2.2 million for loss on extinguishment of debt. In addition, during 2020 certain changes in our operating assets and liabilities resulted in cash increases (decreases) as follows: $1.5 million from an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses, $3.0 million accrued legal settlement balance as of December 31, 2020 related to our settlement with Uber, $0.8 million from an decrease in account receivable and $(2.0) million from an decrease in deferred revenue.
We utilized $(6.2) million of cash from operating activities during 2019 primarily resulting from a net loss of $(12.9) million, as adjusted for non-cash charges related to stock-based compensation of $1.8 million, depreciation and amortization of $0.3 million and allowance for doubtful receivables of $0.1 million. In addition, during 2019 certain changes in our operating assets and liabilities resulted in cash increases (decreases) as follows: $1.1 million from an increase in accrued expenses mainly related to accrued compensation, $0.7 million from an increase in accounts payable related to increase in payables for legal fees, $1.8 million from a decrease in accounts receivable mainly attributable to the conclusion of our statement of work with Fox, $0.6 million from deferred revenue and $0.2 million from prepaid expenses.
Investing Activities
Investing activities during 2019 primarily consisted of proceeds received from the sale of digital currencies.
Financing Activities
Our financing activities during 2020 consisted of proceeds from various debt borrowings offset by repayments on our various debt offerings and financing factoring agreement. We acquired $14.6 million of cash from financing activities during 2020, as a result of $15.4 million from new issuances of debt (inclusive of $0.6 million from related parties), $9.2 million from our at-the-market offering of common stock and $0.1 million in proceeds from stock option exercises. These sources of financing were partially offset of $(9.0) million of payments on debt (inclusive of $0.6 million to related parties) and $(1.1) million in net repayments on our factoring financing agreement.
Our financing activities during 2019 consisted primarily of the proceeds from warrant exercises offset by redemptions of Series A convertible preferred stock. We acquired $0.1 million of cash from financing activities during 2019, primarily as follows: $6.1 million provided by warrant exercises; $1.1 million from our debt financings, which includes $0.2 million
received from an affiliate associated with our Chief Executive Officer; $0.3 million from proceeds of exercises of options to purchase our common stock; and $0.2 million from proceeds received from PhunCoin deposits. These sources of financing were offset by ($6.2) million in payments for the redemption of Series A convertible preferred stock and ($1.4) million in net payments on our factoring financing arrangement.
Contractual Obligations
We lease various office facilities, including our corporate headquarters in Texas and offices in California and Florida, under non-cancellable operating lease agreements that expire through 2025. The terms of the lease agreements provide for rental payments on a graduated basis. We recognize rent expense on a straight-line basis over the lease periods. Rent expense under operating leases totaled $0.8 million and $0.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectfully.
The following table sets forth our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of SEC Regulation S-K, such as the use of unconsolidated subsidiaries, structured finance, special purpose entities or variable interest entities.
Indemnification Agreements
In the ordinary course of business, we provide indemnifications of varying scope and terms to customers, vendors, lessors, business partners and other parties with respect to certain matters, including, but not limited to, losses arising out of breach of such agreements, solutions to be provided by the Company or from intellectual property infringement claims made by third parties. In addition, we have entered into indemnification agreements with directors and certain current and former officers and employees that will require the Company, among other things, to indemnify them against certain liabilities that may arise by reason of, or are related to, their status or service as directors, officers or employees.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenues generated and expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
The critical accounting policies requiring estimates, assumptions and judgments that we believe have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements are set forth below. For further information on all significant accounting policies, refer to Note 2 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue
We derive our revenue primarily from MaaS subscription fees, application development and support fees. Revenue is recognized when control of these products or services are transferred to our customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those services. Our revenue recognition policy follows guidance from Accounting Standards Codification No. 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606).
We determine revenue recognition through the following five-step framework:
•Identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer;
•Identification of the performance obligations in the contract or contracts;
•Determination of the transaction price;
•Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
•Recognition of revenue when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation.
Our contracts with customers often include promises to transfer multiple products and services to a customer. Determining whether products and services are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately versus together may require significant judgment. When a customer contract consists of licensing, application development and support services, we consider these separate performance obligations, which would require an allocation of consideration. For contracts with multiple performance obligations, the contract price is allocated to separate performance obligations on a relative standalone basis for which significant judgment is required. Judgment is required to determine whether a software license is considered distinct and accounted for separately, or not distinct and accounted for together with the software support and services and recognized over time.
Goodwill
We review goodwill for impairment annually during the fourth quarter or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances would more likely than not reduce the fair value of our single reporting unit below its carrying value. As of December 31, 2020, no impairment of goodwill has been identified.
Convertible Notes
In March 2020, we issued a convertible note with a cash conversion feature. In accounting for the issuance of the note, we separated the note into liability and equity components. The carrying amount of the liability component was calculated by measuring the fair value of a similar liability that does not have a convertible feature.
In July 2020, we also issued additional convertible notes to the same investor as the March 2020 convertible note. Our net cash proceeds after the payoff of the March 2020 convertible note and transaction costs were approximately $1.8 million. We also issued a warrant exercisable for 3 years for the purchase of an aggregate of up to 2,160,000 shares of our common stock at an initial exercise price of $4.00 per share in conjunction with the issuance of the convertible notes. We evaluated all of the financial instruments, including the warrants to purchase common stock issued in conjunction with convertible debt, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives in accordance with ASC with ASC Topic 815-40, Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in an Entity’s Own Stock. The warrants are accounted for as liabilities and initially recorded at its fair value and is then re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the consolidated statement of operations. We used a Black-Scholes option-pricing model to value the warrants at inception and subsequent valuation dates. The initial and subsequent valuation of the warrants requires significant judgment. For the assumptions used to value at warrants at issuance and at December 31, 2020, refer to Note 8 “Debt” of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Recent Accounting Standards
Recent accounting standards applicable to our business are described under the subheading "Recently Adopted Accounting Policies" in Note 2 "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" of the notes to consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.