Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion pertains to the results of operations and financial position of the Company and should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes thereto included elsewhere in this report. This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of Polaris’ Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
Overview
2020 was a record year for sales which totaled approximately $7.0 billion, a four percent increase from 2019, primarily due to strong ORV sales. Our annual sales to North American customers increased approximately four percent and our annual sales to customers outside of North America increased approximately one percent in 2020.
Full year net income attributable to Polaris Inc. of $124.8 million was a 61 percent decrease from 2019, with diluted earnings per share decreasing 62 percent to $1.99 per share. The decrease was primarily due to the $379.2 million (pre-tax) impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets in the second quarter associated with the Company’s Aftermarket segment as a result of market and economic conditions resulting from the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic and financial performance and restructuring actions.
On January 28, 2021, we announced that our Board of Directors approved a two percent increase in the regular quarterly cash dividend to $0.63 per share for the first quarter of 2021, representing the 26th consecutive year of increased dividends to shareholders effective with the 2021 first quarter dividend.
The global spread of COVID-19 has negatively impacted the global economy, disrupted global supply chains and created significant volatility and disruption of financial markets. The impact of this pandemic has affected our business segments, employees, dealers, suppliers, and customers in a variety of ways.
As a result of COVID-19, our sales and profitability during the first half of 2020 were negatively impacted by the temporary suspension of select plant operations, which reduced our manufacture and shipment of products, as well as the temporary closures of certain dealers. During this period, sales and profitability were also negatively impacted by a decline in economic activity related to certain of our end markets, such as those served by Global Adjacent Markets and Aftermarket.
Beginning in the second quarter we began to see stronger than anticipated retail demand for our Powersports products as they provided an attractive social-distancing solution for new and existing Powersports customers. Our unit retail sales of ORVs, snowmobiles, and motorcycles to consumers in North America increased 25 percent in 2020. Further, unit retail sales of our boats also increased significantly during the year. Polaris North American dealer inventory as of December 31, 2020 was down 58 percent as retail sales significantly outpaced shipments. At this time, we expect retail demand to be down in 2021 compared to the strong retail of 2020.
During the second half of the year we made significant progress managing operations as we seek to satisfy retail demand. However, due to the dynamics of the COVID-19 pandemic and other natural disasters, our supply chain and manufacturing operations experienced constraints caused by logistics and production-limiting disruptions. Because of the significant economic uncertainty, we are continuing to execute a cautionary approach to spending given the pandemic-generated economic uncertainty. As the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy and our operations evolves, we will continue to assess the impact on the Company and respond accordingly.
Looking ahead, adverse impacts to the economy and certain of the Company’s business segments, certain suppliers, dealers or customers as a result of COVID-19 may affect the Company’s future valuation of certain assets and therefore may increase the likelihood of additional impairment charges, write-offs, or reserves associated with such assets, including goodwill, indefinite and finite-lived intangible assets, property and equipment, inventories, accounts receivable, tax assets, and other assets.
We believe we are well positioned to mitigate the impacts of COVID-19. We will continue to adjust mitigation measures as needed related to employee health and safety. Those measures might include further suspensions of select plant operations, modifying workspaces, continuing social distancing policies, implementing new personal protective equipment or health screening policies at our facilities, or such other industry best practices needed to continue to maintain a healthy and safe environment for our employees amidst the pandemic. In addition, while we have and will
continue to enhance functionality and security of technology for off-site functions, we are also planning for the eventual reintroduction of our currently remote workforce to our facilities.
The duration of these trends and the magnitude of such impacts cannot be precisely estimated at this time, as they are affected by a number of factors (some of which are outside management’s control), including those presented in Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Annual Report.
Consolidated Results of Operations
The consolidated results of operations were as follows:
Sales:
Sales were $7,027.9 million in 2020, a four percent increase from $6,782.5 million in 2019. The components of the consolidated sales change were as follows:
The three percent volume increase in 2020 was primarily the result of increased ORV shipments and related PG&A. Product mix and price contributed a one percent increase in 2020, primarily due to lower promotional costs for ORVs.
Sales by geographic region were as follows:
Sales in the United States for 2020 increased four percent compared to 2019, primarily due to increased ORV wholegood shipments and higher ORV PG&A sales. The United States represented 82 percent of total company sales in 2020.
Sales in Canada for 2020 were flat compared to 2019. Currency rate movements had less than a one percentage point impact on year-over-year sales. Sales in Canada represented six percent of total company sales in 2020.
Sales in other foreign countries, primarily in Europe, increased one percent in 2020 compared to 2019. This increase was primarily driven by higher ORV shipments. Currency rate movements had less than a one percentage point impact on year-over-year sales. Sales in other foreign countries represented 12 percent of total company sales in 2020.
Cost of sales:
The following table reflects our cost of sales in dollars and as a percentage of sales:
For 2020, cost of sales increased four percent to $5,317.7 million compared to $5,133.7 million in 2019. The increase in cost of sales in 2020 is primarily attributed to increased purchased materials and services related to increased ORV shipments and higher PG&A sales.
Gross profit:
Consolidated gross profit for 2020, as a percentage of sales, was approximately flat compared to the 2019. Lower promotional costs and dealer floor plan financing costs were offset by increased costs resulting from supply chain disruption and higher depreciation related to capital expenditures associated with recent new product launches.
Operating expenses:
Operating expenses for 2020, in absolute dollars and as a percent of sales, increased primarily due to the $379.2 million impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets associated with the Company’s Aftermarket segment, partially offset by decreased stock compensation expense related to the CEO departure and lower non-essential expenses driven by our ongoing cautionary approach to spending given the pandemic-generated economic uncertainty.
Income from financial services:
The following table reflects our income from financial services:
Income from financial services decreased one percent to $80.4 million in 2020 compared to $80.9 million in 2019. The decrease in 2020 was primarily due to lower wholesale financing income due to lower dealer inventory levels, partially offset by higher retail credit income driven by higher retail sales.
Interest expense:
The decrease in 2020 compared to 2019, was primarily due to lower interest rates.
Equity in loss of other affiliates:
In the 2019 comparable period, the Company incurred $5.1 million of losses associated with certain investments in nonmarketable securities of strategic companies. Such losses did not occur in 2020.
Other (income) expense, net:
The change in Other (income) expense, net primarily relates to foreign currency exchange rate movements and the corresponding effects on foreign currency transactions, currency hedging positions and balance sheet positions related to our foreign subsidiaries from period to period.
Provision for income taxes:
Income tax expense was $16.5 million, or 11.6% of income before income taxes, for 2020 compared with income tax expense of $83.9 million, or 20.6% of income before income taxes, for 2019. The lower income tax rate for 2020 was primarily due to the lower pretax income generated combined with the incremental benefit from the passing of the statute of limitations on certain tax positions during the year.
Weighted average shares outstanding:
The change in the weighted average diluted shares outstanding from 2019 to 2020 was primarily due to share issuances under employee plans.
Segment Results of Operations
The summary that follows provides a discussion of the results of operations of each of our five reportable segments. Each of these segments is comprised of various product offerings that serve multiple end markets. We evaluate performance based on sales and gross profit.
Beginning in the first quarter of 2020, certain costs, primarily incentive-based compensation costs, previously classified as "Corporate" in the Company's segment gross profit results were allocated to the respective operating segments results. The comparative 2019 gross profit results for ORV/Snowmobiles, Motorcycles, Global Adjacent Markets, Aftermarket, Boats, and Corporate were reclassified for comparability. However, the 2018 gross profit results presented below have not been reclassified to reallocate the costs discussed above and are therefore not comparable to 2020 and 2019 results.
Our sales and gross profit by reporting segment, which includes the respective PG&A, were as follows:
ORV/Snowmobiles:
ORV sales, inclusive of PG&A, of $4,187.9 million in 2020, which includes ATV, Polaris GENERAL, RANGER, and RZR vehicles, increased nine percent compared to 2019. This increase was primarily driven by increased RANGER and ATV shipments as a result of strong retail, as well as higher PG&A sales. Polaris’ North American ORV unit retail sales to consumers increased mid-twenties percent for 2020 compared to 2019, with ATV unit retail sales up high-twenties percent and side-by-side vehicles unit retail sales up mid-twenties percent over the prior year, as our products provided an attractive social-distancing solution for new and existing Powersports customers. The Company estimates that North American industry ORV retail sales were up approximately 30 percent over the prior year. Polaris North American dealer inventories of ORVs decreased mid-sixties percent from 2019 as a result of strong retail sales. ORV sales outside of North America increased 11 percent in 2020 compared to 2019. For 2020, the average ORV per unit sales price increased approximately one percent compared to 2019’s average per unit sales price, primarily driven by lower promotional costs.
Snowmobiles sales, inclusive of PG&A sales, decreased 10 percent to $345.4 million for 2020 compared to 2019. Retail sales to consumers for the 2020-2021 season-to-date period through December 31, 2020, increased mid-twenties percent. Sales of snowmobiles to customers outside of North America, principally within the Scandinavian region and Russia, decreased approximately 19 percent in 2020 as compared to 2019. The Company estimates that North American industry snowmobile retail sales for the 2020-2021 season-to-date period through December 31, 2020, increased high-teens
percent. Polaris North American dealer inventories of snowmobiles decreased 50 percent from 2019. The average per unit sales price in 2020 increased approximately eight percent over 2019’s average per unit sales price, primarily driven by favorable mix.
For the ORV/Snowmobiles segment, gross profit, as a percentage of sales, decreased from 2019 to 2020, primarily due to higher logistical costs as well as plant inefficiencies resulting from the temporary suspension of select plant operations in the first half of the year and ongoing supply chain constraints, partially offset by higher average selling prices driven by lower promotional costs and lower dealer floor plan financing costs, as well as higher PG&A sales.
Motorcycles:
Sales of Motorcycles, inclusive of PG&A sales, decreased slightly from $584.1 million in 2019 to $581.7 million in 2020, primarily due to decreased sales of Indian motorcycles of nine percent, partially offset by an increase in sales of Slingshot of 57 percent. The Company estimates North American industry retail sales of combined 900cc and above cruiser, touring (including 3-wheel), and standard market segments decreased high-single digits percent in 2020 compared to 2019. Over the same period, Polaris North American motorcycle (including Slingshot) unit retail sales to consumers increased high-twenties percent. Polaris North American motorcycle (including Slingshot) dealer inventory decreased low-twenties percent in 2020 versus 2019 levels. Sales of motorcycles (including Slingshot) to customers outside of North America decreased approximately eight percent in 2020 compared to 2019, due primarily to a decrease in Indian motorcycle shipments. The average per unit sales price for the Motorcycles segment in 2020 was approximately flat compared to 2019’s average per unit sales price.
Gross profit, as a percentage of sales, decreased from 2019 to 2020, primarily due to unfavorable mix, higher logistical costs, and plant inefficiencies resulting from the temporary suspension of select plant operations in the first half of the year and ongoing supply chain constraints, partially offset by lower European Union retaliatory tariffs and lower warranty expense.
Global Adjacent Markets:
Global Adjacent Markets sales, inclusive of PG&A sales, decreased eight percent to $424.6 million for 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease in sales was driven by industrial, educational, government and rental organizations reducing or suspending purchases during the COVID-19 pandemic. The decrease in sales was primarily in the Commercial, Government and Defense businesses, partially offset by growth in Polaris Adventures. Sales to customers outside of North America decreased approximately five percent in 2020 compared to 2019.
Gross profit, as a percentage of sales, decreased from 2019 to 2020, primarily due to the reduction of sales volumes resulting in decreased leverage of manufacturing fixed costs, partially offset by favorable product mix.
Aftermarket:
Aftermarket sales, which includes Transamerican Auto Parts (TAP), along with our other aftermarket brands of Klim, Kolpin, ProArmor, Trail Tech and 509, of $884.9 million for 2020 were down two percent compared to 2019, primarily due to a five percent decrease in TAP’s full year sales. TAP sales declined 10% over the first half of the year before stabilizing and growing by one percent over the second half of the year. Underlying the full year performance, we saw a decline within our wholesale business channel, partially offset by growth in our direct to consumer e-commerce platforms. The decrease in full year TAP sales was partially offset by other aftermarket growth of 14%, driven by accessories and apparel demand through dealer, retail, and e-commerce channels.
Gross profit, as a percentage of sales, increased from 2019 to 2020, primarily due to favorable pricing and mix, partially offset by higher freight and logistics costs.
Boats:
Boat sales decreased three percent to $603.4 million in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to the temporary suspension of production in the first half of 2020 caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. We estimate that U.S. pontoon industry unit sales increased high-teens percent during 2020. Polaris U.S. pontoon unit retail sales to consumers was also up high-teens percent during 2020.
Gross profit, as a percentage of sales, decreased from 2019 to 2020, primarily due to costs associated with restructuring activities, partially offset by favorable pricing and margin enhancement initiatives.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary sources of funds have been cash provided by operating and financing activities. Our primary uses of funds have been for acquisitions, repurchase and retirement of common stock, capital investments, new product development and cash dividends to shareholders. The seasonality of production and shipments cause working capital requirements to fluctuate during the year.
Given the economic uncertainty as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we took actions in 2020 to improve our liquidity position, including reducing working capital, temporarily suspending share repurchases, postponing certain capital expenditures, and reducing operating costs by delaying research and development programs, reducing production, initiating workforce reductions and furloughs, and substantially reducing discretionary spending. These actions combined with the strength of our end markets in the second half of 2020 further bolstered our liquidity position heading into 2021. As the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy and our operations evolves, we will continue to assess our liquidity needs.
We believe that existing cash balances, cash flow to be generated from operating activities and borrowing capacity under the credit facility arrangement will be sufficient to fund operations, new product development, cash dividends, share repurchases, and capital requirements for the foreseeable future.
The following table summarizes the cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
Operating Activities:
Net cash provided by operating activities was $1,018.6 million and $655.1 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The $363.5 million increase is primarily the result of improved working capital due to strong end-market demand. The impacts of demand on working capital have been a decrease in finished goods inventory and increases in raw materials and accounts payable. Further, excluding the impact of the non-cash impairment charge, net income was higher than the prior year comparable period which further added to the increase in net cash provided by operating activities.
Investing Activities:
Net cash used for investing activities was $150.7 million and $239.3 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The primary sources and uses of cash in 2020 were for the purchase of property and equipment and tooling for continued capacity and capability at our manufacturing and distribution facilities and for product development, as well as distributions from and contributions to Polaris Acceptance. As a result of the uncertainty associated with the COVID-19 related economic slowdown, the Company reduced or postponed certain planned capital expenditures. This decrease in expenditures combined with an increase in cash distributions from Polaris Acceptance due to lower dealer inventory levels resulted in less cash used for investing activities compared to the prior year.
Financing Activities:
Net cash used for financing activities was $415.4 million and $411.8 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. We paid cash dividends of $152.5 million and $149.1 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Total common stock repurchased in 2020 and 2019 totaled $50.3 million and $8.4 million, respectively. Net repayments under debt arrangements, finance lease obligations and notes payable totaled $246.2 million and $270.0 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Proceeds from the issuance of stock under employee plans were $33.6 million and $15.7 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Financing Arrangements:
We are party to an unsecured credit agreement, which includes a $700.0 million variable interest rate revolving loan facility that expires in July 2023, under which we have unsecured borrowings. At December 31, 2020, there were no borrowings outstanding under this arrangement. Our credit agreement also includes a term loan facility, of which $940.0 million is outstanding as of December 31, 2020. On April 9, 2020, the Company amended the credit agreement to provide a new incremental 364-day term loan (the “incremental term loan”) in the amount of $300.0 million. The new incremental term loan, which was fully drawn on closing, was unsecured and set to mature on April 8, 2021, however, the incremental term loan was paid off in December 2020. Interest is charged at rates based on LIBOR or “prime” for these agreements. As of December 31, 2020, we had $695.3 million of availability on the revolving loan facility. The Company is also party to an unsecured Master Note Purchase Agreement, as amended and supplemented. At December 31, 2020 outstanding borrowings under the agreement totaled $425.0 million.
The credit agreement and the amended Master Note Purchase Agreement contain covenants that require Polaris to maintain certain financial ratios, including minimum interest coverage and maximum leverage ratios. On May 26, 2020, the Company further amended the credit agreement and amended Master Note Purchase Agreement to temporarily decrease its minimum interest coverage ratio from not less than 3.00x to not less than 2.25x and temporarily increase its maximum leverage ratio from 3.50x to 4.75x on a rolling four quarter basis until March 31, 2021. Polaris was in compliance with all such covenants at December 31, 2020. On January 15, 2021 the Company further amended the credit agreement and amended Master Note Purchase Agreement to revert the financial covenants to those in place prior to the 2020 amendments.
As a component of the Boat Holdings merger agreement in 2018, Polaris has committed to make a series of deferred payments to the former owners following the closing date of the merger through July 2030. The original discounted payable was for $76.7 million, of which $66.5 million is outstanding as of December 31, 2020. The outstanding balance is included in long-term debt and current portion of long-term debt in the consolidated balance sheets.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we were in compliance with all debt covenants. Our debt to total capital ratio was 56 percent and 60 percent at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Share Repurchases:
Our Board of Directors has authorized the cumulative repurchase of up to 90.5 million shares of our common stock through an authorized stock repurchase program. Of that total, approximately 87.9 million shares have been repurchased cumulatively from 1996 through December 31, 2020. We repurchased a total of 0.6 million shares of our common stock for $50.3 million during 2020, which had an immaterial impact on earnings per share. We have authorization from our Board of Directors to repurchase up to an additional 2.6 million shares of our common stock as of December 31, 2020. The repurchase of any or all such shares authorized remaining for repurchase will be governed by applicable SEC rules.
Wholesale Customer Financing Arrangements:
We have arrangements with certain finance companies to provide secured floor plan financing for our dealers. These arrangements provide liquidity by financing dealer purchases of our products without the use of our working capital. A majority of the worldwide sales of snowmobiles, ORVs, motorcycles, boats and related PG&A are financed under similar arrangements whereby we receive payment within a few days of shipment of the product. The amount financed by worldwide dealers under these arrangements related to snowmobiles, ORVs, motorcycles, boats and related PG&A as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, was approximately $1,064.0 million and $1,884.1 million, respectively. We participate in the cost of dealer financing up to certain limits.
Polaris Acceptance, a joint venture between Polaris and Wells Fargo Commercial Distribution Finance Corporation (“WFCDF”), a direct subsidiary of Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. (“Wells Fargo”), which is supported by a partnership agreement between their respective wholly owned subsidiaries, finances substantially all of our U.S. sales of snowmobiles, ORVs, motorcycles, and related PG&A, whereby we receive payment within a few days of shipment of the product. The partnership agreement is effective through February 2027.
Polaris Acceptance sells a majority of its receivables portfolio (the “Securitized Receivables”) to a securitization facility (“Securitization Facility”) arranged by Wells Fargo, a WFCDF affiliate. The sale of receivables from Polaris Acceptance to the Securitization Facility is accounted for in Polaris Acceptance’s financial statements as a “true-sale” under ASC Topic 860. Polaris Acceptance is not responsible for any continuing servicing costs or obligations with respect to the
Securitized Receivables. The remaining portion of the receivable portfolio is recorded on Polaris Acceptance’s books, and is funded through a loan from an affiliate of WFCDF and through equity contributions from both partners. At December 31, 2020, the outstanding amount of net receivables financed for dealers under this arrangement, including Securitized Receivables, was $771.5 million, a 46 percent decrease from $1,423.4 million at December 31, 2019, as a result of significantly lower dealer inventory in the current year.
We account for our investment in Polaris Acceptance under the equity method. Polaris Acceptance is funded through equal equity cash investments from the partners and a loan from an affiliate of WFCDF. We do not guarantee the outstanding indebtedness of Polaris Acceptance. The partnership agreement provides that all income and losses of Polaris Acceptance are shared 50 percent by our wholly owned subsidiary and 50 percent by WFCDF’s subsidiary. Our total investment in Polaris Acceptance at December 31, 2020 was $59.4 million. Our exposure to losses of Polaris Acceptance is limited to our equity in Polaris Acceptance. Credit losses in the Polaris Acceptance portfolio have been modest, averaging less than one percent of the portfolio.
We have agreed to repurchase products repossessed by Polaris Acceptance up to an annual maximum of 15 percent of the aggregate average month-end outstanding Polaris Acceptance receivables and Securitized Receivables during the prior calendar year. For calendar year 2020, the potential 15 percent aggregate repurchase obligation was approximately $198.3 million. For calendar year 2021, the potential 15 percent aggregate repurchase obligation is approximately $138.7 million. Our financial exposure under this arrangement is limited to the difference between the amount paid to the finance company for repurchases and the amount received on the resale of the repossessed product. No material losses have been incurred under this agreement during the periods presented. However, an adverse change in retail sales could cause this situation to change and thereby require us to repurchase repossessed units subject to the annual limitation referred to above.
A subsidiary of TCF Financial Corporation (“TCF”) finances a portion of our United States sales of boats whereby we receive payment within a few days of shipment of the product. We have agreed to repurchase products repossessed by TCF up to a maximum of 100 percent of the aggregate outstanding TCF receivables balance. At December 31, 2020, the potential aggregate repurchase obligation was approximately $135.7 million. Our financial exposure under this arrangement is limited to the difference between the amounts unpaid by the dealer with respect to the repossessed product plus costs of repossession and the amount received on the resale of the repossessed product. No material losses have been incurred under this agreement during the periods presented. However, an adverse change in retail sales could cause this situation to change and thereby require us to repurchase repossessed units subject to the annual limitation referred to above.
Retail Customer Financing Arrangements:
We have agreements with certain financial institutions under which these financial institutions provide retail credit financing to end consumers of our products in the United States. The income generated from these agreements has been included as a component of income from financial services in the accompanying consolidated statements of income. At December 31, 2020, the agreements in place were as follows:
During 2020, consumers financed 30 percent of our vehicles sold in the United States through the Performance Finance, Sheffield Financial and Synchrony Bank installment retail credit arrangements. The volume of installment credit contracts written in calendar year 2020 with these institutions was $1,515.9 million, a 21 percent increase from 2019.
Critical Accounting Policies
We have adopted various accounting policies to prepare the consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Some of those significant accounting policies require us to make difficult, subjective, or complex judgments or estimates. An accounting estimate is considered to be critical if it meets both of the following criteria: (i) the estimate requires assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the accounting estimate is made, and (ii) different
estimates reasonably could have been used, or changes in the estimate that are reasonably likely to occur may have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations. The significant accounting policies that management believes are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results include the following: revenue recognition, sales promotions and incentives, product warranties, product liability, and goodwill and indefinite-lived intangibles.
Revenue recognition. With respect to wholegood vehicles, boats, parts, garments and accessories, revenue is recognized when we transfer control of the product to our customer. With respect to services provided by us, revenue is recognized upon completion of the service or over the term of the service agreement in proportion to the costs expected to be incurred in satisfying the obligations over the term of the service period. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for transferring goods or providing services. Sales, value add, and other taxes we collect concurrent with revenue-producing activities are excluded from revenue. Incidental items that are immaterial in the context of the contract are recognized as expense. The expected costs associated with our limited warranties are recognized as expense when the products are sold. We recognize revenue for vehicle service contracts that extend mechanical and maintenance coverage beyond our limited warranties over the life of the contract. Historically, product returns, whether in the normal course of business or resulting from repurchases made under the floor plan financing program, have not been material. However, we have agreed to repurchase products repossessed by the finance companies up to certain limits. Our financial exposure is limited to the difference between the amount paid to the finance companies and the amount received on the resale of the repossessed product. No material losses have been incurred under these agreements. Revenue from goods and services transferred to customers at a point-in-time accounts for the majority of our revenue.
Sales promotions and incentives. We provide for estimated sales promotion and incentive expenses, which are recognized as a component of sales in measuring the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for transferring goods or providing services. Examples of sales promotion and incentive programs include dealer and consumer rebates, volume incentives, retail financing programs and sales associate incentives. Sales promotion and incentive expenses are estimated based on current programs and historical rates for each product line. We record these amounts as a liability in the consolidated balance sheet until they are ultimately paid. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, accrued sales promotions and incentives were $138.1 million and $189.9 million, respectively. Actual results may differ from these estimates if market conditions dictate the need to enhance or reduce sales promotion and incentive programs or if the customer usage rate varies from historical trends. Adjustments to sales promotions and incentives accruals are made as actual usage becomes known in order to properly estimate the amounts necessary to generate consumer demand based on market conditions as of the balance sheet date.
Product warranties. We provide a limited warranty for our vehicles and boats for a period of six months to ten years, depending on the product. We provide longer warranties in certain geographical markets as determined by local regulations and customary practice and may provide longer warranties related to certain promotional programs. Our standard warranties require us, generally through our dealer network, to repair or replace defective products during such warranty periods. The warranty reserve is established at the time of sale to the dealer or distributor based on management’s best estimate using historical rates and trends. We record these amounts as a liability in the consolidated balance sheet until they are ultimately paid. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the accrued warranty liability was $140.8 million and $136.2 million, respectively. Adjustments to the warranty reserve are made based on actual claims experience in order to properly estimate the amounts necessary to settle future and existing claims on products sold as of the balance sheet date. The warranty reserve includes the estimated costs related to recalls, which are accrued when probable and estimable. Factors that could have an impact on the warranty accrual include the following: changes in manufacturing quality, shifts in product mix, changes in warranty coverage periods, impacts on product usage (including weather), product recalls and changes in sales volume. While management believes that the warranty reserve is adequate and that the judgment applied is appropriate, such amounts estimated to be due and payable could differ materially from what will ultimately transpire in the future, and have a material adverse effect on our financial condition.
Product liability. We are subject to product liability claims in the normal course of business. We carry excess insurance coverage for product liability claims. We self-insure product liability claims before the policy date and up to the purchased insurance coverage after the policy date. The estimated costs resulting from any uninsured losses are charged to operating expenses when it is probable a loss has been incurred and the amount of the loss is reasonably estimable. There is significant judgment and estimation required in evaluating the possible outcomes and potential losses of product liability matters. We utilize historical trends and actuarial analysis, along with an analysis of current claims, to assist in determining the appropriate loss reserve levels. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had accruals of $70.7 million and
$57.0 million, respectively, for the probable payment of pending and expected claims related to product liability matters associated with our products. This accrual is included as a component of other accrued expenses in the consolidated balance sheets. While management believes the product liability reserves are adequate, adverse determination of material product liability claims made against us could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition.
Goodwill. Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price of acquired businesses over the net of the fair value of identifiable tangible net assets and identifiable intangible assets purchased and liabilities assumed. Goodwill is tested at least annually for impairment and is tested for impairment more frequently when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. The Company completes its annual goodwill impairment test as of the first day of the fourth quarter.
The Company may first perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of each reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. A qualitative assessment requires that we consider events or circumstances including macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors, overall financial performance, changes in management or key personnel, changes in strategy, changes in customers, changes in the composition or carrying amount of a reporting unit’s net assets, and changes in our stock price. If, after assessing the totality of events or circumstances, it is determined that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, or if the Company elects to bypass the qualitative test and proceed to a quantitative test, then the quantitative goodwill impairment test is performed. A quantitative test includes comparing the fair value of each reporting unit to the carrying amount of the reporting unit, including goodwill. If the estimated fair value is less than the carrying amount of the reporting unit, an impairment is recognized in an amount equal to the difference, limited to the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
Under the quantitative goodwill impairment test, the fair value of each reporting unit is determined using a discounted cash flow analysis and market approach. Determining the fair value of the reporting units requires the use of significant judgment, including discount rates, assumptions in the Company’s long-term business plan about future revenues and expenses, capital expenditures, and changes in working capital, which are dependent on internal forecasts, estimation of long-term growth for each reporting unit, and determination of the discount rate. These plans take into consideration numerous factors including historical experience, anticipated future economic conditions, including the impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic, changes in raw material prices and growth expectations for the industries and end markets in which the Company participates. These assumptions are determined over a five year long-term planning period. The five year growth rates for revenues and earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization ("EBITDA") vary for each reporting unit being evaluated. Revenues and EBITDA beyond five years are projected to grow at a terminal growth rate consistent with industry expectations. Actual results may significantly differ from those used in our valuations. The forecasted future cash flows are discounted using a discount rate developed for each reporting unit. The discount rates were developed using market observable inputs, as well as our assessment of risks inherent in the future cash flows of the respective reporting unit.
In estimating fair value using the market approach, we identify a group of comparable publicly traded companies for each reporting unit that are similar in terms of size and product offering. These groups of comparable companies are used to develop multiples based on total market-based invested capital as a multiple of EBITDA. We determine our estimated values by applying these comparable EBITDA multiples to the operating results of our reporting units. The ultimate fair value of each reporting unit is determined considering the results of both valuation methods. Inputs used to estimate these fair values included significant unobservable inputs that reflect the Company’s assumptions about the inputs that market participants would use and, therefore, the fair value assessments are classified within Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy.
In the second quarter of 2020, as a result of market and economic conditions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as financial performance and restructuring actions, we identified indicators that it was more-likely-than-not that the fair value of the Aftermarket and Boats reporting units would be less than their respective carrying values. Our evaluation included consideration of changes in business performance assumptions compared to those used in our 2019 annual impairment test. As a result, we performed quantitative goodwill impairment tests of the Aftermarket and Boats reporting units.
The level of judgment and estimation is inherently higher in the current environment considering the uncertainty created by the COVID-19 pandemic. We evaluated numerous factors disrupting our business and made significant assumptions which include the severity and duration of the business disruption, the potential impact on customer demand, the timing and degree of economic recovery and ultimately, the combined effect of these assumptions on our future operating results and cash flows.
As a result of this analysis, during the second quarter of 2020 we recorded impairment charges of $270.3 million related to goodwill of the Aftermarket reporting unit. Subsequent to the impairment charges recorded, there is no remaining goodwill for the Aftermarket reporting unit. There were no impairment charges recorded related to the Boats reporting unit. The Boats reporting unit did not have a difference between its fair value and carrying value that was lower than 10%.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, we completed the annual impairment test. It was determined that goodwill was not impaired as each reporting unit’s fair value exceeded its carrying value. We completed a qualitative assessment for the ORV, Snow, Motorcycles and Global Adjacent Markets reporting units and a quantitative goodwill test for the Boats reporting unit. No assessment was performed for the Aftermarket reporting unit as it did not have a goodwill balance as of the annual testing date.
The difference between the Boats reporting unit’s fair value and carrying value was not lower than 10%. While management believes the projections, discount rate, and other assumptions are reasonable, the estimated fair value of the reporting unit is particularly dependent on the strength of the pontoon industry and there is a high level of uncertainty regarding the long-term financial impacts of COVID-19 and the economic recovery. As a result, there can be no assurance that the estimates and assumptions made in our analysis will prove to be an accurate prediction of the future. To the extent future operating results differ from those in our current forecast or our assumptions change pertaining to the business disruption, its impact on customer demand and the related recovery, it is possible that an impairment charge could be recorded in a future accounting period.
Identifiable intangible assets. Our primary identifiable intangible assets include: dealer/customer relationships, brand/trade names, developed technology, and non-compete agreements. Identifiable intangibles with finite lives are amortized and those identifiable intangibles with indefinite lives are not amortized. Identifiable intangible assets that are subject to amortization are evaluated for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. Identifiable intangible assets with indefinite lives are tested for impairment annually or more frequently when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. We complete our annual impairment test as of the first day of the fourth quarter each year for identifiable intangible assets with indefinite lives.
Our identifiable intangible assets with indefinite lives include brand/trade names. The impairment test consists of a comparison of the fair value of the brand/trade name with its carrying value. The fair value is determined using the relief-from-royalty method. This method assumes the trade name has value to the extent that the owner is relieved of the obligation to pay royalties for the benefits received from them. This method requires us to estimate the future revenue for the related brands, the appropriate royalty rate and the discount rate. Forecasted revenues are derived from our annual budget and long-term business plan and royalty rates were based on brand profitability. The discount rates are developed using the market observable inputs used in the development of the reporting unit discount rates, as well as our assessment of risks inherent in the future cash flows of the respective trade name.
In the second quarter of 2020, as a result of market and economic conditions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as financial performance and restructuring actions, we determined that the conditions indicated that indefinite lived intangible assets within the Aftermarket and Boats reporting units were more-likely-than-not impaired and performed an impairment test to compare the fair value of these indefinite lived intangible assets, consisting of certain brand/trade names, with their carrying value. As a result of this analysis, during the second quarter of 2020 the Company recorded impairment charges of $108.9 million related to certain brand/trade names associated with Transamerican Auto Parts which are included in the Aftermarket reporting unit.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, we completed the annual impairment test. It was determined that the Company’s remaining indefinite lived intangible assets were not impaired.
While management believes the projections, discount rate, royalty rate, and other assumptions are reasonable, the estimated fair value of the Aftermarket brand/trade names are particularly dependent on Aftermarket’s ability to execute the planned actions underlying the forecasted improvement in its performance and there is a high level of uncertainty regarding the ultimate financial impacts of COVID-19 and the economic recovery. Similarly, the estimated fair value of the Boats brand/trade names are particularly dependent on the continued strength of the pontoon industry. As a result, there can be no assurance that the estimates and assumptions made in our analysis will prove to be an accurate prediction of the future. To the extent future operating results differ from those in our current forecast or our assumptions change pertaining to the business disruption, its impact on customer demand and the related recovery, it is possible that an impairment charge could be recorded in a future accounting period.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See Item 8 of Part II, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 1-Organization and Significant Accounting Policies-New accounting pronouncements.”