Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion is designed to provide the reader with information that will assist in understanding our consolidated financial statements, the changes in certain key items in those financial statements from year to year, and the primary factors that accounted for those changes, as well as how certain accounting principles affect our consolidated financial statements. In addition, the following discussion includes certain forward-looking statements. For a discussion of important factors, including the continuing development of our business and other factors which could cause actual results to differ materially from the results referred to in the forward-looking statements, see “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” contained in this Annual Report. Unless otherwise indicated, information in Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations has been retrospectively adjusted to reflect continuing operations for all periods presented. See Note 4 - Discontinued Operations and Exit Activities to the audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for further information.
Business Overview
Our Business
Premier, Inc. (“Premier”, the “Company”, “we”, or “our”) is a leading healthcare improvement company, uniting an alliance of U.S. hospitals, health systems and other providers and organizations to transform healthcare. We partner with hospitals, health systems, physicians and other healthcare providers with the common goal of improving and innovating in the clinical, financial and operational areas of their businesses to meet the demands of a rapidly evolving healthcare industry. We deliver value through a comprehensive technology-enabled platform that offers critical supply chain services, clinical, financial, operational and value-based care software-as-a-service (“SaaS”) and licensed-based clinical analytics products, enterprise analytics licenses, consulting services and performance improvement collaborative programs. We also provide services to other businesses including food service, schools and universities.
We generated net revenue, net income from continuing operations and Adjusted EBITDA (a financial measure not determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (“Non-GAAP”)) for the periods presented as follows (in thousands):
See “Our Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures” and “Results of Operations” below for a discussion of our use of Adjusted EBITDA and a reconciliation of net income from continuing operations to Adjusted EBITDA.
Our Business Segments
Our business model and solutions are designed to provide our members and other customers access to scale efficiencies while focusing on optimization of information resources and cost containment, provide actionable intelligence derived from anonymized data in our data warehouse provided by our members, mitigate the risk of innovation and disseminate best practices that will help our member organizations and other customers succeed in their transformation to higher quality and more cost-effective healthcare. We deliver our integrated platform of solutions that address the areas of total cost management, quality and safety improvement and value-based care through two business segments: Supply Chain Services and Performance Services.
Segment net revenue was as follows (in thousands):
Our Supply Chain Services segment includes one of the largest healthcare group purchasing organization programs (“GPO”) in the United States, serving acute, non-acute, non-healthcare and alternate sites, supply chain co-management and our direct sourcing activities. We generate revenue in our Supply Chain Services segment from administrative fees received from suppliers based on the total dollar volume of supplies purchased by our members and other customers, fees from supply chain co-management and through product sales in connection with our direct sourcing activities.
Our Performance Services segment includes one of the largest clinical and cost analytics and consulting services businesses in the United States focused on healthcare providers. We are also expanding our capabilities to more fully address and coordinate care improvement and standardization in the employer, payor and life sciences markets. Our SaaS-based clinical analytics products and technology licenses utilize our comprehensive data set to provide actionable intelligence to our members and other customers, enabling them to benchmark, analyze and identify areas of improvement across three main categories: cost management, quality and safety, and value-based care. The Performance Services segment also includes our technology-enabled performance improvement collaboratives, consulting services, insurance management services, the Contigo Health - direct to employer business and the Remitra - electronic invoicing and payables platform.
Beginning in fiscal 2022, our Performance Services segment will consist of three sub-brands: PINC AITM, RemitraTM and Contigo Health®. Each will serve different markets but are all united in our vision to optimize provider performance and accelerate industry innovation for better, smarter healthcare. For additional information, please see “Performance Services Realignment for Fiscal 2022” above.
Acquisitions and Divestitures
Acquisition of Invoice Delivery Services, LP Assets
On March 1, 2021, we, through a newly formed consolidated subsidiary, Premier IDS, LLC (“Premier IDS”), acquired substantially all the assets and assumed certain liabilities of Invoice Delivery Services, LP (“IDS”) for an adjusted purchase price of $80.7 million, subject to certain adjustments, of which $80.0 million was paid at closing with borrowings under our Credit Facility (as defined in Note 10 - Debt and Notes Payable to the accompanying audited consolidated financial statements).
IDS offers digitization technologies that convert paper and portable document format (“PDF”) invoices to an electronic format to automate, streamline and simplify accounts payable processes in healthcare. IDS’ solutions include those for electronic invoicing and tracking, as well as digital payments. IDS is being integrated within Premier under the brand name RemitraTM and reported as part of the Performance Services segment. See Note 3 - Business Acquisitions to the accompanying audited consolidated financial statements for further information.
Acquisition of Health Design Plus, LLC
On May 4, 2020, we, through our consolidated subsidiary Premier Healthcare Solutions, Inc. (“PHSI”), acquired 97% of the equity of Health Design Plus, LLC (“HDP”) for an adjusted purchase price of $23.8 million, giving effect to certain purchase price adjustments provided for in the purchase agreement. The transaction was funded with borrowings under our Credit Facility. HDP is a third-party administrator and arranges care for employees through its Centers of Excellence program. Shortly after closing, HDP was renamed Contigo Health, LLC (“Contigo Health”) and is reported as part of the Performance Services segment. See Note 3 - Business Acquisitions to the accompanying audited consolidated financial statements for further information.
Acquisition of Acurity and Nexera Assets
On February 28, 2020, we, through two newly formed consolidated subsidiaries, Prince A Purchaser, LLC (“PAP”) and Prince N Purchaser, LLC (“PNP”), acquired substantially all of the assets and certain liabilities of Acurity, Inc. and Nexera, Inc., both indirect wholly-owned subsidiaries of Greater New York Hospital Association (“GNYHA”), for an aggregate amount of $291.5 million, of which $166.1 million was paid at closing with borrowings under our Credit Facility (the “Acurity and Nexera asset acquisition”). Pursuant to the terms of the asset purchase agreement (as amended, the “Purchase Agreement”), an additional $120.0 million will be paid to the sellers in four equal annual installments of $30.0 million on or about June 30, 2021, 2022, 2023 and 2024. The first annual installment was paid on June 30, 2021. An additional $4.7 million was paid to GNYHA during the year ended June 30, 2021 for the final payment related to GNYHA’s tax receivable agreement (“TRA”). In addition, the Purchase Agreement provides a graduated earn-out opportunity to Acurity, Inc. of up to $30.0 million based upon our achievement of a range of member renewals on terms to be agreed to by us and GNYHA based on prevailing market conditions in December 2023.
After the closing of the transaction, we changed the names of PAP and PNP to Acurity, LLC (“Acurity”) and Nexera, LLC (“Nexera”), respectively. Acurity is a regional group purchasing organization and has been a customer and strategic partner of ours for more than 24 years. Nexera is a hospital financial improvement consulting firm which partners with healthcare
organizations to improve hospital and health system performance, with a material focus on supply chain enhancement and transformation. We report the operations of Acurity and Nexera as part of the Supply Chain Services segment. See Note 3 - Business Acquisitions to the accompanying audited consolidated financial statements for further information.
Acquisition of Medpricer
On October 28, 2019, we, through our consolidated subsidiary, Premier Supply Chain Improvement, Inc. (“PSCI”), acquired all of the outstanding capital stock in Medpricer.com, Inc. (“Medpricer”) for an adjusted purchase price of $38.5 million giving effect to certain purchase price adjustments provided for in the purchase agreement. The transaction was funded with borrowings under the Credit Facility. Medpricer is a SaaS-based provider of technology solutions that enable hospitals and other organizations to analyze, benchmark and source purchased services contracts independent of any existing GPO affiliation. During the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2020, Medpricer changed its name to Conductiv, Inc. (“Conductiv”) and is reported as part of the Supply Chain Services segment. See Note 3 - Business Acquisitions to the accompanying audited consolidated financial statements for further information.
Market and Industry Trends and Outlook
We expect that certain trends and economic or industry wide factors will continue to affect our business, both in the short- and long-term. We have based our expectations described below on assumptions made by us and on information currently available to us. To the extent our underlying assumptions about, or interpretation of, available information prove to be incorrect, our actual results may vary materially from our expected results. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors.”
Trends in the U.S. healthcare market affect our revenues and costs in the Supply Chain Services and Performance Services segments. The trends we see affecting our current healthcare business include the impact of the implementation of current or future healthcare legislation, particularly the potential for the Affordable Care Act (“ACA”) to be materially altered by Congress, through regulatory action by government agencies, or in the event of a change of party control in Congress. Actions related to the ACA could be disruptive for Premier and our customers, impacting revenue, reporting requirements, payment reforms, shift in care to the alternate site market and increased data availability and transparency. To meet the demands of this environment, there will be increased focus on scale and cost containment and healthcare providers will need to measure and report on and bear financial risk for outcomes. Over the long-term, we believe these trends will result in increased demand for our Supply Chain Services and Performance Services solutions in the areas of cost management, quality and safety, and value-based care; however, there are uncertainties and risks that may affect the actual impact of these anticipated trends, expected demand for our services or related assumptions on our business. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” for more information.
COVID-19 Pandemic, Variants Thereof, Recurrences or Similar Pandemics
In addition to the trends in the U.S. healthcare market discussed above, we face known and unknown uncertainties arising from the outbreak of the novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”) and the resulting global pandemic and financial and operational uncertainty, including its impact on the overall economy, our sales, operations and supply chains, our members and other customers, workforce and suppliers, and countries. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, variants thereof and potential future pandemic outbreaks, we face significant risks including, but not limited to:
•Changes in the demand for our products and services. We experienced and may continue to experience demand uncertainty from both material increases and decreases in demand as a result of COVID-19. There was a material increase in demand for personal protective equipment (“PPE”), drugs and other supplies directly related to treating and preventing the spread of COVID-19 during 2020 and 2021. However, either voluntarily or due to government orders or advisories, patients, hospitals and other medical facilities deferred elective procedures and routine medical visits during the crisis. This created a material decline in the demand for supplies and services not related to COVID-19 during 2020 and 2021 and such lower demand may continue into fiscal 2022 and beyond if COVID-19 vaccine programs are not as successful as anticipated or if COVID-19 variants become widespread. In addition, as a result of our members’ focus on managing the effects of COVID-19 on patients and their businesses, we have experienced a decrease in demand for our consulting and other performance service engagements. Furthermore, during the COVID-19 pandemic, many of our members’ non-acute or non-healthcare facilities, such as education and hospitality businesses, closed, operated on a limited or reduced basis and have delayed re-opening, and, as a result, we may see a material reduction in product sales to those facilities. The extent to which these impacts on demand may continue, and the effect they may have on our business and operating results, will depend upon future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted.
•Limited access to our members’ facilities that impacts our ability to fulfill our contractual requirements. Our member hospitals and non-acute care sites have experienced reduced or limited access for non-patients, including our field teams, consultants and other professionals, and travel restrictions have impacted our employees’ ability to travel to our
members' facilities and the resulting performance on contracts. The long-term continuation, or any future recurrence of these circumstances may negatively impact the ability of our employees to more effectively deliver existing or sell new products and services to our members and could affect our performance of our existing contracts.
•Materials and personnel shortages and disruptions in supply chain, including manufacturing and shipping. The global supply chain has been materially disrupted due to stay at home orders, border closings and rapidly escalating shipping costs. Borders closings and restrictions in response to COVID-19, particularly regarding China and India, have impacted our access to products for our members. Staffing or personnel shortages due to shelter-in-place orders and quarantines have impacted and, in the future, may impact us and our members, other customers or suppliers. In addition, due to unprecedented demand during the COVID-19 pandemic, there have been widespread shortages in certain product categories. During the COVID-19 pandemic, we lost revenue when member healthcare systems chose to source products directly themselves rather than through our GPO when incumbent suppliers could not deliver products in a timely manner or at all. In the food service line, COVID-19 related illnesses impacted food processing suppliers and led to plant closures. If the supply chain for materials used in the products purchased by our members through our GPO or products contract manufactured through our direct sourcing business continue to be adversely impacted by restrictions resulting from COVID-19, our supply chain may continue to be disrupted. Failure of our suppliers, contract manufacturers, distributors, contractors and other business partners to meet their obligations to our members, other customers or to us, or material disruptions in their ability to do so due to their own financial or operational difficulties, may adversely impact our operations.
•Requests for contract modifications, payment deferrals or exercises of force majeure clauses. We have and may continue to receive requests for contract modifications, payment waivers and deferrals, payment reductions or amended payment terms from our contract counterparties. We have and may continue to receive requests to delay service or payment on performance service contracts. In addition, we may receive requests from our suppliers for increases to their contracted prices, and such requests may be implemented in the future. In addition, several pharmacy suppliers have exercised force majeure clauses related to failure to supply clauses in their contracts with us because they are unable to obtain raw materials for manufacturing from India and China. The standard failure to supply language in our contracts contains financial penalties to suppliers if they are unable to supply products, which such suppliers may not be able to pay. In addition, we may not be able to source products from alternative suppliers on commercially reasonable terms, or at all.
•Overall economic and capital markets decline. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic could result in a prolonged recession or depression in the United States or globally that could harm the banking system, limit demand for all products and services and cause other foreseen and unforeseen events and circumstances, all of which could negatively impact us. The continued spread of COVID-19 has led to and could continue to lead to severe disruption and volatility in the United States and global capital markets, which could increase our cost of capital and adversely affect our ability to access the capital markets in the future. In addition, trading prices on the public stock market as well as that of our Class A common stock, have been highly volatile as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
•Managing the evolving regulatory environment. In response to COVID-19, federal, state and local governments are issuing new rules, regulations, changing reimbursement eligibility rules, orders and advisories on a regular basis. These government actions can impact us and our members, other customers and suppliers.
The ultimate impact of COVID-19, variants thereof, recurrences, or similar pandemics on our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows is dependent on future developments, including the duration of any pandemic and the related length of its impact on the United States and global economies, which are uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, variants thereof, recurrences, or future similar pandemics may also exacerbate many of the other risks described in this “Item 1A. Risk Factors” section. Despite our efforts to manage these impacts, their ultimate impact depends on factors beyond our knowledge or control, including the duration and severity of any outbreak and actions taken to contain its spread and mitigate its public health effects. The foregoing and other continued disruptions in our business as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, variants thereof, recurrences or similar pandemics could result in a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition, cash flows, prospects and the trading prices of our securities in the near-term and through fiscal 2021 and beyond.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Below is a discussion of our critical accounting policies and estimates. These and other significant accounting policies are set forth under Note 2 - Significant Accounting Policies to the accompanying audited consolidated financial statements for more information.
Business Combinations
We account for acquisitions of a business using the acquisition method. All the assets acquired, liabilities assumed, contractual contingencies and contingent consideration are generally recognized at their fair value on the acquisition date. Any excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair values of the net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill. Acquisition-related costs are recorded as expenses in the Consolidated Statements of Income and Comprehensive Income.
Several valuation methods may be used to determine the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed. For intangible assets, we typically use the income method. This method starts with a forecast of all of the expected future net cash flows for each asset. These cash flows are then adjusted to present value by applying an appropriate discount rate that reflects the risk factors associated with the cash flow streams. Some of the more significant estimates and assumptions inherent in the income method or other methods include the amount and timing of projected future cash flows, the discount rate selected to measure the risks inherent in the future cash flows and the assessment of the asset's life cycle and the competitive trends impacting the asset, including consideration of any technical, legal, regulatory or economic barriers to entry. Determining the useful life of an intangible asset also requires judgment as different types of intangible assets will have different useful lives and certain assets may even be considered to have indefinite useful lives.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents costs in excess of fair values assigned to the underlying net assets of acquired businesses. We perform our annual goodwill impairment testing on the first day of the last fiscal quarter of our fiscal year unless impairment indicators are present which could require an interim impairment test.
Under accounting rules, we may elect to perform a qualitative assessment to determine if an impairment is more likely than not to have occurred. This qualitative assessment requires an evaluation of any excess of fair value over the carrying value for a reporting unit and significant judgment regarding potential changes in valuation inputs, including a review of our most recent long-range projections, analysis of operating results versus the prior year, changes in market values, changes in discount rates and changes in terminal growth rate assumptions. If it is determined that an impairment is more likely than not to exist, then we are required to perform a quantitative assessment to determine whether or not goodwill is impaired and to measure the amount of goodwill impairment, if any.
A goodwill impairment charge is recognized for the amount by which the reporting unit’s carrying amount exceeds its fair value. We determine the fair value of a reporting unit using a discounted cash flow analysis as well as market-based approaches. Determining fair value requires the exercise of significant judgment, including judgment about appropriate discount rates, perpetual growth rates and the amount and timing of expected future cash flows. The cash flows employed in the discounted cash flow analyses are based on the most recent budget and long-term forecast. The discount rates used in the discounted cash flow analyses are intended to reflect the risks inherent in the future cash flows of the respective reporting units. The market comparable approach estimates fair value using market multiples of various financial measures compared to a set of comparable public companies and recent comparable transactions.
Our most recent annual impairment testing as of April 1, 2021 consisted of a quantitative assessment and did not result in any goodwill impairment charges.
TRA
On August 10, 2020, we exercised our right to terminate the TRA entered into as of September 25, 2013 and effective as of October 1, 2013 by and among us and the former limited partners of Premier LP by providing all former LPs a notice of the termination and the amount of the expected payment to be made to each LP pursuant to the early termination provisions of the TRA with a determination date of August 10, 2020.
Prior to termination of the TRA, we recorded TRA liabilities based on 85% of the estimated amount of tax savings we expected to receive, generally over a 15-year period, which were attributable to the initial purchase of Class B common units from the member owners made concurrently with the IPO and subsequent exchanges by member owners of Class B common units into Class A common stock or cash. Tax payments made under the TRA were made to the member owners as we realized tax benefits. Determining the estimated amount of tax savings we expected to receive required judgment as deductibility of
goodwill amortization expense was not assured and the estimate of tax savings was dependent upon the actual realization of the tax benefit and the tax rates in effect at that time.
Revenue Recognition
We account for a contract with a customer when the contract is committed, the rights of the parties, including payment terms, are identified, the contract has commercial substance and consideration is probable of collection.
Revenue is recognized when, or as, control of a promised product or service transfers to a customer, in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for transferring those products or services. If the consideration promised in a contract includes a variable amount, we estimate the amount to which we expect to be entitled using either the expected value or most likely amount method. Our contracts may include terms that could cause variability in the transaction price, including, for example, revenue share, rebates, discounts, and variable fees based on performance.
We only include estimated amounts of consideration in the transaction price to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is resolved. These estimates require management to make complex, difficult or subjective judgments, and to make estimates about the effect of matters inherently uncertain. As such, we may not be able to reliably estimate variable fees based on performance in certain long-term arrangements due to uncertainties that are not expected to be resolved for a long period of time or when our experience with similar types of contracts is limited. Estimates of variable consideration and the determination of whether to include estimated amounts of consideration in the transaction price are based on information (historical, current and forecasted) that is reasonably available to us, taking into consideration the type of customer, the type of transaction and the specific facts and circumstances of each arrangement. Additionally, management performs periodic analyses to verify the accuracy of estimates for variable consideration.
Although we believe that our approach in developing estimates and reliance on certain judgments and underlying inputs is reasonable, actual results could differ which may result in exposure of increases or decreases in revenue that could be material.
Performance Obligations
A performance obligation is a promise to transfer a distinct good or service to a customer. A contract's transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance obligation and recognized as revenue when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied. Contracts may have a single performance obligation as the promise to transfer individual goods or services is not separately identifiable from other promises, and therefore, not distinct, while other contracts may have multiple performance obligations, most commonly due to the contract covering multiple deliverable arrangements (licensing fees, subscription fees, professional fees for consulting services, etc.).
Net Administrative Fees Revenue
Net administrative fees revenue is a single performance obligation earned through a series of distinct daily services and includes maintaining a network of members to participate in the group purchasing program and providing suppliers efficiency in contracting and access to our members. Revenue is generated through administrative fees received from suppliers and is included in service revenue in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Income and Comprehensive Income.
Through our GPO programs, we aggregate member purchasing power to negotiate pricing discounts and improve contract terms with suppliers. Contracted suppliers pay us administrative fees which generally represent 1% to 3% of the purchase price of goods and services sold to members under the contracts we have negotiated. Administrative fees are variable consideration and are recognized as earned based upon estimated purchases by our members utilizing analytics based on historical member spend and updates for current trends and expectations. Administrative fees are estimated due to the difference in timing of when a member purchases on a supplier contract and when we receive the purchasing information. Member and supplier contracts substantiate persuasive evidence of an arrangement. We do not take title to the underlying equipment or products purchased by members through our GPO supplier contracts. Administrative fee revenue receivable is included in contract assets in the accompanying Consolidated Balance Sheets.
We pay a revenue share equal to a percentage of gross administrative fees, which is estimated according to the members’ contractual agreements with us using a portfolio approach based on historical revenue fee share percentages and adjusted for current or anticipated trends. Revenue share is recognized as a reduction to gross administrative fees revenue to arrive at a net administrative fees revenue, and the corresponding revenue share liability is included in revenue share obligations in the accompanying Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Product Revenue
Direct sourcing generates revenue primarily through products sold to our members, other customers or distributors. Revenue is recognized once control of products has been transferred to the customer and is recorded net of discounts and rebates offered to customers. Discounts and rebates are estimated based on contractual terms and historical trends.
Other Services and Support Revenue
Within Performance Services, which provides technology with wrap-around service offerings, revenue consists of SaaS-based clinical analytics products subscriptions, enterprise analytics licenses, performance improvement collaboratives and other service subscriptions, professional fees for consulting services, insurance services management fees and commissions from group-sponsored insurance programs, third-party administrator fees for the Contigo Health - direct to employer business and customer fees for the Remitra - electronic invoicing and payables platform.
SaaS-based clinical analytics subscriptions include the right to use our proprietary hosted technology on a SaaS basis, training and member support to deliver improvements in cost management, quality and safety, value-based care and provider analytics. SaaS arrangements create a single performance obligation for each subscription within the contract in which the nature of the obligation is a stand-ready obligation, and each day of service meets the criteria for over time recognition. Pricing varies by application and size of healthcare system. Clinical analytics products subscriptions are generally three- to five-year agreements with automatic renewal clauses and annual price escalators that typically do not allow for early termination. These agreements do not allow for physical possession of the software. Subscription fees are typically billed on a monthly basis and revenue is recognized as a single deliverable on a straight-line basis over the remaining contractual period following implementation. Implementation involves the completion of data preparation services that are unique to each member’s data set and, in certain cases, the installation of member site-specific software, in order to access and transfer member data into our hosted SaaS-based clinical analytics products. Implementation is generally 60 to 240 days following contract execution before the SaaS-based clinical analytics products can be fully utilized by the member.
Enterprise analytics licenses include term licenses that range from three to ten years and offer clinical analytics products, improvements in cost management, quality and safety, value-based care and provider analytics. Pricing varies by application and size of healthcare system. Revenue on licensing is recognized upon delivery of the license, and revenue from hosting and maintenance is recognized ratably over the life of the contract.
Revenue from performance improvement collaboratives and other service subscriptions that support our offerings in cost management, quality and safety, and value-based care is recognized over the service period as the services are provided, which is generally one year. Performance improvement collaboratives and other services subscriptions revenue is considered one performance obligation and is generated by providing customers access to online communities whereby data is housed and available for analytics and benchmarking.
Professional fees for consulting services are sold under contracts, the terms of which vary based on the nature of the engagement. These services typically include general consulting, report-based consulting and cost savings initiatives. Promised services under such consulting engagements are typically not considered distinct and are regularly combined and accounted for as one performance obligation. Fees are billed as stipulated in the contract, and revenue is recognized on a proportional performance method as services are performed or when deliverables are provided. In situations where the contracts have significant contract performance guarantees, the performance guarantees are estimated and accounted for as a form of variable consideration when determining the transaction price. In the event that guaranteed savings levels are not achieved, we may have to perform additional services at no additional charge in order to achieve the guaranteed savings or pay the difference between the savings that were guaranteed and the actual achieved savings. Occasionally, our entitlement to consideration is predicated on the occurrence of an event such as the delivery of a report for which client acceptance is required. However, except for event-driven point-in-time transactions, the majority of services provided within this service line are delivered over time due to the continuous benefit provided to our customers.
Consulting arrangements can require significant estimates for the transaction price and estimated number of hours within an engagement. These estimates are based on the expected value which is derived from outcomes from historical contracts that are similar in nature and forecasted amounts based on anticipated savings for the new agreements. The transaction price is generally constrained until the target transaction price becomes more certain.
Insurance services management fees are recognized in the period in which such services are provided. Commissions from group sponsored insurance programs are earned by acting as an intermediary in the placement of effective insurance policies. Under this arrangement, revenue is recognized at a point in time on the effective date of the associated policies when control of the policy transfers to the customer and is constrained for estimated early terminations.
Third party administrator fees for the Contigo Health - direct to employer business consist of integrated fees for the processing of self-insured health care plan claims. Third party administrator fees are invoiced to customers monthly and typically collected in that period. Revenue is recognized in the period in which the services have been provided.
Revenue for the Remitra - electronic invoicing and payables platform primarily consists of fees from customers who are participating in services such as electronic invoicing and tracking. Fees are invoiced to our customers monthly and typically collected in the following period. For fixed fee contracts, revenue is recognized in the period in which the services have been provided. For variable rate contracts, revenue is recognized as customers are invoiced. Additional revenue consists of fees from check replacement services which consist of monthly rebates from bank partners.
Multiple Deliverable Arrangements
We enter into agreements where the individual deliverables discussed above, such as SaaS subscriptions and consulting services, are bundled into a single service arrangement. These agreements are generally provided over a time period ranging from approximately three months to five years after the applicable contract execution date. Revenue, including both fixed and variable consideration, is allocated to the individual performance obligations within the arrangement based on the stand-alone selling price when it is sold separately in a stand-alone arrangement.
Software Development Costs
Costs associated with internally developed computer software that are incurred in the preliminary project stage are expensed as incurred. During the development stage and once the project has reached technological feasibility, direct consulting costs and payroll and payroll-related costs for employees that are directly associated with each project are capitalized. Capitalized software costs are included in property and equipment, net in the accompanying Consolidated Balance Sheets. Capitalized costs are amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the related software applications of up to five years and amortization is included in cost of revenue or selling, general and administrative expenses in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Income and Comprehensive Income, based on the software's end use. Replacements and major improvements are capitalized, while maintenance and repairs are expensed as incurred. Some of the more significant estimates and assumptions inherent in this process involve determining the stages of the software development project, the direct costs to capitalize and the estimated useful life of the capitalized software.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under the asset and liability approach. Deferred tax assets or liabilities are determined based on the differences between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities as measured by the enacted tax rates as well as net operating losses and credit carryforwards, which will be in effect when these differences reverse. We provide a valuation allowance against net deferred tax assets when, based upon the available evidence, it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
We prepare and file tax returns based on interpretations of tax laws and regulations. Our tax returns are subject to examination by various taxing authorities in the normal course of business. Such examinations may result in future tax, interest and penalty assessments by these taxing authorities.
In determining our tax expense for financial reporting purposes, we establish a reserve when there are transactions, calculations, and tax filing positions for which the tax determination is uncertain, and it is more likely than not that such positions would not be sustained upon examinations.
We adjust tax reserve estimates periodically based on the changes in facts and circumstances, such as ongoing examinations by, and settlements with, varying taxing authorities, as well as changes in tax laws, regulations and interpretations. The consolidated tax expense of any given year includes adjustments to prior year income tax reserve and related estimated interest charges that are considered appropriate. Our policy is to recognize, when applicable, interest and penalties on uncertain income tax positions as part of income tax expense.
New Accounting Standards
New accounting standards that we have recently adopted as well as those that have been recently issued but not yet adopted by us are included in Note 2 - Significant Accounting Policies to the accompanying audited consolidated financial statements, which is incorporated herein by reference.
As further described in Note 2 - Significant Accounting Policies, we adopted ASU No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (“ASU 2016-13”) effective July 1, 2020, on a
modified retrospective approach. The modified retrospective approach resulted in recognizing the cumulative effect of initially applying ASU 2016-13 as an adjustment to the opening balance of equity at July 1, 2020.
Key Components of Our Results of Operations
Net Revenue
Net revenue consists of service revenue, which includes net administrative fees revenue and other services and support revenue, and product revenue. Net administrative fees revenue consists of GPO administrative fees in our Supply Chain Services segment. Other services and support revenue consists primarily of fees generated by our Performance Services segment as discussed below. Product revenue consists of direct sourcing product sales, which are included in the Supply Chain Services segment.
Supply Chain Services
Supply Chain Services revenue consists of GPO net administrative fees (gross administrative fees received from suppliers, reduced by the amount of revenue share paid to members), supply chain co-management and direct sourcing revenue.
The success of our Supply Chain Services revenue streams are influenced by our ability to negotiate favorable contracts with suppliers and members, the number of members that utilize our GPO supplier contracts and the volume of their purchases, as well as the impact of changes in the defined allowable reimbursement amounts determined by Medicare, Medicaid and other managed care plans and the number of members and other customers that purchase products through our direct sourcing activities and the impact of competitive pricing.
Performance Services
Performance Services revenue consists of SaaS clinical analytics products subscriptions, license fees, performance improvement collaborative and other service subscriptions, professional fees for consulting services, insurance services management fees and commissions from endorsed commercial insurance programs, third party administrator fees for our Contigo Health - direct to employer business and customer fees for our Remitra - electronic invoicing and payables platform.
Our Performance Services growth will depend upon the expansion of our SaaS-based clinical analytics products, enterprise analytics licenses, performance improvement collaboratives and consulting services to new and existing members and other customers, renewal of existing subscriptions to our SaaS and licensed informatics products, and our ability to generate additional applied sciences engagements, continue to sell enterprise analytics licenses at historical levels and expand into new markets.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue consists of cost of service revenue and cost of product revenue.
Cost of service revenue includes expenses related to employees (including compensation and benefits) and outside consultants who directly provide services related to revenue-generating activities, including consulting services to members and other customers and implementation services related to SaaS clinical analytics along with associated amortization of certain capitalized contract costs. Amortization of contract costs represent amounts that have been capitalized and reflect the incremental costs of obtaining and fulfilling a contract. Amortization of contract costs included within cost of service revenue include costs related to implementing SaaS informatics tools. Cost of service revenue also includes expenses related to hosting services, related data center capacity costs, third-party product license expenses and amortization of the cost of internally developed software applications.
Cost of product revenue consists of purchase and shipment costs for direct sourced medical and commodity products. Our cost of product revenue is influenced by the manufacturing and transportation costs associated with direct sourced medical and commodity products.
Other Operating Income
Other operating income includes the adjustment to TRA liabilities. Changes in estimated TRA liabilities are the result of the change in North Carolina state income tax law. See “Income Tax Expense” below for additional information.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses includes selling, general and administrative expenses, research and development expenses and amortization of purchased intangible assets.
Selling, general and administrative expenses are directly associated with selling and administrative functions and support of revenue-generating activities including expenses to support and maintain our software-related products and services. Selling, general and administrative expenses primarily consist of compensation and benefits related costs, travel-related expenses, business development expenses, including costs for business acquisition opportunities, indirect costs such as insurance, professional fees and other general overhead expenses, and amortization of certain contract costs. Amortization of contract costs represent amounts, including sales commissions, that have been capitalized and reflect the incremental costs of obtaining and fulfilling a contract.
Research and development expenses consist of employee-related compensation and benefit expenses and third-party consulting fees of technology professionals, net of capitalized labor, incurred to develop our software-related products and services prior to reaching technological feasibility.
Amortization of purchased intangible assets includes the amortization of all identified intangible assets.
Other (Expense) Income, Net
Other (expense) income, net, includes equity in net income of unconsolidated affiliates that is generated from our equity method investments. Our equity method investments primarily consist of our interests in FFF Enterprises, Inc. (“FFF”) and Prestige Ameritech (“Prestige”). Other (expense) income, net, also includes the change in fair value of our FFF Put and Call Rights (as defined in Note 6 - Fair Value Measurements), interest income and expense, realized and unrealized gains or losses on deferred compensation plan assets, gains or losses on the disposal of assets, and any impairment on our held-to-maturity investments.
Income Tax (Benefit) Expense
On August 11, 2020, we entered into the Merger Agreement by and among us, Premier Healthcare Alliance LP (“Premier LP”) and BridgeCo, a wholly owned subsidiary of Premier Services, LLC formed for the sole purpose of merging with and into Premier LP. Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, (i) each of the issued and outstanding Class B common units of Premier LP was canceled and converted automatically into a right to receive one share of our Class A common stock, and (ii) all of the issued and outstanding shares of our Class B common stock beneficially held by the limited partners of Premier LP were canceled in accordance with our Certificate of Incorporation. As a result of the Merger, we simplified our tax structure whereby we and our subsidiaries formed one consolidated filing group for federal income tax purposes. See Note 16 - Income Taxes.
Adjusted Net Income, a Non-GAAP financial measure as defined below in “Our Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures”, is calculated net of taxes based on our estimated annual effective tax rate for federal and state income tax, adjusted for unusual or infrequent items, as we are a consolidated group for tax purposes with all of our subsidiaries’ activities included. Prior to August 11, 2020, Adjusted Net Income was calculated as if we were one consolidated group for tax purposes. The tax rate used to compute the Adjusted Net Income was 22% for the year ended June 30, 2021. The tax rate used to compute the Adjusted Net Income was 26% for the years ended June 30, 2020 and 2019.
Income (Loss) from Discontinued Operations, Net of Tax
Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax represents the net income or loss associated with the sale of certain assets and wind down and exit of the specialty pharmacy business. See Note 4 - Discontinued Operations and Exit Activities for further information.
Net Income Attributable to Non-Controlling Interest
For the year ended June 30, 2021, we recognized net income attributable to the limited partners of Premier LP through August 11, 2020, the date of the Merger. At June 30, 2021, we, through Premier Services, LLC (“Premier GP”), the sole general partner of Premier LP, and Premier Services II, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company, wholly owned subsidiary of us and sole limited partner of Premier LP, held 100% interest in Premier LP. At June 30, 2020, we held a 59% sole general partner interest in Premier LP. In addition to their equity interest in us, our members held a 0% and 41% limited partner interest in Premier LP at June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020, respectively (see Note 11 - Redeemable Limited Partners' Capital to the accompanying consolidated financial statements).
Through our consolidated subsidiary PRAM Holdings, LLC (“PRAM”), we hold an approximate 20% interest in Prestige through PRAM’s ownership of Prestige limited partnership units at June 30, 2021. We own approximately 26% of the membership interest of PRAM, with the remainder held by 16 member health systems, and recognized net income attributable to non-controlling interest for the 74% interest held by the 16 member health systems.
Through our consolidated subsidiary DePre Holdings, LLC (“DPH”), we hold an approximate 49% interest in DePre, LLC (“DePre”) through DPH’s ownership of DePre membership interests at June 30, 2021. We own approximately 21% of the
membership interest of DPH, with the remainder held by 34 member health systems, and recognized net income attributable to non-controlling interest of the 79% interest held by the 34 member health systems.
Our Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The other key business metrics we consider are EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Segment Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income (historically referenced as “Adjusted Fully Distributed Net Income”), Adjusted Earnings per Share (historically referenced as “Adjusted Fully Distributed Earnings per Share”) and Free Cash Flow, which are all Non-GAAP financial measures.
We define EBITDA as net income before income or loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, interest and investment income or expense, net, income tax expense, depreciation and amortization and amortization of purchased intangible assets. We define Adjusted EBITDA as EBITDA before merger and acquisition related expenses and non-recurring, non-cash or non-operating items and including equity in net income of unconsolidated affiliates. For all Non-GAAP financial measures, we consider non-recurring items to be income or expenses and other items that have not been earned or incurred within the prior two years and are not expected to recur within the next two years. Such items include certain strategic and financial restructuring expenses. Non-operating items include gains or losses on the disposal of assets and interest and investment income or expense.
We define Segment Adjusted EBITDA as the segment’s net revenue less cost of revenue and operating expenses directly attributable to the segment excluding depreciation and amortization, amortization of purchased intangible assets, merger and acquisition related expenses and non-recurring or non-cash items, and including equity in net income of unconsolidated affiliates. Operating expenses directly attributable to the segment include expenses associated with sales and marketing, general and administrative, and product development activities specific to the operation of each segment. General and administrative corporate expenses that are not specific to a particular segment are not included in the calculation of Segment Adjusted EBITDA. Segment Adjusted EBITDA also excludes any income and expense that has been classified as discontinued operations.
We define Adjusted Net Income as net income attributable to Premier (i) excluding income or loss from discontinued operations, net, (ii) excluding income tax expense, (iii) excluding the impact of adjustment of redeemable limited partners’ capital to redemption amount, (iv) excluding the effect of non-recurring or non-cash items, including certain strategic and financial restructuring expenses, (v) assuming the exchange of all the Class B common units for shares of Class A common stock, which results in the elimination of non-controlling interest in Premier LP and (vi) reflecting an adjustment for income tax expense on Non-GAAP net income before income taxes at our estimated annual effective income tax rate, adjusted for unusual or infrequent items. We define Adjusted Earnings per Share as Adjusted Net Income divided by diluted weighted average shares (see Note 13 - Earnings (Loss) Per Share).
We define Free Cash Flow as net cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations less distributions and TRA payments to limited partners, early termination payments to certain former limited partners that elected to execute a Unit Exchange and Tax Receivable Acceleration Agreement (“Unit Exchange Agreement”) in connection with our August 2020 restructuring and purchases of property and equipment. Free Cash Flow does not represent discretionary cash available for spending as it excludes certain contractual obligations such as debt repayments.
Adjusted EBITDA and Free Cash Flow are supplemental financial measures used by us and by external users of our financial statements and are considered to be indicators of the operational strength and performance of our business. Adjusted EBITDA and Free Cash Flow measures allow us to assess our performance without regard to financing methods and capital structure and without the impact of other matters that we do not consider indicative of the operating performance of our business. More specifically, Segment Adjusted EBITDA is the primary earnings measure we use to evaluate the performance of our business segments.
We use Adjusted EBITDA, Segment Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Earnings per Share to facilitate a comparison of our operating performance on a consistent basis from period to period that, when viewed in combination with our results prepared in accordance with GAAP, provides a more complete understanding of factors and trends affecting our business. We believe Adjusted EBITDA and Segment Adjusted EBITDA assist our Board of Directors, management and investors in comparing our operating performance on a consistent basis from period to period because they remove the impact of earnings elements attributable to our asset base (primarily depreciation and amortization), certain items outside the control of our management team, e.g. taxes, other non-cash items (such as impairment of intangible assets, purchase accounting adjustments and stock-based compensation), non-recurring items (such as strategic and financial restructuring expenses) and income and expense that has been classified as discontinued operations from our operating results. We believe Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Earnings per Share assist our Board of Directors, management and investors in comparing our net income and earnings per share on a consistent basis from period to period because these measures remove non-cash (such as impairment of intangible assets, purchase accounting adjustments and stock-based compensation) and non-recurring items (such as strategic and financial restructuring expenses), and eliminate the variability of non-controlling interest that results from
member owner exchanges of Class B common units for shares of Class A common stock. We believe Free Cash Flow is an important measure because it represents the cash that we generate after payment of tax distributions to limited partners, payments to certain former limited partners that elected to execute a Unit Exchange Agreement and capital investment to maintain existing products and services and ongoing business operations, as well as development of new and upgraded products and services to support future growth. Our Free Cash Flow allows us to enhance stockholder value through acquisitions, partnerships, joint ventures, investments in related businesses and debt reduction.
Despite the importance of these Non-GAAP financial measures in analyzing our business, determining compliance with certain financial covenants in our Credit Facility, measuring and determining incentive compensation and evaluating our operating performance relative to our competitors, EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Segment Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income, Adjusted Earnings per Share and Free Cash Flow are not measurements of financial performance under GAAP, may have limitations as analytical tools and should not be considered in isolation from, or as an alternative to, net income, net cash provided by operating activities, or any other measure of our performance derived in accordance with GAAP.
Some of the limitations of the EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Segment Adjusted EBITDA measures include that they do not reflect: our capital expenditures or our future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments; changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs; the interest expense or the cash requirements to service interest or principal payments under our Credit Facility; income tax payments we are required to make; and any cash requirements for replacements of assets being depreciated or amortized. In addition, EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Segment Adjusted EBITDA and Free Cash Flow are not measures of liquidity under GAAP, or otherwise, and are not alternatives to cash flows from operating activities.
Some of the limitations of the Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Earnings per Share measures are that they do not reflect income tax expense or income tax payments we are required to make. In addition, Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Earnings per Share are not measures of profitability under GAAP.
We also urge you to review the reconciliation of these Non-GAAP financial measures included elsewhere in this Annual Report. To properly and prudently evaluate our business, we encourage you to review the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report and to not rely on any single financial measure to evaluate our business. In addition, because the EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Segment Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income, Adjusted Earnings per Share and Free Cash Flow measures are susceptible to varying calculations, such Non-GAAP financial measures may differ from, and may therefore not be comparable to, similarly titled measures used by other companies.
Non-recurring and non-cash items excluded in our calculation of Adjusted EBITDA, Segment Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income consist of stock-based compensation, acquisition and disposition related expenses, remeasurement of TRA liabilities, gain or loss on FFF Put and Call Rights, income and expense that has been classified as discontinued operations and other expense. More information about certain of the more significant items follows below.
Stock-based compensation
In addition to non-cash employee stock-based compensation expense, this item includes non-cash stock purchase plan expense of $0.5 million during each of the years ended June 30, 2021, 2020 and 2019 (see Note 14 - Stock-Based Compensation to the accompanying consolidated financial statements).
Acquisition and disposition related expenses
Acquisition related expenses include legal, accounting and other expenses related to acquisition activities and gains and losses on the change in fair value of earn-out liabilities. Disposition related expenses include severance and retention benefits and financial advisor fees and legal fees related to disposition activities.
Remeasurement of TRA liabilities
On August 10, 2020, we exercised our right to terminate the TRA by providing all former LPs a notice of termination and the amount of the expected payment to be made to each LP pursuant to the early termination provisions of the TRA with a determination date of August 10, 2020.
Prior to termination of the TRA, we recorded TRA liabilities based on 85% of the estimated amount of tax savings we expected to receive, generally over a 15-year period, which were attributable to the initial purchase of Class B common units from the member owners made concurrently with the IPO and subsequent exchanges by member owners of Class B common units into Class A common stock or cash. Tax payments made under the TRA were made to the member owners as we realized tax benefits. Determining the estimated amount of tax savings we expected to receive required judgment as deductibility of goodwill amortization expense was not assured and the estimate of tax savings was dependent upon the actual realization of the tax benefit and the tax rates in effect at that time.
Gain or loss on FFF put and call rights
See Note 6 - Fair Value Measurements and Note 21 - Subsequent Events to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended June 30, 2021 and 2020
Results of operations for all periods presented have been retrospectively adjusted to reflect continuing operations unless otherwise indicated.
The following table presents our results of operations for the fiscal years presented (in thousands, except per share data):
The following table provides certain Non-GAAP financial measures for the fiscal years presented (in thousands, except per share data). Refer to “Our Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for further information regarding items excluded in our calculation of Adjusted EBITDA and Segment Adjusted EBITDA.
The following table provides the reconciliation of net income from continuing operations to Adjusted EBITDA and the reconciliation of income before income taxes to Segment Adjusted EBITDA (in thousands). Refer to “Our Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for further information regarding items excluded in our calculation of Adjusted EBITDA and Segment Adjusted EBITDA.
The following table provides the reconciliation of net income attributable to stockholders to Non-GAAP Adjusted Net Income and the reconciliation of the numerator and denominator for earnings per share attributable to stockholders to Non-GAAP Adjusted Earnings per Share for the years presented (in thousands). Refer to “Our Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for further information regarding items excluded in our calculation of Non-GAAP Adjusted Net Income and Non-GAAP Adjusted Earnings per Share.
_________________________________
(a)Reflects income tax expense at an estimated effective income tax rate of 22% of non-GAAP adjusted net income before income taxes for the year ended June 30, 2021 and 26% of non-GAAP adjusted net income before income taxes for the year ended June 30, 2020.
(b)For the year ended June 30, 2021, the effect of 5.6 million Class B common shares were excluded from the GAAP diluted weighted average shares outstanding as they had an anti-dilutive effect. On a non-GAAP basis, the effect of 5.6 million Class B common shares were included in the non-GAAP diluted weighted average shares outstanding for the year ended June 30, 2021.
The following table provides the reconciliation of earnings per share attributable to stockholders to Non-GAAP Adjusted Earnings per Share for the periods presented. Refer to “Our Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for further information regarding items excluded in our calculation of Non-GAAP Adjusted Earnings per Share.
_________________________________
(a)Reflects income tax expense at an estimated effective income tax rate of 22% of non-GAAP adjusted net income before income taxes for the year ended June 30, 2021 and 26% of non-GAAP adjusted net income before income taxes for the year ended June 30, 2020.
(b)Reflects impact of dilutive shares, primarily attributable to the assumed conversion of all Class B common units for Class A common stock.
Consolidated Results - Comparison of the Years Ended June 30, 2021 to 2020
The variances in the material factors contributing to the changes in the consolidated results are discussed further in “Segment Results” below.
Net Revenue
Net revenue increased by $421.6 million, or 32%, during the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the year ended June 30, 2020 primarily due to an increase of $474.2 million in product revenue and an increase of $45.3 million in other services and support revenue. These increases were partially offset by a decrease of $97.9 million in net administrative fees revenue.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue increased by $451.0 million, or 104%, during the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the year ended June 30, 2020 primarily due to an increase of $468.5 million in cost of product revenue and a decrease of $17.5 million in cost of services revenue.
Other Operating Income
Other operating income of $24.6 million during the year ended June 30, 2020 is attributable to the remeasurement of the TRA liability as a result of a change in North Carolina state income tax law.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses increased by $62.7 million, or 12%, during the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the year ended June 30, 2020 due to increases of $72.5 million in selling, general and administrative expenses and $1.0 million in research and development expenses partially offset by a decrease of $10.8 million in amortization of intangible assets.
Other (Expense) Income, Net
Other (expense) income, net decreased by $16.3 million, or 161.4%, during the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the year ended June 30, 2020, primarily due to the loss on the FFF put and call rights in the current period compared to the gain on the FFF put and call rights in the prior period (see Note 6 - Fair Value Measurements to the accompanying consolidated financial
statements for further information) partially offset by an increase in equity in net income from our investments in unconsolidated affiliates and an increase in deferred compensation plan income.
Income Tax (Benefit) Expense
We recorded an income tax benefit of $53.9 million for the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to an income tax expense $92.6 million for the year ended June 30, 2020 primarily attributable to a one-time deferred tax benefit of $108.8 million, primarily driven by deferred tax remeasurement due to tax rate changes and a valuation allowance release as a result of the Merger.
Net Income Attributable to Non-Controlling Interest
Net income attributable to non-controlling interest decreased by $144.8 million, or 89%, during the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the year ended June 30, 2020, primarily due to the Merger, whereby net income attributable to non-controlling interest in Premier LP was not recorded after the Merger date of August 11, 2020. As of June 30, 2021, we owned a 99.999% controlling general partner interest and a 0.001% limited partnership interest in Premier GP. At June 30, 2020, the portion of net income attributable to the limited partners of Premier LP was 41%.
Partially offsetting the decrease was the addition of non-controlling interest for the portion of net income attributable to PRAM, DPH and HDP, which was 74%, 79% and 3%, respectively.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA, a Non-GAAP financial measure, decreased by $90.8 million, or 16%, during the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the year ended June 30, 2020 driven by a decrease of $102.4 million in Supply Chain Services, an increase of $9.3 million in Corporate and an increase of $20.9 million Performance Services.
Segment Results
Supply Chain Services
The following table summarizes our results of operations and Adjusted EBITDA, a Non-GAAP financial measure, in the Supply Chain Services segment for the fiscal years presented (in thousands):
Net Revenue
Supply Chain Services segment revenue increased by $390.9 million, or 41%, during the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the year ended June 30, 2020 driven by increases of $474.2 million and $14.6 million in products and other services and support revenue, respectively, offset by a decrease of $97.9 million in net administrative fee revenue.
Net Administrative Fees Revenue
Net administrative fees revenue decreased $97.9 million, or 15%, during the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the year ended June 30, 2020, driven primarily by a higher average revenue fee share percentage as a result of amendments to the GPO participation agreements, effective as of July 1, 2020, and amortization of the prepaid contract administrative fee share for one-time rebates paid by Acurity, Inc. to certain of its then members, as agreed to by Acurity, Inc. prior to entering into the Purchase Agreement (“Acurity prepaid contract administrative fee share”). These decreases in net administrative fees were partially offset by further penetration of member purchases and the addition of new categories and suppliers.
We anticipate our net administrative fees revenue to grow in fiscal year 2022 to the extent the ongoing impact from the COVID-19 pandemic has subsided and our existing members increase the utilization of our contracts and additional members convert to our contract portfolio. Due to competitive market trends, we have experienced, and expect to continue to experience, requests, at times, to provide existing and prospective members increases in revenue share on incremental or overall purchasing volume that could, if materially increased, adversely impact our revenues and overall financial performance.
Other Services and Support Revenue
Other services and support revenue increased by $14.6 million, or 119%, during the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the year ended June 30, 2020 primarily due to supply chain co-management fees as a result of the asset acquisition of Nexera.
Product Revenue
Product revenue increased by $474.2 million, or 176%, during the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by the aggregated purchasing of PPE and other high demand supplies as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and growth in commodity products.
There has been a significant increase in demand for PPE and other supplies directly related to treating and preventing the spread of COVID-19, as well as replenishing and maintaining certain inventory levels, that has contributed significantly to the increase in product revenue. Due to COVID-19 variants, the continuation of high demand for PPE and related supplies is uncertain. To the extent the COVID-19 pandemic and its variants subside or become more manageable, we expect the market for these high demand products to stabilize and, accordingly, we anticipate product revenues to correspondingly decrease.
Cost of Revenue
Supply Chain Services segment cost of revenue increased by $472.3 million, or 193%, during the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the year ended June 30, 2020 primarily due to the aforementioned increase in product revenue as well as higher costs for products that we incurred as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Due to COVID-19 variants, the continuation of high demand for PPE and related supplies is uncertain. To the extent the COVID-19 pandemic subsides or becomes more manageable, we expect the market for these high demand products to stabilize and, accordingly, we anticipate our product costs to correspondingly decrease. However, once the COVID-19 pandemic subsides, we expect our cost of non-COVID-19-related product revenue to increase to the extent we are able to sell additional direct-sourced medical products to new and existing members and other customers. Depending on the underlying product sales mix in the future, increase in product revenues could reduce our gross profit as a percentage of our net revenue.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses increased by $40.9 million, or 22%, during the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in selling, general and administrative expenses of $31.4 million driven by an increase in expenses associated with our acquisition of Medpricer and the Acurity and Nexera asset acquisition (the “fiscal year 2020 acquisitions”) partially offset by a decrease in employee travel and meeting expenses due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, operating expenses increased by $9.4 million as a result of increased amortization of purchased intangible assets related to the fiscal year 2020 acquisitions.
As we execute on our growth strategy and further deploy capital, we expect increases in amortization of intangible assets in connection with future potential acquisitions.
Segment Adjusted EBITDA
Segment Adjusted EBITDA in the Supply Chain Services segment decreased by $102.4 million, or 18%, during the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the year ended June 30, 2020 primarily due to the aforementioned impacts to net administrative fees and the increase in selling, general and administrative expenses largely due to our fiscal year 2020 acquisitions partially offset by an increase in profitability driven by the increase in product revenue.
Performance Services
The following table summarizes our results of operations and Adjusted EBITDA in the Performance Services segment for the fiscal years presented (in thousands):
Net Revenue
Other services and support revenue in our Performance Services segment increased by $30.7 million, or 9%, during the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by growth across the technology businesses, including new enterprise analytics license agreements, and consulting services as well as incremental revenue associated with our acquisitions. These increases were partially offset by lower revenue as a result of the planned reduction and subsequent discontinuance of the Hospital Improvement Innovation Network (“HIIN”) contract in March 2020.
We expect our other services and support revenue to grow over the long-term to the extent we are able to expand our sales to existing members and additional members begin to utilize our integrated platform of products and services.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of services revenue in our Performance Services segment decreased by $21.3 million, or 11%, during the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the year ended June 30, 2020 primarily due to a decrease in amortization of internally developed software applications, lower consulting expenses due to decreased utilization of third-party contractors and lower expenses as a result of the planned reduction and subsequent discontinuance of the HIIN contract in March 2020. These decreases were partially offset by incremental expenses associated with our acquisitions.
We expect cost of service revenue to increase to the extent we continue to develop new and enhance existing internally developed software applications, expand our consulting services and performance improvement collaboratives and expand into new product offerings.
Operating Expenses
Performance Services segment operating expenses decreased by $13.8 million, or 8%, during the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the year ended June 30, 2020. The decrease was due to a reduction in amortization of purchased intangible assets of $20.2 million. As we execute on our growth strategy and further deploy capital, we expect increases in amortization of intangible assets in connection with future potential acquisitions.
The decrease was partially offset by an increase in selling, general and administrative expenses of $5.6 million driven by higher costs as a result of the acquisitions of HDP and IDS and increases in employee-related expenses. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in employee travel and meeting expenses due to the COVID-19 pandemic and a decrease in amortization of internally developed software applications.
Segment Adjusted EBITDA
Segment Adjusted EBITDA in the Performance Services segment increased by $20.9 million, or 19%, during the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the year ended June 30, 2020 primarily due to the aforementioned increase in revenue and increase in selling, general and administrative expenses offset by incremental expenses associated with our acquisitions.
Corporate
The following table summarizes corporate expenses and Adjusted EBITDA for the fiscal years presented (in thousands):
Other Operating Income
There was no other operating income during the year ended June 30, 2021. Other operating income of $24.6 million for the year ended June 30, 2020 is attributable to the remeasurement of the TRA as a result of the change in North Carolina state income tax law.
Operating Expenses
Corporate operating expenses increased by $35.5 million, or 23%, during the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the year ended June 30, 2020 primarily due to an increase in selling, general and administrative expenses which was driven by incremental personnel costs primarily related to the fiscal year 2020 acquisitions and an increase in deferred compensation plan expense due to market changes. These increases in selling, general and administrative expenses were partially offset by a decrease in employee travel and meeting expenses as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA decreased by $9.3 million during the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the year ended June 30, 2020 primarily due to incremental personnel costs related to the fiscal year 2020 acquisitions offset by a decrease in employee travel and meeting expenses due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended June 30, 2020 and 2019
A discussion of changes in our results of operations from fiscal year 2019 to fiscal year 2020 has been omitted from this Annual Report but may be found in “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, filed with the SEC on August 25, 2020, which is available free of charge on the SECs website at www.sec.gov and our website at http://investors.premierinc.com.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of June 30, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal source of cash has primarily been cash provided by operating activities. From time to time we have used, and expect to use in the future, borrowings under our Credit Facility as a source of liquidity. Our primary cash requirements involve operating expenses, working capital fluctuations, revenue share obligations, tax payments, capital expenditures, dividend payments on our Class A common stock, if and when declared, repurchases of Class A common stock pursuant to stock repurchase programs in place from time to time, acquisitions and related business investments, and general corporate activities. Our capital expenditures typically consist of internally developed software costs, software purchases and computer hardware purchases.
As of June 30, 2021 and 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $129.1 million and $99.3 million, respectively. As of both June 30, 2021 and 2020, there was $75.0 million of outstanding borrowings under the Credit Facility. During the year ended June 30, 2021, we borrowed and repaid $225.0 million of borrowings under the Credit Facility, which was used to fund our current year acquisition and for other general corporate purposes. Subsequent to June 30, 2021, we repaid the $75.0 million of outstanding borrowings under our Credit Facility.
We expect cash generated from operations and borrowings under our Credit Facility to provide us with adequate liquidity to fund our anticipated working capital requirements, revenue share obligations, tax payments, capital expenditures, dividend payments on our Class A common stock, if and when declared, and repurchases of Class A common stock pursuant to stock repurchase programs in place from time to time. Our capital requirements depend on numerous factors, including funding requirements for our product and service development and commercialization efforts, our information technology requirements and the amount of cash generated by our operations. We believe that we have adequate capital resources at our disposal to fund currently anticipated capital expenditures, business growth and expansion, and current and projected debt service requirements. However, strategic growth initiatives will likely require the use of one or a combination of various forms of capital resources including available cash on hand, cash generated from operations, borrowings under our Credit Facility and other long-term debt and, potentially, proceeds from the issuance of additional equity or debt securities.
On August 5, 2021, our Board of Directors declared a cash dividend of $0.20 per share, payable on September 15, 2021 to stockholders of record on September 1, 2021.
On August 5, 2021, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to $250.0 million of our outstanding Class A common stock during fiscal year 2022 through open market purchases or privately negotiated transactions. In order to initiate the repurchase program, we expect to execute the necessary agreements and documentation with one or more financial institutions during the next open trading window under our insider trading policy. There can be no assurance, however, as to when or whether the repurchase program will be ultimately initiated or regarding the number of shares of Class A common stock, if any, purchased under the program. We will provide additional details regarding the repurchase program, if adopted and initiated, in future filings with the SEC. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
During the second half of fiscal 2020, COVID-19 became a global pandemic that spread throughout the United States and much of the rest of the world. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to impact our business, operating results, financial condition and liquidity will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, including new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19 and variants thereof, the continued actions to contain it and treat its impact, including the success of the COVID-19 vaccination program, or recurrences of COVID-19, variants thereof or similar pandemics. As discussed in detail under “Item 1A. Risk Factors” above, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and potential future pandemic outbreaks, we face significant risks including but not limited to the following:
•We have experienced and may continue to experience demand uncertainty from both significant increases and decreases in demand for PPE, drugs and other supplies directly related to treating and preventing the spread of COVID-19 and any variants thereof and decreases in demand for non-COVID-19 related products.
•Our member hospitals and non-acute care sites have experienced reduced or limited access for non-patients, including our field teams, consultants and other professionals, and travel restrictions have impacted our employees’ ability to travel to our members’ facilities.
•The global supply chain has been significantly disrupted due to stay at home orders, border closings and rapidly escalating shipping costs.
•We have and may continue to receive requests for contract modifications, payment waivers and deferrals, payment reductions or amended payment terms from our contract counterparties. In addition, several pharmacy suppliers have exercised force majeure clauses related to failure to supply clauses in their contracts with us.
•The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and any variants thereof could result in a prolonged recession or depression in the United States or globally that could harm the banking system, limit demand for all products and services and cause other foreseen and unforeseen events and circumstances, all of which could negatively impact us.
•In response to COVID-19 and variants thereof, federal, state and local governments are issuing new rules, regulations, changing reimbursement eligibility rules, orders and advisories on a regular basis. These government actions can impact us, our members, other customers and suppliers.
Discussion of Cash Flows for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020
A summary of net cash flows follows (in thousands):
Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $67.5 million for the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase in cash provided by operating activities was primarily due to the prior year recognition of the Acurity prepaid contract administrative fee share on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Additionally, the change in cash provided by operating activities was driven by changes in our net working capital, including the impact of aggregated purchases of PPE as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and the impact of lower net administrative fees revenue as a result of amendments to GPO participation agreements, effective as of July 1, 2020.
Net cash used in investing activities decreased by $47.8 million for the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the year ended June 30, 2020. The decrease in cash used in investing activities was primarily due to a decrease of $37.2 million in cash paid for business acquisitions in the current year compared to cash paid for business acquisitions in the prior year. Additionally, there was a decrease of $10.2 million in cash paid for investments in unconsolidated subsidiaries in the prior year that did not recur in the current year.
Net cash used in financing activities increased by $34.0 million for the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase in net cash used in financing activities is driven by cash dividend payments of $92.9 million, a $48.3 million increase in payments on the outstanding notes payable to members (see Note 10 - Debt and Notes Payable), a $50.0 million decrease in net borrowings under our Credit Facility and $29.2 million paid to GNYHA as the first of the four equal annual installments related to the Acurity and Nexera asset acquisition. These were offset by a decrease of $150.1 million for prior year repurchases of Class A common stock under the fiscal year 2020 stock repurchase program and a $39.0 million reduction in distributions to limited partners of Premier LP as a result of the elimination of distributions in connection with the August 2020 restructuring.
Net cash provided by operating activities attributable to discontinued operations decreased by $9.6 million for the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the year ended June 30, 2020 primarily due to payments on liabilities that were outstanding as of June 30, 2020.
Discussion of Non-GAAP Free Cash Flow for the Years Ended June 30, 2021 and 2020
We define Non-GAAP Free Cash Flow as net cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations less distributions and TRA payments to limited partners, early termination payments to certain former limited partners that elected to execute a Unit Exchange Agreement in connection with our August 2020 restructuring and purchases of property and equipment. Non-GAAP Free Cash Flow does not represent discretionary cash available for spending as it excludes certain contractual obligations such as debt repayments under our Credit Facility. A summary of Non-GAAP Free Cash Flow and reconciliation to net cash provided by operating activities for the periods presented follows (in thousands):
_________________________________
(a) Net cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations for the year ended June 30, 2020 excludes the impact of the Acurity prepaid contract administrative fee share, as defined above.
(b) Early termination payments to certain former limited partners that elected to execute a Unit Exchange Agreement in connection with our August 2020 restructuring are presented in our Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows under “Payments made on notes payable”. We paid $51.3 million to members including imputed interest of $7.3 million which is included in net cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations. See Note 10 - Debt and Notes Payable to the accompanying audited consolidated financial statements for further information.
Non-GAAP Free Cash Flow decreased by $26.1 million for the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the year ended June 30, 2020. The decrease in Non-GAAP Free Cash Flow was primarily due to the early termination payments to certain former limited partners and higher TRA payments during the year ended June 30, 2021 which include the $10.5 million that was paid to limited partners of Premier LP who did not elect to execute a Unit Exchange Agreement in connection with the August 2020 restructuring. These decreases were partially offset by lower distributions to limited partners of Premier LP as distributions were eliminated in connection with the August 2020 restructuring.
In addition to the above changes in Non-GAAP Free Cash Flow, net cash provided by operating activities for continuing operations decreased due primarily due to the aforementioned changes in net working capital.
See “Our Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures” above for additional information regarding our use of Non-GAAP Free Cash Flow.
Contractual Obligations
The following table presents our contractual obligations as of June 30, 2021 (in thousands):
_________________________________
(a)Notes payable to members represent the amount of the expected payment to be made to each former limited partner pursuant to the early termination provisions of the TRA (each such amount an “Early Termination Payment”).
(b)Other notes payable are non-interest bearing and generally have stated maturities of three to five years from the date of issuance.
(c)Future contractual obligations for leases represent future minimum payments under noncancelable operating leases primarily for office space.
(d)Additional consideration to be paid pursuant to the Purchase Agreement for the Acurity and Nexera asset acquisition.
Notes Payable to Members
As of June 30, 2021, $410.7 million remains to be paid in 16 equal quarterly installments to former limited partners that elected to execute Unit Exchange Agreements ending with the quarter ending June 30, 2025. See Note 10 - Debt and Notes Payable to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for more information.
Other Notes Payable
At June 30, 2021, we had commitments of $8.6 million for other obligations under notes payable. Other notes payable have stated maturities between three to five years from the date of issuance and non-interest bearing. See Note 10 - Debt and Notes Payable to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for more information.
Credit Facility
We maintain an unsecured credit facility which provides for borrowings of up to $1.0 billion with a $50.0 million sub-facility for standby letters of credit and a $100.0 million sub-facility for swingline loans as well as the ability to incur incremental term loans from time to time and request an increase in the revolving commitments up to an aggregate of $350.0 million (the “Credit Facility”). The Credit Facility matures on November 9, 2023, subject to up to two one-year extensions and approval by a majority of the lenders under the Credit Facility.
Outstanding borrowings under the Credit Facility bear interest on a variable rate structure with borrowings bearing interest at either the London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) plus an applicable margin ranging from 1.000% to 1.500% or the prime lending rate plus an applicable margin ranging from 0.000% to 0.5000%. We pay a commitment fee ranging from 0.100% to 0.200% for unused capacity under the Credit Facility. At June 30, 2021, the interest rate on outstanding borrowings under the Credit Facility was 1.080% and the commitment fee was 0.100%.
The Credit Facility contains customary representations and warranties as well as customary affirmative and negative covenants. We were in compliance with all such covenants at June 30, 2021. The Credit Facility also contains customary events of default, including a cross-default of any indebtedness or guarantees in excess of $75.0 million. If any event of default occurs and is continuing, the administrative agent under the Credit Facility may, with the consent, or shall, at the request of a majority of the lenders under the Credit Facility, terminate the commitments and declare all of the amounts owed under the Credit Facility to be immediately due and payable.
Proceeds from borrowings under the Credit Facility may generally be used to finance ongoing working capital requirements, including permitted acquisitions, repurchases of Class A common stock pursuant to stock repurchase programs, in place from time to time, dividend payments, if and when declared, and other general corporate activities. At June 30, 2021, we had outstanding borrowings of $75.0 million under the Credit Facility with $924.9 million of available borrowing capacity after reductions for outstanding borrowings and outstanding letters of credit. Subsequent to June 30, 2021, we repaid the $75.0 million of outstanding borrowings under the Credit Facility.
Cash Dividends
During 2021, we paid cash dividends of $0.19 per share on outstanding shares of Class A common stock on September 15, 2020, December 15, 2020, March 15, 2021 and June 15, 2021. On August 5, 2021, our Board of Directors declared a cash dividend of $0.20 per share, payable on September 15, 2021 to stockholders of record on September 1, 2021.
We currently expect quarterly dividends to continue to be paid on or about December 15, March 15, June 15 and September 15. However, the actual declaration of any future cash dividends, and the setting of record and payment dates as well as the per share amounts, will be at the discretion of our Board of Directors each quarter after consideration of various factors, including our results of operations, financial condition and capital requirements, earnings, general business conditions, restrictions imposed by our current credit facility and any future financing arrangements, legal restrictions on the payment of dividends and other factors our Board of Directors deems relevant.
Fiscal 2022 Stock Repurchase Program
On August 5, 2021, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to $250.0 million of our outstanding Class A common stock during fiscal year 2022 through open market purchases or privately negotiated transactions. In order to initiate the repurchase program, we expect to execute the necessary agreements and documentation with one or more financial institutions during the next open trading window under our insider trading policy. There can be no assurance, however, as to when or whether the repurchase program will be ultimately initiated or regarding the number of shares of Class A common stock, if any, purchased under the program. We will provide additional details regarding the repurchase program, if adopted and initiated, in future filings with the SEC. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”