ITEM 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes and other financial information appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions, including risks and uncertainties regarding the duration, scope and impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Our actual results could differ materially from these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed in “Risk Factors” and “Note About Forward-Looking Statements” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 is presented below. A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 is included under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Overview of 2020 Results
Our key financial and operating results as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020 are as follows:
•Revenue was $1,692.7 million, an increase of 48% compared to 2019.
•Monthly active users ("MAUs") were 459 million, an increase of 37% compared to December 31, 2019.
•Share-based compensation expense was $321.0 million, a decrease of $1,056.8 million compared to 2019.
•Total costs and expenses were $1,835.2 million.
•Loss from operations was $(142.5) million.
•Net loss was $(128.3) million.
•Adjusted EBITDA was $305.0 million.
•Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities were $1,760.3 million.
•Headcount was 2,545.
Update on the COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic, which resulted in authorities implementing preventative measures to contain or mitigate the outbreak of the virus, such as travel bans and restrictions, limitations on business activity, quarantines and shelter-in-place orders continues to have an impact globally. After a sharp deceleration in revenue growth in mid-March as advertisers responded to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, our revenue growth began recovering in the second quarter of 2020 before accelerating sharply in July 2020 and remaining strong through the end of 2020. Advertiser demand was broad based as businesses have increasingly adapted to the COVID-19 environment. An increase in the number of advertisements and a recovery in advertiser demand supported our revenue growth. In addition, people who began using Pinterest during the COVID-19 pandemic continued to have high levels of engagement in the fourth quarter of 2020. In fact, users in the COVID-19 pandemic cohort have had higher retention and higher engagement (defined as impressions, closeups and saves) than a cohort of new users during the same period in 2019.
Since the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our results of operations and overall financial performance remains unprecedented and highly unpredictable, our past results may not be indicative of our future performance. Given the uncertainty, we are unable to predict the extent and duration of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on advertiser demand, Pinner engagement, and our business, operations and financial results. To the extent the pandemic continues to disrupt economic activity globally we, like other businesses, would not be immune as it could adversely affect our business, operations and financial results. See "Risk Factors" and "Note About Forward-Looking Statements” for additional details.
We continue to actively monitor the situation and may take further actions that alter our business operations as may be required by federal, state, local or foreign authorities, or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, advertisers, Pinners, partners and stockholders. It is not clear what the potential effects any such alterations or modifications may have on our business, including the effects on our employees, advertisers, Pinners, suppliers, vendors or other partners, or on our financial results.
Trends in User Metrics
Monthly Active Users. We define a monthly active user as an authenticated Pinterest user who visits our website, opens our mobile application or interacts with Pinterest through one of our browser or site extensions, such as the Save button, at least once during the 30-day period ending on the date of measurement. We present MAUs based on the number of MAUs measured on the last day of the current period. We calculate average MAUs based on the average of the number of MAUs measured on the last day of the current period and the last day prior to the beginning of the current period. MAUs are the primary metric by which we measure the scale of our active user base.
Quarterly Monthly Active Users
(in millions)
Note: United States and International may not sum to Global due to rounding.
A portion of our MAUs visit Pinterest on a weekly basis. We define a weekly active user (“WAU”) as an authenticated Pinterest user who visits our website, opens our mobile application or interacts with Pinterest through one of our browser or site extensions, such as the Save button, at least once during the seven-day period ending on the date of measurement. We actively monitor the relationship of WAUs to MAUs, which has stayed relatively consistent over time. As of December 31, 2020, the proportion of WAUs to MAUs was 56%.
We have experienced significant growth in our global MAUs over the last several years. In particular, our international MAUs have grown significantly as a result of our focus on localizing content in international markets. We expect our international user growth to continue to outpace U.S. user growth in the near term. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on user growth remains difficult to measure and predict, and we are unable to predict the extent to which new or existing users will maintain their engagement once the pandemic has subsided.
Trends in Monetization Metrics
Revenue. We calculate revenue by user geography based on our estimate of the geography in which ad impressions are delivered. The geography of our users affects our revenue and financial results because we currently only monetize certain countries and currencies and because we monetize different geographies at different average rates. Our revenue in the United States is higher primarily due to our decision to focus our earliest monetization efforts there and also due to the relative size and maturity of the U.S. digital advertising market.
Quarterly Revenue
(in millions)
Note: Revenue by geography in the charts above is geographically apportioned based on our estimate of the geographic location of our users when they perform a revenue-generating activity. This allocation differs from our disclosure of revenue disaggregated by geography in the notes to our consolidated financial statements where revenue is geographically apportioned based on our customers’ billing addresses. United States and International may not sum to Global and quarterly amounts may not sum to annual due to rounding.
Average Revenue per User (“ARPU”). We measure monetization of our platform through our average revenue per user metric. We define ARPU as our total revenue in a given geography during a period divided by average MAUs in that geography during the period. We calculate ARPU by geography based on our estimate of the geography in which revenue-generating activities occur. We present ARPU on a U.S. and international basis because we currently monetize users in different geographies at different average rates. U.S. ARPU is higher primarily due to our decision to focus our earliest monetization efforts there and also due to the relative size and maturity of the U.S. digital advertising market.
Quarterly Average Revenue per User
For the year ended December 31, 2020, global ARPU was $4.26, which represents an increase of 12% compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, U.S. ARPU was $15.34 and international ARPU was $0.88, which represent increases of 27% and 62%, respectively, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
We use MAUs and ARPU to assess the growth and health of our overall business and believe that these metrics best reflect our ability to attract, retain, engage and monetize our users, and thereby drive revenue.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
Growth in MAUs. User growth trends, which are reflected in the number of MAUs, are a key factor that affects our revenue and financial results. As our user base and the quality of engagement of our users grow, we believe the potential to increase our revenue grows.
We are focused on increasing the ways Pinners use and get value from our platform and on expanding our user base, with an emphasis on international markets.
We may face challenges enhancing the quality of engagement and increasing the size of our user base, including competition from alternative products and services, saturation of existing markets, difficulties scaling in international markets, a lack of sufficiently relevant content available on Pinterest, actions by external parties (such as changes in search engine methodologies and policies, changes in terms of online application stores and disruptions in single sign-on access) or changes in regulations (which require changes to our products in a manner that negatively impacts our user growth, retention and engagement). We expect long-term revenue growth will be driven more by the quality of user engagement and higher monetization of users than by sheer growth of users. To the extent our user growth slows, our revenue growth will become increasingly dependent on our ability to increase the quality of user engagement.
Growth in Monetization. Monetization trends, which are reflected in ARPU, are a key factor that affects our revenue and financial results.
We are in the early stages of our monetization efforts. We are focused on helping advertisers of all sizes succeed on Pinterest and expanding our sales efforts to reach advertisers in additional international markets, with an initial focus on Western Europe and other select markets to follow. Our investments in tools are focused on helping advertisers with ad creation, campaign scaling and measurement.
There are many variables that impact ARPU, including the number of ad impressions shown on our platform and the price per ad, which depends on a number of factors including the engagement of our audience and the quality of that engagement, the number and diversity of advertisers, our ability and decision to serve contextually relevant advertisements, the amount of advertising spend, an advertiser’s objectives, ad performance and the effectiveness of
our advertising products and our ability to measure that effectiveness for our advertisers, as well as the effect of geographic differences on each of these factors. Due to our decision to focus our earliest monetization efforts in the United States, we have less experience monetizing international markets and therefore may experience challenges scaling and monetizing these markets due to differences in Pinners' taste and interests and advertisers' expectations. The international advertising market is also smaller and less mature than the U.S. digital advertising market.
Investment in Technology. We make investments in technology that we believe will enhance Pinner and advertiser experiences. Key investment areas for our platform include machine learning, computer vision and our recommendation engine. We also invest heavily in our advertising products, including our self-serve platform and first- and third-party measurement tools. We plan to continue making significant investments in research and development and may develop products for Pinners that cannot be monetized immediately, if ever.
Investment in Talent. Our business relies on our ability to attract and retain talent. As of December 31, 2020, we had 2,545 full-time employees, an increase of 15% compared to December 31, 2019. For information, see "Talent Management and Development" in section Item 1. Business, which is incorporated herein by reference.
Competition. We face significant competition in almost every aspect of our business. We primarily compete with consumer internet companies that are either tools (search, ecommerce) or media (newsfeeds, video, social networks). We also compete for advertising revenue across a variety of formats. We must compete effectively for users and advertisers in order to grow our business and increase our revenue. For more information, see "Our Competition" in section Item 1. Business and Item 1A. Risk Factors, which are incorporated herein by reference.
Seasonality. We experience seasonality in user growth, engagement and monetization on our platform. Historically, we have had lower engagement in the second calendar quarter, though we did not experience typical seasonal trends and saw an increase in active user growth in the second quarter of 2020 due to shelter-in-place orders related to the COVID-19 pandemic. Industry advertising spend tends to be strongest in the fourth quarter, and we observe a similar pattern in our historical advertising revenue. Significant user and monetization growth has partially offset these trends in historical periods, and thus we expect the impact of seasonality to be more pronounced in the future.
Share-Based Compensation. We began granting restricted stock units ("RSUs") in March 2015. We measure RSUs based on the fair market value of our common stock on the grant date.
RSUs granted under our 2009 Plan are subject to both a service condition, which is typically satisfied over four years, and a performance condition, which was deemed satisfied upon the pricing of our IPO. We did not record any share-based compensation expense for our RSUs prior to our IPO because the performance condition had not yet been satisfied. Upon pricing our IPO, we recorded cumulative share-based compensation expense using the accelerated attribution method for those RSUs granted under our 2009 Plan for which the service condition had been satisfied at that date. We will record the remaining unrecognized share-based compensation expense over the remainder of the requisite service period.
RSUs and restricted stock awards ("RSAs") granted under our 2019 Omnibus Incentive Plan (the "2019 Plan") are subject only to a service condition, which is typically satisfied over four years. We record share-based compensation expense for these RSUs and RSAs on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $742.7 million of unrecognized share-based compensation expense, which we expect to recognize over a weighted-average period of 3.0 years.
For more information about the factors impacting our performance, see “Risk Factors.”
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue. We generate revenue by delivering ads on our website and mobile application. Advertisers purchase ads directly with us or through their relationships with advertising agencies. We recognize revenue only after transferring control of promised goods or services to customers, which occurs when a user clicks on an ad contracted on a cost per click ("CPC") basis, views an ad contracted on a cost per thousand impressions ("CPM") basis or views a video ad contracted on a cost per view ("CPV") basis.
Cost of Revenue. Cost of revenue consists primarily of expenses associated with the delivery of our service, including the cost of hosting our website and mobile application. Cost of revenue also includes personnel-related expense, including salaries, benefits and share-based compensation for employees on our operations teams, payments associated with partner arrangements, credit card and other transaction processing fees, and allocated facilities and other supporting overhead costs.
Research and Development. Research and development consists primarily of personnel-related expense, including salaries, benefits and share-based compensation for our engineers and other employees engaged in the research and development of our products, and allocated facilities and other supporting overhead costs.
Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing consists primarily of personnel-related expense, including salaries, commissions, benefits and share-based compensation for our employees engaged in sales, sales support, marketing, and customer service functions, advertising and promotional expenditures, professional services and allocated facilities and other supporting overhead costs. Our marketing efforts also include user- and advertiser-focused marketing expenditures.
General and Administrative. General and administrative consists primarily of personnel-related expense, including salaries, benefits and share-based compensation for our employees engaged in finance, legal, human resources and other administrative functions, professional services, including outside legal and accounting services, and allocated facilities and other supporting overhead costs.
Other Income (Expense), Net. Other income consists primarily of interest earned on our cash equivalents and marketable securities.
Provision for Income Taxes. Provision for income taxes consists primarily of income taxes in foreign jurisdictions and U.S. federal and state income taxes adjusted for discrete items.
Adjusted EBITDA. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net loss adjusted to exclude depreciation and amortization expense, share-based compensation expense, interest income, interest expense and other income (expense), net, provision for income taxes and, for the third quarter of 2020, a one-time payment for the termination of a future lease contract. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measure” for more information and for a reconciliation of net loss, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP, to Adjusted EBITDA.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our consolidated statements of operations data (in thousands):
(1)Includes share-based compensation expense as follows (in thousands):
(2)See “Selected Financial Data-Non-GAAP Financial Measure” for more information and for a reconciliation of net loss, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP, to Adjusted EBITDA.
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data (as a percentage of revenue):
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $549.9 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Revenue growth was driven by a 12% increase in ARPU supported by a 37% increase in MAUs. These resulted in a 27% increase in the number of advertisements served and a 17% increase in the price of advertisements.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, revenue based on our estimate of the geographic location of our users increased by 39% in the United States to $1,424.5 million driven by a 27% increase in U.S. ARPU supported by an 11% increase in U.S. MAUs. International revenue increased by 129% to $268.2 million driven by a 62% increase in international ARPU supported by a 46% increase in international MAUs.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $90.5 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to higher absolute hosting costs due to user growth offset by a $23.9 million decrease in share-based compensation expense due to our IPO in 2019.
Research and Development
Research and development for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $600.9 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a $648.5 million decrease in share-based compensation expense due to our IPO in 2019 offset by a 17% increase in average headcount, which drove higher personnel expenses, as well as higher consulting expenses.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $168.8 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a $203.7 million decrease in share-based compensation expense due to our IPO in 2019 and lower marketing expenses, offset by a 22% increase in average headcount, which drove higher personnel expenses.
General and Administrative
General and administrative for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $17.3 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a $180.7 million decrease in share-based compensation expense due to our IPO in 2019, offset by a one-time payment of $89.5 million for the termination of a future lease contract, a $22.5 million settlement with our former Chief Operating Officer, an increase in outside advisor and legal-related expenses, and a 14% increase in average headcount, which drove higher personnel expenses.
Other Income
Other income for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $12.5 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to lower returns on our marketable securities as a result of lower interest rates.
Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes was primarily due to profits generated by our foreign subsidiaries.
Net Loss and Adjusted EBITDA
Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $(128.3) million, as compared to $(1,361.4) million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Adjusted EBITDA was $305.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $16.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, due to the factors described above. See “Selected Financial Data-Non-GAAP Financial Measure” for more information and for a reconciliation of net loss, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP, to Adjusted EBITDA.
Quarterly Results of Operations Data
The following tables set forth our unaudited quarterly consolidated results of operations for each of the eight quarters in the period ended December 31, 2020. Our unaudited quarterly results of operations have been prepared on the same basis as our audited consolidated financial statements, and we believe they reflect all normal recurring adjustments necessary for the fair statement of our results of operations for these periods. This information should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our historical operating data may not be indicative of our future performance.
(1)Upon pricing our IPO, the performance condition for RSUs granted under our 2009 Plan was deemed satisfied, and we recorded cumulative share-based compensation expense for those RSUs for which the service condition had been satisfied at that date. For the three months ended June 30, 2019, we recorded total share-based compensation expense of $1,134.6 million.
(2)Includes share-based compensation expense as follows (in thousands):
*Share-based compensation expense was negative for the three months ended June 30, 2020 due to the reversal of previously recognized share-based compensation expense related to unvested RSUs forfeited by our former Chief Operating Officer.
(3)In August 2020, we entered into an agreement to terminate a future lease contract which involved a one-time payment of $89.5 million.
(4)The following table presents a reconciliation of net income (loss), the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP, to Adjusted EBITDA (in thousands):
The following table sets forth the components of our unaudited quarterly consolidated statements of operations (as a percentage of revenue):
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have historically financed our operations primarily through sales of our stock and payments received from our customers. Our primary uses of cash are personnel-related costs and the cost of hosting our website and mobile application. As of December 31, 2020, we had $1,760.3 million in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities. Our cash equivalents and marketable securities are primarily invested in short-duration fixed income securities, including government and investment-grade corporate debt securities and money market funds. As of December 31, 2020, $82.1 million of our cash and cash equivalents was held by our foreign subsidiaries.
In November 2018, we entered into a five-year $500.0 million revolving credit facility with an accordion option which, if exercised, would allow us to increase the aggregate commitments by the greater of $100.0 million and 10% of our consolidated total assets, provided we are able to secure additional lender commitments and satisfy certain other conditions. Interest on any borrowings under the revolving credit facility accrues at either LIBOR plus 1.50% or at an alternative base rate plus 0.50%, at our election, and we are required to pay an annual commitment fee that accrues at 0.15% per annum on the unused portion of the aggregate commitments under the revolving credit facility.
The revolving credit facility also allows us to issue letters of credit, which reduce the amount we can borrow. We are required to pay a fee that accrues at 1.50% per annum on the average aggregate daily maximum amount available to be drawn under any outstanding letters of credit.
The revolving credit facility contains customary conditions to borrowing, events of default and covenants, including covenants that restrict our ability to incur indebtedness, grant liens, make distributions to holders of our stock or the stock of our subsidiaries, make investments or engage in transactions with our affiliates. The revolving credit facility also contains two financial maintenance covenants: a consolidated total assets covenant and a minimum liquidity balance of $350.0 million, which includes any available borrowing capacity. The obligations under the revolving credit facility are secured by liens on substantially all of our domestic assets, including certain domestic intellectual property assets. We are in compliance with all covenants and there were no amounts outstanding under this facility as of December 31, 2020.
On April 23, 2019, we closed our IPO in which we issued and sold 75,000,000 shares of Class A common stock at $19.00 per share. We received net proceeds of $1,368.0 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and before deducting offering costs of $9.8 million. We utilized a portion of the net proceeds from this offering to pay approximately $302.7 million to satisfy the tax withholding and remittance obligations related to the settlement of RSUs.
On April 29, 2019, we issued and sold an additional 11,250,000 shares of Class A common stock at $19.00 per share pursuant to the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares. We received additional net proceeds of $205.2 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions.
We believe our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities and amounts available under our revolving credit facility will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure needs over at least the next 12 months, though we continue to monitor the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our working capital needs and may require additional capital resources in the future. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic has caused disruption in the capital markets. It could make financing more difficult and/or expensive, and we may not be able to obtain such financing on terms acceptable to us or at all.
For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, our net cash flows were as follows (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Cash flows from operating activities consist of our net loss adjusted for certain non-cash reconciling items, such as share-based compensation expense, depreciation and amortization, and changes in our operating assets and liabilities. Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $28.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to a decrease in our net loss after adjusting for non-cash reconciling items offset by an increase in accounts receivable.
Investing Activities
Cash flows from investing activities consist of capital expenditures for improvements to new and existing office spaces. We also actively manage our operating cash and cash equivalent balances and invest excess cash in short-duration marketable securities, sales and maturities of which we use to fund our ongoing working capital requirements. Net cash used in investing activities decreased by $538.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to increased proceeds from maturities of marketable securities.
Financing Activities
Cash flows from financing activities consist of net proceeds from our IPO, tax withholdings on release of RSUs and proceeds from the exercise of stock options. Net cash provided by financing activities decreased by $1,108.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to the net proceeds related to our IPO in 2019 offset by a decrease in tax withholdings on release of RSUs.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
In March 2019, we entered into a lease for approximately 490,000 square feet of office space to be constructed near our current headquarters campus in San Francisco, California. In August 2020, we entered into an agreement to terminate the lease which involved a one-time payment of $89.5 million. As a result of the termination, we eliminated potential future total minimum lease payments of approximately $440.0 million.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP. Preparing our consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses as well as related disclosures. Because these estimates and judgments may change from period to period, actual results could differ materially, which may negatively affect our financial condition or results of operations. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and various other assumptions that we consider reasonable, and we evaluate these estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis. We refer to such estimates and judgments, discussed further below, as critical accounting policies and estimates.
Some of our estimates may require increased judgment due to the significant volatility, uncertainty and economic disruption of the COVID-19 pandemic. We continue to monitor the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, and our estimates and judgments may change materially as new events occur or additional information becomes available to us.
Refer to Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements for further information on our other significant accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue by delivering ads on our website and mobile application. We recognize revenue only after transferring control of promised goods or services to customers, which occurs when a user clicks on an ad contracted on a CPC basis, views an ad contracted on a CPM basis or views a video ad contracted on a CPV basis. We typically bill customers on a CPC, CPM or CPV basis, and our payment terms vary by customer type and location. The term between billing and payment due dates is not significant.
We occasionally offer customers free ad inventory, and revenue is recognized only after satisfying our contractual performance obligations. When contracts with our customers contain multiple performance obligations, we allocate the overall transaction price, which is the amount of consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for promised goods or services, to each of the distinct performance obligations based on their relative standalone selling prices. We generally determine standalone selling prices based on the effective price charged per contracted click, impression or view, and we do not disclose the value of unsatisfied performance obligations because the original expected duration of our contracts is generally less than one year.
Leases and Operating Lease Incremental Borrowing Rate
We lease office space under operating leases with expiration dates through 2033. We determine whether an arrangement constitutes a lease at inception and record lease liabilities and right-of-use assets on our consolidated balance sheets at lease commencement. We measure lease liabilities based on the present value of the total lease payments not yet paid discounted based on the more readily determinable of the rate implicit in the lease or our incremental borrowing rate, which is the estimated rate we would be required to pay for a collateralized borrowing equal to the total lease payments over the term of the lease. We estimate our incremental borrowing rate based on an analysis of publicly traded debt securities of companies with credit and financial profiles similar to our own. We measure right-of-use assets based on the corresponding lease liability adjusted for (i) payments made to the lessor at or before the commencement date, (ii) initial direct costs we incur and (iii) tenant incentives under the lease. We begin recognizing rent expense when the lessor makes the underlying asset available to us, we do not assume renewals or early terminations unless we are reasonably certain to exercise these options at commencement, and we do not allocate consideration between lease and non-lease components.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements for recent accounting pronouncements.