ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following information should be read in conjunction with the accompanying audited consolidated financial statements and related notes and exhibits included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. Certain statements in this Form 10-K may be considered forward-looking. See "Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements" in this Form 10-K for additional information regarding such statements and related risks and uncertainties.
Item 7 in this Form 10-K discusses our 2020 and 2019 results and the year-over-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussion of our 2018 results and the year-over-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 can be found in "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 28, 2020.
Explanation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We have included financial measures that are not prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP"). These non-GAAP financial measures include adjustments to exclude (1) revenues and expenses related to noncontrolling interests, (2) interest expense on long-term financing from net revenues, (3) amortization of intangible assets related to acquisitions, (4) compensation and non-compensation expenses from acquisition-related agreements, (5) acquisition-related restructuring and integration costs and (6) discontinued operations. The adjusted weighted average diluted shares outstanding used in the calculation of non-GAAP earnings per diluted common share contains an adjustment to include the common shares for unvested restricted stock awards with service conditions granted pursuant to the acquisitions of SOP Holdings, LLC and its subsidiaries, including Sandler O'Neill & Partners, L.P. (collectively, "Sandler O'Neill") and The Valence Group ("Valence"). These adjustments affect the following financial measures: net revenues, compensation expenses, non-compensation expenses, income tax expense, net income applicable to Piper Sandler Companies, earnings per diluted common share, non-interest expenses, pre-tax income and pre-tax margin. Management believes that presenting these results and measures on an adjusted basis in conjunction with the corresponding U.S. GAAP measures provides the most meaningful basis for comparison of our operating results across periods and enhances the overall understanding of our current financial performance by excluding certain items that may not be indicative of our core operating results. The non-GAAP financial measures should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for, measures of financial performance prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
Executive Overview
Overview of Operations - Our continuing operations principally consist of providing investment banking and institutional brokerage services to corporations, private equity groups, public entities, non-profit entities and institutional investors in the United States and Europe. We operate through one reportable business segment.
Investment banking services include financial advisory services, management of and participation in underwritings and municipal financing activities. Revenues are generated through the receipt of advisory and financing fees. Institutional sales, trading and research services focus on the trading of equity and fixed income products with institutions, government and non-profit entities. Revenues are generated through commissions and sales credits earned on equity and fixed income institutional sales activities, net interest revenues on trading securities held in inventory, profits and losses from trading these securities, and research checks as clients pay us for research services and corporate access offerings. Also, we have historically generated revenue through strategic trading activities, which focused on investments in municipal bonds; however, we ceased these activities in the first half of 2020. In order to invest firm capital and to manage capital from outside investors, we have created alternative asset management funds in merchant banking, which involve equity investments in late stage private companies, and in the energy sector, whose principal activity is to invest in oil and gas services companies headquartered in Europe. We receive management and performance fees for managing these funds, as well as investment gains and losses.
Discontinued Operations - Discontinued operations includes the operating results of ARI, our traditional asset management subsidiary which we sold in the third quarter of 2019. See Note 5 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further discussion of our discontinued operations.
Our Business Strategy - Our long-term strategic objectives are to drive revenue growth, build a stronger and more durable platform, continue to gain market share, and maximize shareholder value. In order to meet these objectives, we are focused on the following:
•Continuing to transform our business through strategic investments and selectively adding partners who share our client-centric culture and who can leverage our platform to better serve clients;
•Growing our investment banking platform through market share gains, accretive combinations, developing internal talent, and continued sector and geographic expansion. We also believe there is an opportunity to capitalize on the strength of our U.S. franchises by expanding in Europe;
•Leveraging the scale within the equity brokerage and fixed income services platforms, driven by our recently expanded client base and product offerings, to grow market share; and
•Prudently managing capital to maintain our balance sheet strength with ample liquidity and flexibility through all market conditions.
Strategic Activities - During 2019 and 2020, we took the following important steps in the execution of our business strategy.
•On December 31, 2020, we completed the acquisition of TRS Advisors LLC ("TRS"), an advisory firm offering restructuring and reorganization services to companies in public, private and governmental settings. The transaction expands the scale of our restructuring advisory business.
•On April 3, 2020, we completed the acquisition of Valence, an investment bank offering mergers and acquisitions advisory services to companies and financial sponsors with a focus on the chemicals, materials and related sectors. The transaction adds a new industry sector and expands our presence in Europe.
•On January 3, 2020, we completed the acquisition of Sandler O'Neill, a full-service investment banking firm and broker dealer focused on the financial services industry. The acquisition of Sandler O'Neill is accretive to our advisory services revenues, diversifies and enhances scale in corporate financings, adds a differentiated fixed income services business, and increases scale in our equity brokerage business.
•On August 2, 2019, we completed the acquisition of Weeden & Co. L.P. ("Weeden & Co."). Weeden & Co. is a broker dealer focused on providing institutional clients with global trading solutions, specializing in best execution through the use of high-touch, low-touch and program trading capabilities. The transaction added enhanced trade execution capabilities and scale to our equity brokerage business.
Financial Highlights
See the "Results of Operations" section for additional information.
(1)Reconciliation of U.S. GAAP to adjusted non-GAAP financial information
(1) A non-GAAP measure for which the adjustment related to participating shares excludes the impact of the annual special cash dividend paid in the first quarter.
Market Data
The following table provides a summary of relevant market data over the past three years.
(a)Data provided is at period end.
(b)Source: Refinitiv (transactions with reported deal value between $100 million and $1 billion and transactions with an undisclosed deal value that had a financial advisor).
(c)Source: Dealogic and Piper Sandler Equity Capital Markets (IPOs, follow-on offerings and convertible offerings with reported deal value greater than $10 million).
(d)Source: Dealogic and Piper Sandler Equity Capital Markets (offerings with reported deal value greater than $10 million).
(e)Source: Dealogic and Piper Sandler Equity Capital Markets (IPOs, follow-on offerings and convertible offerings with deal values greater than $10 million and PIPEs/RDs greater than $5 million for sub-$5 billion market cap issuers; SPAC IPO fees are represented as the standard two percent upfront fee unless noted differently on the IPO cover).
(f)Source: Refinitiv (sole/senior negotiated and private placement transactions).
(g)Calculated based on the 10-year Municipal Market Data (MMD) index rate divided by the 10-year treasury rate.
External Factors Impacting Our Business
Performance in the financial services industry in which we operate is highly correlated to the overall strength of economic conditions and financial market activity. Overall market conditions are a product of many factors, which are beyond our control, often unpredictable and at times inherently volatile. These factors may affect the financial decisions made by investors, including their level of participation in the financial markets. In turn, these decisions may affect our business results. With respect to financial market activity, our profitability is sensitive to a variety of factors, including the demand for investment banking services as reflected by the number and size of advisory transactions, equity and debt corporate financings, and municipal financings; the relative level of volatility of the equity and fixed income markets; changes in interest rates and credit spreads (especially rapid and extreme changes); overall market liquidity; the level and shape of various yield curves; the volume and value of trading in securities; and overall equity valuations.
Factors that differentiate our business within the financial services industry also may affect our financial results. For example, our capital markets business focuses on specific industry sectors while serving principally middle-market clientele. If the business environment for our focus sectors is impacted adversely, our business and results of operations could reflect these impacts. In addition, our business, with its specific areas of focus and investment, may not track overall market trends. Given the variability of the capital markets and securities businesses, our earnings may fluctuate significantly from period to period, and results for any individual period should not be considered indicative of future results.
Outlook for 2021
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization characterized the COVID-19 outbreak as a global pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has affected major economic and financial markets, and businesses and governments continue to face challenges associated with the economic conditions resulting from efforts to address it. Global macroeconomic conditions have been significantly impacted by the government-mandated closure of businesses and the subsequent reopening of the economy with new protocols for social interaction, supply chain and production disruptions, job losses, reduced consumer spending and sentiment, and a myriad of other factors.
The U.S. federal government passed legislation in the first and fourth quarters of 2020 attempting to mitigate some of the economic hardship caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, with the potential for additional legislation and stimulus measures in 2021. The U.S. Federal Reserve took extraordinary steps in 2020 to provide liquidity in the financial markets, including cutting the short-term benchmark interest rate to zero and launching a new round of quantitative easing. After historic volatility in the first quarter of 2020, equity markets rebounded and fixed income markets stabilized, aided by the record levels of federal monetary and fiscal support. In the third quarter of 2020, the U.S. Federal Reserve announced it would keep the benchmark interest rate at its current low level for an extended period of time, and maintained their quantitative easing measures.
After the unprecedented shock to the economy in 2020 from COVID-19, we expect the economy to improve in 2021, likely weighted towards the second half of the year. However, economic recovery and growth will be dependent on the trajectory of vaccine distribution and administration. The results of the recent U.S. elections will also influence future legislative actions and policies which, in part, may impact economic growth. Geopolitical and macroeconomic risks, such as uncertainties surrounding trade policy and other global economic conditions, remain in the background and will continue to have an ongoing impact to the U.S. and global economy.
Market conditions continued to be favorable for corporate capital raising in the fourth quarter of 2020 driven by strong investor demand and market valuations. We believe equity and debt capital raising activity will remain strong in 2021 albeit at reduced levels from 2020.
Advisory services revenues rebounded in the fourth quarter of 2020 from the trough we experienced during the third quarter of 2020. Advisory services activity is benefiting from increased CEO confidence and more clarity on a post-pandemic outlook. Market conditions remain conducive for activity in the middle market due to attractive valuations, low financing rates and an expectation of continued economic growth. Our pipeline is strong across our industry verticals.
In our equity brokerage business, revenues for 2020 reflected substantially increased levels of volatility and volumes. We believe our equity brokerage revenues will decline in 2021 as institutional trading volumes moderate from the elevated 2020 levels. We also expect the equity brokerage fee pool will be down in 2021.
The actions taken by the U.S. Federal Reserve to inject liquidity into the financial markets and to keep interest rates low allowed for stability in the fixed income markets after the first quarter of 2020. We anticipate less volatility in 2021 which will reduce volumes and commission spreads. We will continue to provide our clients with differentiated advice and analytics on repositioning balance sheets, maximizing yields and managing risk in the current market environment.
Our public finance underwriting business benefited from market stability, low yields, robust refinancing activity and strong investor demand in 2020. We believe that market issuance volumes in 2021 will moderate from the record levels in 2020, especially within the governmental space. Revenues from higher-yielding municipal offerings should increase as high yield investor demand has improved meaningfully. Issuer capital needs, interest rate yields, rate stability and client demand will continue to be the principal drivers of the level of municipal finance activity going forward.
Results of Operations
Financial Summary
The following table provides a summary of the results of our operations on a U.S. GAAP basis and the results of our operations as a percentage of net revenues for the periods indicated.
N/M - Not meaningful
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded net income from continuing operations applicable to Piper Sandler Companies of $40.5 million. Net revenues from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased 48.4 percent to $1.24 billion, compared with $834.6 million in the year-ago period, driven by record corporate financing revenues. Additionally, the acquisitions of Sandler O'Neill and Weeden & Co. have provided increased diversification and scale to our platform. In 2020, investment banking revenues increased 36.4 percent to $858.5 million, compared with $629.4 million in 2019, due to significantly higher corporate financing revenues, as well as increased municipal financing revenues. For the year ended December 31, 2020, institutional brokerage revenues were $357.8 million, up 113.1 percent compared with $167.9 million in 2019. The increase was due to the acquisitions of Weeden & Co. and Sandler O'Neill, as well as higher volatility in the financial markets, particularly in the first quarter of 2020, which drove higher trading volumes. In 2020, net interest expense was $1.3 million, compared to net interest income of $15.0 million in 2019. Net interest expense resulted from a decline in interest income on our long inventory positions combined with incremental interest expense on our long-term financing arrangements, which consist of our fixed rate senior notes issued on October 15, 2019, and the unsecured promissory notes we entered into on April 3, 2020 to fund a portion of the Valence purchase price. For the year ended December 31, 2020, investment income was $23.3 million, compared with $22.3 million in 2019. In 2020, we recorded lower gains on our investment and the noncontrolling interests in the merchant banking funds that we manage which were more than offset by higher gains on our other firm investments. Non-interest expenses from continuing operations were $1.17 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020, up 63.5 percent compared with $715.6 million in the prior year, primarily due to higher compensation and non-compensation expenses resulting from our recent acquisitions.
Consolidated Non-Interest Expenses from Continuing Operations
Compensation and Benefits - Compensation and benefits expenses, which are the largest component of our expenses, include salaries, incentive compensation, benefits, stock-based compensation, employment taxes, income associated with the forfeiture of stock-based compensation and other employee-related costs. A significant portion of compensation expense is comprised of variable incentive arrangements, including discretionary incentive compensation, the amount of which fluctuates in proportion to the level of business activity, increasing with higher revenues and operating profits. Other compensation costs, primarily base salaries and benefits, are more fixed in nature. The timing of incentive compensation payments, which generally occur in February, has a greater impact on our cash position and liquidity than is reflected on our consolidated statements of operations. We have granted restricted stock and restricted cash with service conditions as a component of our acquisition deal consideration, which is amortized to compensation expense over the service period.
The following table summarizes our future acquisition-related compensation expense for restricted stock and restricted cash with service conditions, as well as amounts estimated to be paid under earnout arrangements:
For the year ended December 31, 2020, compensation and benefits expenses increased 70.0 percent to $877.5 million from $516.1 million in 2019. The increase in compensation and benefits expenses was driven by increased revenues and incremental headcount from the acquisitions of Sandler O'Neill and Valence, along with higher acquisition-related compensation related to restricted consideration and retention awards associated with these acquisitions. We also recorded additional compensation expense for an earnout associated with the acquisition of Weeden & Co. related to our expectations of achieving a net revenue target, as our equity brokerage business is outperforming initial projections. Compensation and benefits expenses as a percentage of net revenues was 70.9 percent in 2020, compared with 61.8 percent in 2019. The compensation ratio was impacted by increased acquisition-related compensation related to our recent acquisitions.
Outside Services - Outside services expenses include securities processing expenses, outsourced technology functions, outside legal fees, fund expenses associated with our consolidated alternative asset management funds and other professional fees. Outside services expenses were $38.4 million in 2020, up 6.1 percent compared with $36.2 million in 2019. The increase was due to incremental expenses related to the acquisition of Sandler O'Neill.
Occupancy and Equipment - For the year ended December 31, 2020, occupancy and equipment expenses increased 46.8 percent to $54.0 million, compared with $36.8 million in 2019. The increase was primarily the result of incremental expenses related to our recent acquisitions.
Communications - Communication expenses include costs for telecommunication and data communication, primarily consisting of expenses for obtaining third party market data information. For the year ended December 31, 2020, communication expenses increased 44.2 percent to $44.4 million, compared with $30.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 due to higher market data services expenses resulting from incremental headcount related to our recent acquisitions.
Marketing and Business Development - Marketing and business development expenses include travel and entertainment costs, advertising and third party marketing fees. In 2020, marketing and business development expenses decreased 53.2 percent to $13.5 million, compared with $28.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was driven by lower travel and entertainment costs related to the COVID-19 pandemic. We anticipate that travel will begin to resume in the second half of 2021, resulting in increased travel and entertainment costs compared to 2020.
Deal-Related Expenses - Deal-related expenses include costs we incurred over the course of a completed investment banking deal, which primarily consist of legal fees, offering expenses, and travel and entertainment costs. For the year ended December 31, 2020, deal-related expenses increased 47.4 percent to $38.1 million, compared with $25.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The amount of deal-related expenses is principally dependent on the level of deal activity and may vary from period to period as the recognition of deal-related costs typically coincides with the closing of a transaction. We closed on a record number of equity financing transactions in 2020, which resulted in higher deal-related expenses.
Trade Execution and Clearance - For the year ended December 31, 2020, trade execution and clearance expenses were $18.9 million, compared with $10.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in trade execution and clearance expenses was reflective of higher trading volumes.
Restructuring and Integration Costs - For the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred acquisition-related restructuring and integration costs of $10.8 million. The expenses consisted of $4.4 million of transaction costs related to our recent acquisitions, $3.0 million of severance benefits, $0.9 million of contract termination costs and $2.5 million for vacated leased office space.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we incurred acquisition-related restructuring and integration costs of $14.3 million related to the acquisitions of Weeden & Co. and Sandler O'Neill. The expenses consisted of $6.9 million of professional fees related to the transactions, $2.9 million of severance benefits, $2.8 million of contract termination costs and $1.7 million for vacated leased office space.
Intangible Asset Amortization - Intangible asset amortization includes the amortization of definite-lived intangible assets consisting of customer relationships, internally developed software and the trade name that we acquired from Simmons & Company International ("Simmons"). For the year ended December 31, 2020, intangible asset amortization was $44.7 million, compared with $4.3 million in 2019. The increase was due to incremental intangible asset amortization expense related to identifiable intangible assets associated with the acquisitions of Sandler O'Neill and Valence and a full year of intangible asset amortization expense related to Weeden & Co. In 2021, we anticipate incurring additional intangible asset amortization expense related to the acquisition of TRS and a full year of intangible asset amortization expense related to the acquisition of Valence.
Other Operating Expenses - Other operating expenses include insurance costs, license and registration fees, expenses related to our charitable giving program and litigation-related expenses, which consist of the amounts we reserve and/or pay out related to legal and regulatory matters. Other operating expenses were $29.5 million in 2020, compared with $12.4 million in 2019. In the first quarter of 2020, we recorded a $12.1 million fair value adjustment related to the earnout for former Weeden & Co. equity owners who did not transition to our platform. We recorded the full value of the projected earnout as the non-employee equity owners do not have service requirements. The increase was also due to higher expense related to our charitable giving program.
Income Taxes - For the year ended December 31, 2020, our provision for income taxes was $19.2 million. Excluding the impact of noncontrolling interests, our effective tax rate was 32.1 percent, which was driven by the impact of non-deductible covered employee compensation expense, partially offset by $2.4 million of income tax benefits related to the tax provisions in the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, our provision for income taxes was $24.6 million, which included a $5.1 million tax benefit related to stock-based compensation awards vesting at values greater than the grant price. Excluding the impact of this benefit and noncontrolling interests, our effective tax rate was 26.4 percent.
Financial Performance from Continuing Operations
Our activities as an investment bank and institutional securities firm constitute a single business segment.
Throughout this section, we have presented results on both a U.S. GAAP and non-GAAP basis. Management believes that presenting results and measures on an adjusted, non-GAAP basis in conjunction with the corresponding U.S. GAAP measures provides a more meaningful basis for comparison of its operating results and underlying trends between periods, and enhances the overall understanding of our current financial performance by excluding certain items that may not be indicative of our core operating results. The non-GAAP results should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for, the results prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
The adjusted financial results exclude (1) revenues and expenses related to noncontrolling interests, (2) interest expense on long-term financing from net revenues, (3) amortization of intangible assets related to acquisitions, (4) compensation and non-compensation expenses from acquisition-related agreements and (5) acquisition-related restructuring and integration costs. For U.S. GAAP purposes, these items are included in each of their respective line items on the consolidated statements of operations.
Adjusted operating income and adjusted operating margin present the results of operations excluding the impact resulting from the consolidation of noncontrolling interests in alternative asset management funds. Consolidation of these funds results in the inclusion of the proportionate share of the income or loss attributable to the equity interests in consolidated funds that are not attributable, either directly or indirectly, to us (i.e., noncontrolling interests). This proportionate share is reflected in net income/(loss) applicable to noncontrolling interests in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations, and has no effect on our overall financial performance, as ultimately, this income or loss is not income or loss for us. Included in adjusted operating income and adjusted operating margin is the actual proportionate share of the income or loss attributable to us as an investor in such funds.
The adjusted, non-GAAP financial results also exclude amortization of intangible assets and compensation and non-compensation expenses from acquisition-related agreements. These amounts are excluded on a non-GAAP basis as they represent expenses specifically related to acquisitions that will eventually be fully amortized and therefore not part of our on-going operations. The acquisition-related restructuring and integration costs excluded from the adjusted financial results represent charges that resulted from severance benefits, contract termination costs, vacating redundant leased office space and professional fees related to the respective transactions. These restructuring and integration costs are excluded from our non-GAAP financial measures as they relate to acquisitions and excluding these amounts provides a better understanding of our core non-compensation expenses. Interest expense on long-term financing is an adjustment from net revenues as these arrangements were used to fund the Sandler O'Neill and Valence acquisitions. Management believes that presenting adjusted financial results excluding the acquisition-related amounts provides clarity on the financial results generated by the core operating components of our business.
The following table sets forth the adjusted, non-GAAP financial results and adjustments necessary to reconcile to our consolidated U.S. GAAP financial results for the periods presented:
(1) The following is a summary of the adjustments needed to reconcile our consolidated U.S. GAAP financial results to the adjusted, non-GAAP financial results:
Noncontrolling interests - The impacts of consolidating noncontrolling interests in our alternative asset management funds are not included in our adjusted financial results.
Other adjustments - The following items are not included in our adjusted financial results:
Net revenues on a U.S. GAAP basis increased 48.4 percent to $1.24 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with $834.6 million in the prior-year period. For the year ended December 31, 2020, adjusted net revenues were $1.23 billion compared with $825.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The variance explanations for net revenues and adjusted net revenues are consistent on both a U.S. GAAP and non-GAAP basis unless stated otherwise.
Investment banking revenues comprise all of the revenues generated through advisory services activities, which includes mergers and acquisitions ("M&A"), equity and debt private placements, debt and restructuring advisory, and municipal financial advisory transactions. Collectively, equity and debt private placements and debt and restructuring advisory transactions are referred to as capital advisory transactions. Investment banking revenues also include equity and debt corporate financing activities and municipal financings.
In 2020, investment banking revenues were $858.5 million, up 36.4 percent compared with $629.4 million in the prior-year period. For the year ended December 31, 2020, advisory services revenues were $443.3 million, compared with $440.7 million in 2019. Incremental revenues from the addition of Sandler O'Neill to our platform offset the decline in revenues from a market-wide decrease as M&A activity slowed appreciably during the second and third quarters of 2020 as uncertainty around COVID-19 put many engagements on hold. We saw a rebound in activity in the fourth quarter of 2020 from the trough we experienced during the third quarter, due, in part, to increased CEO confidence and more clarity on a post-pandemic outlook. For the year ended December 31, 2020, corporate financing revenues were a record $295.3 million, up significantly compared with $105.3 million in the prior-year period, due to more completed and book run equity deals, and the addition of Sandler O'Neill to our platform, which book ran 37 debt offerings for financial services companies. Following a substantial halt to capital raising activity in March, market conditions became favorable for capital raising during the second quarter of 2020 driven by a sharp rebound in valuations for equities of certain industry groups combined with lower volatility and low new issue interest rates in debt markets, and these dynamics continued through the remainder of the year. Activity for us during the year was principally in the healthcare sector, and we completed 96 healthcare equity deals. Additionally, activity in the first quarter of 2019 was impacted by the U.S. federal government shut-down. Municipal financing revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were a record $119.8 million, up 43.6 percent compared with $83.4 million in the year-ago period. Despite a rapid decline in the level of activity in March due to significant volatility in the fixed income markets, low interest rates combined with strong investor demand drove record market issuance volumes in 2020. During 2020, the issuance activity was focused within the governmental space. The par amount of our negotiated municipal issuances increased approximately 55 percent in 2020 compared to an increase of approximately 19 percent for the industry.
The following table provides investment banking deal information:
Institutional brokerage revenues comprise all of the revenues generated through trading activities, which consist of facilitating customer trades, executing competitive municipal underwritings and our strategic trading activities in municipal bonds. Our results may vary from quarter to quarter as a result of changes in trading margins, trading gains and losses, net interest spreads, trading volumes, the timing of payments for research services and the timing of transactions based on market opportunities.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, institutional brokerage revenues increased to $357.8 million, compared with $167.9 million in the prior-year period. Equity brokerage revenues were $161.4 million in 2020, up 84.4 percent compared with $87.6 million in 2019, reflecting the successful integration of our platform with Weeden & Co. This combination has expanded our client base, execution expertise and product capabilities, which we leveraged to find liquidity for our clients during the year. Additionally, market-wide volumes and volatility were higher compared to 2019. In the first quarter of 2020, increased volatility market-wide drove significantly higher volumes as investors repositioned in response to market uncertainty and fund outflows. Volumes were also elevated in the fourth quarter of 2020 as clients repositioned before and after the 2020 U.S. presidential election, and market indices traded higher driven by optimism on COVID-19 vaccine results and an economic recovery. For the year ended December 31, 2020, fixed income services revenues were $196.3 million, up 144.4 percent compared with $80.3 million in the prior-year period, due to the addition of Sandler O'Neill to our platform, strong client activity and solid execution in conducive markets. We continue to provide strategic advice on repositioning balance sheets, maximizing yields and managing risk in this low interest rate environment within a market with ample liquidity. Additionally, in the first quarter of 2020, the historically volatile quarter and higher volumes in municipals drove client activity as we provided liquidity to municipal bond funds which saw significant outflows by identifying buyers who took advantage of meaningfully higher yields. This strong client activity was partially offset by trading losses in municipal securities due to the sharp and sudden market dislocation.
Interest income represents amounts earned from holding long inventory positions. For the year ended December 31, 2020, interest income decreased 50.8 percent to $13.2 million, compared with $26.7 million in 2019, reflecting lower long inventory balances. We have focused on only carrying inventory where clients need liquidity within our areas of expertise.
Investment income includes realized and unrealized gains and losses on investments, including amounts attributable to noncontrolling interests, in our merchant banking and energy funds, as well as management and performance fees generated from those funds. For the year ended December 31, 2020, investment income was $23.3 million, compared to $22.3 million in 2019. In 2020, we recorded lower gains on our investment and the noncontrolling interests in the merchant banking funds that we manage. Lower equity valuations and an uncertain and challenging operating environment for some of our portfolio companies drove fair value adjustments in our merchant banking portfolio in the first half of 2020. These declines were more than offset by higher gains on our other firm investments. Excluding the impact of noncontrolling interests, adjusted investment income was $10.4 million in 2020 and $11.5 million in 2019.
Interest expense represents amounts associated with financing, economically hedging and holding short inventory positions, including interest paid on our long-term financing arrangements, as well as commitment fees on our line of credit and revolving credit facility. For the year ended December 31, 2020, interest expense increased to $14.4 million, compared with $11.7 million in the prior-year period. In 2020, we recorded incremental interest expense on our long-term financing arrangements, which consist of the $175 million of fixed rate senior notes we issued on October 15, 2019, and $20 million of unsecured promissory notes we entered into on April 3, 2020 to fund a portion of the Valence purchase price. The increase was partially offset by a decline in interest expense resulting from lower average short inventory balances. Excluding the impact of interest expense on long-term financing, adjusted interest expense was $4.8 million and $9.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The $20 million of unsecured promissory notes were repaid in early 2021, which will decrease interest expense on long-term financing.
Pre-tax margin for 2020 was 5.5 percent, down compared with 14.3 percent for 2019 due to the increased compensation ratio resulting from higher acquisition-related compensation expense. Adjusted pre-tax margin increased to 20.3 percent in 2020, compared with 16.7 percent in 2019. Adjusted pre-tax margin increased driven by the increased scale of our platform, the successful integration of the Sandler O'Neill and Weeden & Co. acquisitions, and significantly lower marketing and business development expenses due to reduced travel and entertainment costs related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The following table sets forth the adjusted, non-GAAP financial results and adjustments necessary to reconcile to our consolidated U.S. GAAP financial results for the periods presented:
(1) The following is a summary of the adjustments needed to reconcile our consolidated U.S. GAAP financial results to the adjusted, non-GAAP financial results:
Noncontrolling interests - The impacts of consolidating noncontrolling interests in our alternative asset management funds are not included in our adjusted financial results.
Other adjustments - The following items are not included in our adjusted financial results:
Discussion of the year-over-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 can be found in "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 28, 2020.
Discontinued Operations
Discontinued operations includes our traditional asset management subsidiary, ARI, which we sold in the third quarter of 2019. ARI's results, previously reported in our Asset Management segment, have been presented as discontinued operations for all prior periods presented.
The components of discontinued operations were as follows:
(1)Includes $2.9 million of intangible asset impairment related to the ARI trade name for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Restructuring costs of $10.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily relate to transaction costs and payments associated with the sale of the business.
See Note 5 to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further discussion of our discontinued operations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Recent accounting pronouncements are set forth in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K, and are incorporated herein by reference.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our accounting and reporting policies comply with U.S. GAAP and conform to practices within the securities industry. The preparation of financial statements in compliance with U.S. GAAP and industry practices requires us to make estimates and assumptions that could materially affect amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements. Critical accounting policies are those policies that we believe to be the most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and that require us to make estimates that are difficult, subjective or complex. Most accounting policies are not considered by us to be critical accounting policies. Several factors are considered in determining whether or not a policy is critical, including whether the estimates are significant to the consolidated financial statements taken as a whole, the nature of the estimates, the ability to readily validate the estimates with other information (e.g., third party or independent sources), the sensitivity of the estimates to changes in economic conditions and whether alternative accounting methods may be used under U.S. GAAP.
For a full description of our significant accounting policies, see Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K. We believe that of our significant accounting policies, the following are our critical accounting policies.
Valuation of Financial Instruments
Financial instruments and other inventory positions owned, financial instruments and other inventory positions sold, but not yet purchased, and certain of our investments recorded in investments on our consolidated statements of financial condition consist of financial instruments recorded at fair value, as required by accounting guidance. Unrealized gains and losses related to these financial instruments are reflected on our consolidated statements of operations.
The fair value of a financial instrument is the amount at which the instrument could be exchanged in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date (the exit price). Based on the nature of our business and our role as a "dealer" in the securities industry or as a manager of alternative asset management funds, the fair values of our financial instruments are determined internally. See Note 2 and Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information on the valuation of our financial instruments and our fair value processes, including specific control processes to determine the reasonableness of the fair value of our financial instruments.
Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") Accounting Standards Codification Topic 820, "Fair Value Measurement," establishes a fair value hierarchy that prioritizes the inputs to valuation techniques used to measure fair value. The hierarchy gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (Level I measurements) and the lowest priority to inputs with little or no pricing observability (Level III measurements). Assets and liabilities are classified in their entirety based on the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value measurement. See Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements for additional discussion of our assets and liabilities in the fair value hierarchy.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
We record all assets acquired and liabilities assumed in acquisitions, including goodwill and other intangible assets, at fair value. Determining the fair value of assets and liabilities acquired requires certain management estimates. At December 31, 2020, we had goodwill of $227.5 million and intangible assets of $149.9 million.
We are required to perform impairment tests of goodwill and indefinite-life intangible assets annually and on an interim basis when circumstances exist that could indicate possible impairment. We have elected to test goodwill for impairment in the fourth quarter of each calendar year. We have the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If, after making an assessment, we determine it is not more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then further analysis is unnecessary. However, if we conclude otherwise, then we are required to perform a quantitative goodwill test, which requires management to make judgments in determining what assumptions to use in the calculation. The quantitative goodwill test compares the fair value of the reporting unit to its carrying value, including allocated goodwill. An impairment is recognized for the excess amount of a reporting unit's carrying value over its fair value. See Notes 2 and 12 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information on our impairment testing.
The initial recognition of goodwill and other intangible assets and the subsequent quantitative impairment analysis involves significant judgment in determining the estimates of future cash flows, discount rates, economic forecast and other assumptions which are then used in acceptable valuation techniques, such as the market approach (earnings and/or transaction multiples) and/or the income approach (discounted cash flow method). Changes in these estimates and assumptions could have a significant impact on the fair value and any resulting impairment of goodwill. Our estimated cash flows, by their nature, are difficult to determine over an extended time period. Events and factors that may significantly affect the estimates include, among others, competitive forces and changes in revenue growth trends, cost structures, technology and market conditions. To assess the reasonableness of cash flow estimates and validate assumptions used in our estimates, we review historical performance of the underlying assets or similar assets. In assessing the fair value of our reporting unit, the volatile nature of the securities markets and our industry requires us to consider the business and market cycle and assess the stage of the cycle in estimating the timing and extent of future cash flows. In addition to discounted cash flows, we consider earnings multiples of comparable public companies and multiples of recent mergers and acquisitions transactions of similar businesses in our subsequent impairment analysis.
We elected to perform a qualitative assessment to test goodwill in our capital markets reporting unit for impairment. The following relevant events and circumstances were evaluated in concluding that it was not more likely than not that this goodwill was impaired: macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations and the overall financial performance of the capital markets reporting unit. Our annual goodwill impairment testing, performed as of October 31, 2020, resulted in no impairment.
We also evaluated our intangible assets (indefinite and definite-lived) and concluded there was no impairment in 2020.
Compensation Plans
Stock-Based Compensation Plans
As part of our compensation to employees and directors, we use stock-based compensation, consisting of restricted stock, restricted stock units and stock options. We account for equity awards in accordance with FASB Accounting Standards Codification Topic 718, "Compensation-Stock Compensation," ("ASC 718"), which requires all share-based payments to employees, including grants of employee stock options, to be recognized on the consolidated statements of operations at grant date fair value. Compensation expense related to share-based awards which require future service are amortized over the service period of the award. Forfeitures of awards with service conditions are accounted for when they occur. Share-based awards that do not require future service are recognized in the year in which the awards are deemed to be earned.
See Note 20 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information about our stock-based compensation plans.
Income Taxes
We file a consolidated U.S. federal income tax return, which includes all of our qualifying subsidiaries. We also are subject to income tax in various states and municipalities and those foreign jurisdictions in which we operate. Amounts provided for income taxes are based on income reported for financial statement purposes and do not necessarily represent amounts currently payable. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences attributable to temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax basis and for tax loss carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. Deferred income taxes are provided for temporary differences in reporting certain items, principally restricted compensation (i.e., restricted stock, restricted stock units, restricted mutual fund shares, and deferred compensation). The realization of deferred tax assets is assessed and a valuation allowance is recognized to the extent that it is more likely than not that any portion of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. We believe that our future taxable profits will be sufficient to recognize our U.S. deferred tax assets. However, if our projections of future taxable profits do not materialize, we may conclude that a valuation allowance is necessary, which would impact our results of operations in that period. As of December 31, 2020, we have recorded a deferred tax asset valuation allowance of $4.9 million related to net operating loss carryforwards in the U.K. for Piper Sandler Ltd.
We record deferred tax benefits for future tax deductions expected upon the vesting of stock-based compensation. We recognize the income tax effects of stock-based compensation awards in the income statement when the awards vest. If deductions reported on our tax return for stock-based compensation (i.e., the value of the stock-based compensation at the time of vesting) exceed the cumulative cost of those instruments recognized for financial reporting (i.e., the grant date fair value of the compensation computed in accordance with ASC 718), we record the excess tax benefit as income tax benefit. Conversely, if deductions reported on our tax return for stock-based compensation are less than the cumulative cost of those instruments recognized for financial reporting, the deficiency is recorded as income tax expense. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a $0.3 million tax benefit from continuing operations for stock awards vesting during the period. In the first quarter of 2021, approximately 757,000 shares vested at share prices greater than the grant date fair values, resulting in $1.7 million of excess tax benefits recorded as income tax benefit in the first quarter of 2021.
We establish reserves for uncertain income tax positions in accordance with FASB Accounting Standards Codification Topic 740, "Income Taxes," when it is not more likely than not that a certain position or component of a position will be ultimately upheld by the relevant taxing authorities. Significant judgment is required in evaluating uncertain tax positions. Our tax provision and related accruals include the impact of estimates for uncertain tax positions and changes to the reserves that are considered appropriate. To the extent the probable tax outcome of these matters changes, such change in estimate will impact the income tax provision in the period of change and, in turn, our results of operations. In the fourth quarter of 2019, we recorded a $4.1 million liability for uncertain income tax positions related to our acquisition of Weeden & Co. In the third quarter of 2020, we recorded the reversal of $3.2 million related to this liability. These amounts were recorded as measurement period adjustments in accordance with FASB Accounting Standards Codification Topic 805, "Business Combinations," and include a corresponding indemnification asset. We also paid a settlement of $0.9 million, for which we were indemnified.
Liquidity, Funding and Capital Resources
Liquidity is of critical importance to us given the nature of our business. Insufficient liquidity resulting from adverse circumstances contributes to, and may be the cause of, financial institution failure. Accordingly, we regularly monitor our liquidity position and maintain a liquidity strategy designed to enable our business to continue to operate even under adverse circumstances, although there can be no assurance that our strategy will be successful under all circumstances.
The majority of our tangible assets consist of assets readily convertible into cash. Financial instruments and other inventory positions owned are stated at fair value and are generally readily marketable in most market conditions. Receivables and payables with brokers, dealers and clearing organizations usually settle within a few days. As part of our liquidity strategy, we emphasize diversification of funding sources to the extent possible while considering tenor and cost. Our assets are financed by our cash flows from operations, equity capital, and our funding arrangements. The fluctuations in cash flows from financing activities are directly related to daily operating activities from our various businesses. One of our most important risk management disciplines is our ability to manage the size and composition of our balance sheet. While our asset base changes due to client activity, market fluctuations and business opportunities, the size and composition of our balance sheet reflect our overall risk tolerance, our ability to access stable funding sources and the amount of equity capital we hold.
Certain market conditions can impact the liquidity of our inventory positions, requiring us to hold larger inventory positions for longer than expected or requiring us to take other actions that may adversely impact our results.
A significant component of our employees' compensation is paid in annual discretionary incentive compensation. The timing of these incentive compensation payments, which generally are made in February, has a significant impact on our cash position and liquidity.
Our capital and liquidity positions are strong, our leverage is low, and our risk posture remains conservative. We believe that our priorities for capital deployment remain aligned with our shareholders' interests.
Our dividend policy is intended to return between 30 percent and 50 percent of our adjusted net income from the previous fiscal year to shareholders. This includes the payment of a quarterly and an annual special cash dividend, payable in the first quarter of each year. Our board of directors determines the declaration and payment of dividends on an annual and quarterly basis, and is free to change our dividend policy at any time.
Our board of directors declared the following dividends on shares of our common stock:
(1)Represents the annual special cash dividend based on our results from the previous fiscal year.
Our board of directors has declared a special cash dividend on our common stock of $1.85 per share related to 2020 adjusted net income. This special dividend will be paid on March 12, 2021, to shareholders of record as of the close of business on March 3, 2021. Including this special cash dividend and the regular quarterly dividends totaling $1.25 per share paid during 2020, we will have returned $3.10 per share, or approximately 31 percent of our fiscal year 2020 adjusted net income to shareholders.
Effective January 1, 2020, our board of directors authorized the repurchase of up to $150.0 million in common shares through December 31, 2021. In 2020, we repurchased 188,319 shares of our common stock at an average price of $69.72 per share for an aggregate purchase price of $13.1 million related to this authorization. At December 31, 2020, we had $136.9 million remaining under this authorization.
We also purchase shares of common stock from restricted stock award recipients upon the award vesting or as recipients sell shares to meet their employment tax obligations. During 2020, we purchased 105,193 shares or $8.8 million of our common stock for these purposes.
Cash Flows
Cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2020 were $507.9 million, an increase of $257.9 million from December 31, 2019. Operating activities provided $779.8 million of cash, driven by cash generated from earnings and a reduction in operating assets. The decrease in operating assets resulted from a $203.8 million decline in net financial instruments and other inventory positions owned as we have focused on only carrying inventory where clients need liquidity within our areas of expertise, as well as a $254.3 million decrease in receivables from brokers, dealers and clearing organizations. The increase in operating liabilities was primarily due to an increase in accrued compensation of $132.8 million, the result of higher compensation costs in 2020 from increased revenues and incremental headcount from our recent acquisitions. In 2020, investing activities used $435.0 million, of which $417.4 million was used for the acquisitions of Sandler O'Neill, Valence and TRS. We also used $17.6 million for the purchase of fixed assets. Cash of $87.6 million was used in financing activities as we reduced amounts due under our short-term financing by $50.0 million. We repaid the amount outstanding under our commercial paper program in full upon maturity in the fourth quarter of 2020. We also paid $28.2 million in dividends and repurchased $22.0 million of common stock during 2020.
Cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2019 were $250.0 million, an increase of $199.7 million from December 31, 2018. Operating activities provided $67.8 million of cash, primarily due to cash generated from earnings. Our net income of $118.2 million in 2019 included a $33.0 million non-cash gain on the sale of ARI. The increase in operating assets was driven by a $46.2 million increase in our receivables from brokers, dealers and clearing organizations. The decrease in operating liabilities was due to a decrease in accrued compensation of $29.3 million resulting from the payment of the Simmons performance award plan in the third quarter of 2019. In 2019, investing activities provided $26.7 million, primarily due to proceeds from the sale of ARI. This increase was partially offset by the use of $19.7 million for the acquisition of Weeden & Co. and $6.5 million for the purchase of fixed assets. Cash of $104.7 million was provided through financing activities as we issued $175.0 million of fixed rate senior notes on October 15, 2019. The repurchase of $50.6 million of common stock and dividend payments of $35.6 million partially offset this increase.
Leverage
The following table presents total assets, adjusted assets, total shareholders' equity and tangible shareholders' equity with the resulting leverage ratios:
(1)Leverage ratio equals total assets divided by total shareholders' equity.
(2)Adjusted leverage ratio equals adjusted assets divided by tangible common shareholders' equity.
Adjusted assets and tangible common shareholders' equity are non-GAAP financial measures. Goodwill and intangible assets are subtracted from total assets and total shareholders' equity in determining adjusted assets and tangible common shareholders' equity, respectively, as we believe that goodwill and intangible assets do not constitute operating assets that can be deployed in a liquid manner. The right-of-use lease asset is also subtracted from total assets in determining adjusted assets as it is not an operating asset that can be deployed in a liquid manner. Amounts attributed to noncontrolling interests are subtracted from total assets and total shareholders' equity in determining adjusted assets and tangible common shareholders' equity, respectively, as they represent assets and equity interests in consolidated entities that are not attributable, either directly or indirectly, to Piper Sandler Companies. We view the resulting measure of adjusted leverage, also a non-GAAP financial measure, as a more relevant measure of financial risk when comparing financial services companies. Our adjusted leverage ratio increased from December 31, 2019 primarily due to the goodwill and intangible assets related to our acquisitions of Sandler O'Neill, Valence and TRS.
Funding and Capital Resources
The primary goal of our funding activities is to ensure adequate funding over a wide range of market conditions. Given the mix of our business activities, funding requirements are fulfilled through a diversified range of short-term and long-term financing. We attempt to ensure that the tenor of our borrowing liabilities equals or exceeds the expected holding period of the assets being financed. Our ability to support increases in total assets is largely a function of our ability to obtain funding from external sources. Access to these external sources, as well as the cost of that financing, is dependent upon various factors, including market conditions, the general availability of credit and credit ratings. We currently do not have a credit rating, which could adversely affect our liquidity and competitive position by increasing our financing costs and limiting access to sources of liquidity that require a credit rating as a condition to providing the funds.
Our day-to-day funding and liquidity is obtained primarily through the use of our clearing arrangement with Pershing, commercial paper issuance, a prime broker agreement and a bank line of credit, and is typically collateralized by our securities inventory. These funding sources are critical to our ability to finance and hold inventory, which is a necessary part of our institutional brokerage business. The majority of our inventory is liquid and is therefore funded by short-term facilities. Certain of these short-term facilities (i.e., committed line and commercial paper) have been established to mitigate changes in the liquidity of our inventory based on changing market conditions. In the case of our committed line, it is available to us regardless of changes in market liquidity conditions through the end of its term, although there may be limitations on the type of securities available to pledge. Our commercial paper program helps mitigate changes in market liquidity conditions given it is not an overnight facility, but provides funding with a term of 27 to 270 days. Our funding sources are also dependent on the types of inventory that our counterparties are willing to accept as collateral and the number of counterparties available. Funding is generally obtained at rates based upon the federal funds rate or LIBOR.
Pershing Clearing Arrangement - We have established an arrangement to obtain financing from Pershing related to the majority of our trading activities. Under our fully disclosed clearing agreement, the majority of our securities inventories and all of our customer activities are held by or cleared through Pershing. Financing under this arrangement is secured primarily by securities, and collateral limitations could reduce the amount of funding available under this arrangement. Our clearing arrangement activities are recorded net from trading activity and reported within receivables from or payables to brokers, dealers and clearing organizations. The funding is at the discretion of Pershing (i.e., uncommitted) and could be denied without a notice period. Our fully disclosed clearing agreement includes a covenant requiring Piper Sandler & Co., our U.S. broker dealer subsidiary, to maintain excess net capital of $120 million. At December 31, 2020, we had $0.1 million of financing outstanding under this arrangement.
Commercial Paper Program - Piper Sandler & Co. issues secured commercial paper to fund a portion of its securities inventory. This commercial paper is currently issued under the CP Series II A program, and is secured by different inventory classes, which is reflected in the interest rate paid. The program can issue commercial paper with maturities of 27 to 270 days and the maximum amount that may be issued is $200 million. CP Series II A includes a covenant that requires Piper Sandler & Co. to maintain excess net capital of $100 million. At December 31, 2020, the CP Series II A program had no outstanding balance. We retired the CP Series A program on January 2, 2020.
Prime Broker Arrangements - We have established an overnight financing arrangement with a broker dealer related to our convertible securities inventories. Financing under this arrangement is secured primarily by convertible securities and collateral limitations could reduce the amount of funding available. The funding is at the discretion of the prime broker and could be denied subject to a notice period. This arrangement is reported within receivables from or payables to brokers, dealers and clearing organizations, net of trading activity. At December 31, 2020, we had $106.3 million of financing outstanding under this prime broker arrangement.
Committed Line - We elected to decrease our committed line from $125 million to $100 million in the fourth quarter of 2020. Advances under this facility are secured by certain marketable securities. The facility includes a covenant that requires Piper Sandler & Co. to maintain a minimum regulatory net capital of $120 million, and the unpaid principal amount of all advances under the facility will be due on December 10, 2021. This credit facility has been in place since 2008 and we renewed the facility for another one-year term in the fourth quarter of 2020. At December 31, 2020, we had no advances against this line of credit.
Revolving Credit Facility - Our parent company, Piper Sandler Companies, has an unsecured $50 million revolving credit facility with U.S. Bank N.A. The credit agreement will terminate on December 20, 2022, unless otherwise terminated, and is subject to a one-year extension exercisable at our option. At December 31, 2020, there were no advances against this credit facility. In January 2021, we increased our revolving credit facility from $50 million to $65 million.
This credit facility includes customary events of default and covenants that, among other things, requires Piper Sandler & Co. to maintain a minimum regulatory net capital of $120 million, limits our leverage ratio, requires maintenance of a minimum ratio of operating cash flow to fixed charges, and imposes certain limitations on our ability to make acquisitions and make payments on our capital stock. At December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all covenants.
The following tables present the average balances outstanding for our various funding sources by quarter for 2020 and 2019:
The average funding in the fourth quarter of 2020 decreased to $129.9 million, compared with $172.8 million during the third quarter of 2020 and $172.6 million during the fourth quarter of 2019. Cash from operations allowed us to reduce financing balances throughout 2020. We repaid the $50 million outstanding under our CP Series II A program in full upon maturity in October 2020. Also, early in the fourth quarter of 2020, we repaid the $25 million of advances against our revolving credit facility.
The following table presents the maximum daily funding amount by quarter for 2020 and 2019:
Long-term Financing
Senior Notes - On October 15, 2019, we entered into a note purchase agreement ("Note Purchase Agreement") under which we issued unsecured fixed rate senior notes ("Notes") in the amount of $175 million. The initial holders of the Notes are certain entities advised by Pacific Investment Management Company ("PIMCO"). The Notes consist of two classes, Class A Notes and Class B Notes, with principal amounts of $50 million and $125 million, respectively. The Class A Notes bear interest at an annual fixed rate of 4.74 percent and mature on October 15, 2021. The Class B Notes bear interest at an annual fixed rate of 5.20 percent and mature on October 15, 2023. Interest on the Notes is payable semi-annually. The unpaid principal amounts are due in full on the respective maturity dates and may not be prepaid.
The Note Purchase Agreement includes customary events of default and covenants that, among other things, requires Piper Sandler & Co. to maintain a minimum regulatory net capital, limits our leverage ratio and requires maintenance of a minimum ratio of operating cash flow to fixed charges. At December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all covenants.
Valence Notes - On April 3, 2020, we entered into unsecured promissory notes as part of the acquisition of Valence totaling $20 million (the "Valence Notes"). The Valence Notes bear interest at an annual fixed rate of 5.0 percent and mature on October 15, 2021. Interest is payable quarterly in arrears. The Valence Notes were repaid in early 2021.
Capital Requirements
As a registered broker dealer and member firm of FINRA, Piper Sandler & Co. is subject to the uniform net capital rule of the SEC and the net capital rule of FINRA. We have elected to use the alternative method permitted by the uniform net capital rule which requires that we maintain minimum net capital of $1.0 million. Advances to affiliates, repayment of subordinated liabilities, dividend payments and other equity withdrawals are subject to certain approvals, notifications and other provisions of the uniform net capital rules. We expect that these provisions will not impact our ability to meet current and future obligations. At December 31, 2020, our net capital under the SEC's uniform net capital rule was $212.9 million, and exceeded the minimum net capital required under the SEC rule by $211.9 million.
Although we operate with a level of net capital substantially greater than the minimum thresholds established by FINRA and the SEC, a substantial reduction of our capital would curtail many of our capital markets revenue producing activities.
Our committed short-term credit facility, revolving credit facility and senior notes with PIMCO include covenants requiring Piper Sandler & Co. to maintain a minimum regulatory net capital of $120 million. Secured commercial paper issued under CP Series II A includes a covenant that requires Piper Sandler & Co. to maintain excess net capital of $100 million. Our fully disclosed clearing agreement with Pershing also includes a covenant requiring Piper Sandler & Co. to maintain excess net capital of $120 million.
At December 31, 2020, Piper Sandler Ltd., our broker dealer subsidiary registered in the U.K., was subject to, and was in compliance with, the capital requirements of the Prudential Regulation Authority and the Financial Conduct Authority pursuant to the Financial Services Act of 2012.
Piper Sandler Hong Kong Limited is licensed by the Hong Kong Securities and Futures Commission, which is subject to the liquid capital requirements of the Securities and Futures (Financial Resources) Rule promulgated under the Securities and Futures Ordinance. At December 31, 2020, Piper Sandler Hong Kong Limited was in compliance with the liquid capital requirements of the Hong Kong Securities and Futures Commission.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In the ordinary course of business we enter into various types of off-balance sheet arrangements. The following table summarizes the notional contract value of our off-balance sheet arrangements for the periods presented:
(1)Consists of interest rate swaps. We have minimal market risk related to these matched-book derivative contracts; however, we do have counterparty risk with one major financial institution, which is mitigated by collateral deposits. In addition, we have a limited number of counterparties (contractual amount of $161.3 million at December 31, 2020) who are not required to post collateral. The uncollateralized amounts, representing the fair value of the derivative contracts, expose us to the credit risk of these counterparties. At December 31, 2020, we had $24.0 million of credit exposure with these counterparties, including $20.2 million of credit exposure with one counterparty.
(2)We believe the fair value of these derivative contracts is a more relevant measure of the obligations because we believe the notional or contract amount overstates the expected payout. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the net fair value of these derivative contracts approximated $18.1 million and $16.3 million, respectively.
(3)The investment commitments have no specified call dates. The timing of capital calls is based on market conditions and investment opportunities.
Derivatives
Derivatives' notional or contract amounts are not reflected as assets or liabilities on our consolidated statements of financial condition. Rather, the fair value of the derivative transactions are reported on the consolidated statements of financial condition as assets or liabilities in financial instruments and other inventory positions owned and financial instruments and other inventory positions sold, but not yet purchased, as applicable. For a discussion of our activities related to derivative products, see Note 6 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Investment Commitments
We have investments, including those made as part of our merchant banking activities, in various limited partnerships or limited liability companies that make direct or indirect equity or debt investments in companies. We commit capital and/or act as the managing partner of these entities. We have committed capital of $66.0 million to certain entities and these commitments generally have no specified call dates. For additional information on our activities related to these types of entities, see Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Replacement of Interbank Offered Rates ("IBORs"), including LIBOR
Central banks and regulators in a number of major jurisdictions (e.g., U.S., U.K., European Union, Switzerland and Japan) have convened working groups to find, and implement the transition to, suitable replacements for IBORs. The U.K. Financial Conduct Authority, which regulates LIBOR, has announced that it will not compel panel banks to contribute to LIBOR after 2021. A recent plan would extend the publication of certain USD LIBOR tenors until June 30, 2023, which would allow most legacy USD LIBOR contracts to mature before LIBOR experiences disruptions. We have a limited number of contractual agreements which use LIBOR. We do not expect the transition from LIBOR to a replacement rate to have a significant impact on our operations.
Risk Management
Risk is an inherent part of our business. The principal risks we face in operating our business include: strategic risk, market risk, liquidity risk, credit risk, operational risk, human capital risk, and legal and regulatory risks. The extent to which we properly identify and effectively manage each of these risks is critical to our financial condition and profitability. We have a formal risk management process to identify, assess and monitor each risk and mitigating controls in accordance with defined policies and procedures. The risk management functions are independent of our business lines. Our management takes an active role in the risk management process, and the results are reported to senior management and the board of directors.
The audit committee of the board of directors oversees management's processes for identifying and evaluating our major risks, and the policies, procedures and practices employed by management to govern its risk assessment and risk management processes. The nominating and governance committee of the board of directors oversees the board of directors' committee structures and functions as they relate to the various committees' responsibilities with respect to oversight of our major risk exposures. With respect to these major risk exposures, the audit committee is responsible for overseeing management's monitoring and control of our major risk exposures relating to market risk, credit risk, liquidity risk, legal and regulatory risks, operational risk (including cybersecurity), and human capital risk relating to misconduct, fraud, and legal and compliance matters. Our compensation committee is responsible for overseeing management's monitoring and control of our major risk exposures relating to compensation, organizational structure, and succession. Our board of directors is responsible for overseeing management's monitoring and control of our major risk exposures related to our corporate strategy. Our Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer meet with the audit committee on a quarterly basis to discuss our market, liquidity, and legal and regulatory risks, and provide updates to the board of directors, audit committee, and compensation committee concerning the other major risk exposures on a regular basis.
We use internal committees to assist in governing risk and ensure that our business activities are properly assessed, monitored and managed. Our executive financial risk committee manages our market, liquidity and credit risks; oversees risk management practices related to these risks, including defining acceptable risk tolerances and approving risk management policies; and responds to market changes in a dynamic manner. Membership is comprised of senior leadership, including but not limited to, our Chief Executive Officer, President, Chief Financial Officer, Treasurer, Head of Market and Credit Risk, and Head of Fixed Income Trading and Risk. Other committees that help evaluate and monitor risk include underwriting, leadership team and operating committees. These committees help manage risk by ensuring that business activities are properly managed and within a defined scope of activity. Our valuation committee, comprised of members of senior management and risk management, provide oversight and overall responsibility for the internal control processes and procedures related to fair value
measurements. Additionally, our operational risk committees address and monitor risk related to information systems and security, legal, regulatory and compliance matters, and third parties such as vendors and service providers.
With respect to market risk and credit risk, the cornerstone of our risk management process is daily communication among traders, trading department management and senior management concerning our inventory positions and overall risk profile. Our risk management functions supplement this communication process by providing their independent perspectives on our market and credit risk profile on a daily basis. The broader objectives of our risk management functions are to understand the risk profile of each trading area, to consolidate risk monitoring company-wide, to assist in implementing effective hedging strategies, to articulate large trading or position risks to senior management, and to ensure accurate fair values of our financial instruments.
Risk management techniques, processes and strategies may not be fully effective in mitigating our risk exposure in all market environments or against all types of risk, and any risk management failures could expose us to material unanticipated losses.
Strategic Risk
Strategic risk represents the risk associated with executive management failing to develop and execute on the appropriate strategic vision which demonstrates a commitment to our culture, leverages our core competencies, appropriately responds to external factors in the marketplace, and is in the best interests of our clients, employees and shareholders.
Our leadership team is responsible for managing our strategic risks. The board of directors oversees the leadership team in setting and executing our strategic plan.
Market Risk
Market risk represents the risk of losses, or financial volatility, that may result from the change in value of a financial instrument due to fluctuations in its market price. Our exposure to market risk is directly related to our role as a financial intermediary for our clients and to our market-making activities. The scope of our market risk management policies and procedures includes all market-sensitive cash and derivative financial instruments.
Our different types of market risk include:
Interest Rate Risk - Interest rate risk represents the potential volatility from changes in market interest rates. We are exposed to interest rate risk arising from changes in the level and volatility of interest rates, changes in the slope of the yield curve, changes in credit spreads, and the rate of prepayments on our interest-earning assets (e.g., inventories) and our funding sources (e.g., short-term financing) which finance these assets. Interest rate risk is managed by selling short U.S. government securities, agency securities, corporate debt securities and derivative contracts. See Note 6 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information on our derivative contracts. Our interest rate hedging strategies may not work in all market environments and as a result may not be effective in mitigating interest rate risk. Also, we establish limits on our long fixed income securities inventory, monitor these limits on a daily basis and manage within those limits. Our limits include but are not limited to the following: position and concentration size, dollar duration (i.e., DV01), credit quality and aging.
We estimate that a parallel 50 basis point adverse change in the market would result in a decrease of approximately $0.8 million in the carrying value of our fixed income securities inventory as of December 31, 2020, including the effect of the hedging transactions.
We also measure and monitor the aging and turnover of our long fixed income securities inventory. Turnover is evaluated based on a five-day average by category of security. The vast majority of our fixed income securities inventory generally turns over within three weeks.
In addition to the measures discussed above, we monitor and manage market risk exposure through evaluation of spread DV01 and the MMD basis risk for municipal securities to movements in U.S. treasury securities. All metrics are aggregated by asset concentration and are used for monitoring limits and exception approvals. In times of market volatility, we may also perform ad hoc stress tests and scenario analysis as market conditions dictate.
Equity Price Risk - Equity price risk represents the potential loss in value due to adverse changes in the level or volatility of equity prices. We are exposed to equity price risk through our trading activities primarily in the U.S. market. We attempt to reduce the risk of loss inherent in our market-making and in our inventory of equity securities by establishing limits on our long inventory, monitoring these limits on a daily basis, and by managing net position levels within those limits.
Foreign Exchange Risk - Foreign exchange risk represents the potential volatility to earnings or capital arising from movement in foreign exchange rates. A modest portion of our business is conducted in currencies other than the U.S. dollar, and changes in foreign exchange rates relative to the U.S. dollar can therefore affect the value of non-U.S. dollar net assets, revenues and expenses.
Liquidity Risk
Liquidity risk is the risk that we are unable to timely access necessary funding sources in order to operate our business, as well as the risk that we are unable to timely divest securities that we hold in connection with our market-making and sales and trading activities. We are exposed to liquidity risk in our day-to-day funding activities, by holding potentially illiquid inventory positions and in our role as a remarketing agent for variable rate demand notes.
Our inventory positions subject us to potential financial losses from the reduction in value of illiquid positions. Market risk can be exacerbated in times of trading illiquidity when market participants refrain from transacting in normal quantities and/or at normal bid-offer spreads. Depending on the specific security, the structure of the financial product, and/or overall market conditions, we may be forced to hold a security for substantially longer than we had planned or forced to liquidate into a challenging market if funding becomes unavailable.
See the section entitled "Liquidity, Funding and Capital Resources" for information regarding our liquidity and how we manage liquidity risk.
Credit Risk
Credit risk refers to the potential for loss due to the default or deterioration in credit quality of a counterparty, customer, borrower or issuer of securities we hold in our trading inventory. The nature and amount of credit risk depends on the type of transaction, the structure and duration of that transaction and the parties involved. Credit risk also results from an obligor's failure to meet the terms of any contract with us or otherwise fail to perform as agreed. This may be reflected through issues such as settlement obligations or payment collections.
A key tenet of our risk management procedures related to credit risk is the daily monitoring of the credit quality of our long fixed income securities inventory. These rating trends and the credit quality mix are regularly reviewed with the executive financial risk committee. The following table summarizes the credit rating for our long corporate fixed income, municipal (taxable and tax-exempt), and U.S. government and agency securities as a percentage of the total of these asset classes:
Convertible and preferred securities are excluded from the table above as they are typically unrated and the nature of the strategy is low risk.
Our different types of credit risk include:
Credit Spread Risk - Credit spread risk arises from the possibility that changes in credit spreads will affect the value of financial instruments. Credit spreads represent the credit risk premiums required by market participants for a given credit quality (e.g., the additional yield that a debt instrument issued by a AA-rated entity must produce over a risk-free alternative). Changes in credit spreads result from potential changes in an issuer's credit rating or the market's perception of the issuer's credit worthiness. We are exposed to credit spread risk with the debt instruments held in our trading inventory. We enter into transactions to hedge our exposure to credit spread risk with derivatives and certain other financial instruments. These hedging strategies may not work in all market environments and as a result may not be effective in mitigating credit spread risk.
Deterioration/Default Risk - Deterioration/default risk represents the risk due to an issuer, counterparty or borrower failing to fulfill its obligations. We are exposed to deterioration/default risk in our role as a trading counterparty to dealers and customers, as a holder of securities, and as a member of exchanges. The risk of default depends on the creditworthiness of the counterparty and/or issuer of the security. We mitigate this risk by establishing and monitoring individual and aggregate position limits for each counterparty relative to potential levels of activity, holding and marking to market collateral on certain transactions. Our risk management functions also evaluate the potential risk associated with institutional counterparties with whom we hold derivatives, TBAs and other documented institutional counterparty agreements that may give rise to credit exposure.
Collections Risk - Collections risk arises from ineffective management and monitoring of collecting outstanding debts and obligations, including those related to our customer trading activities. Our client activities involve the execution, settlement and financing of various transactions. Client activities are transacted on a delivery versus payment, cash or margin basis. Our credit exposure to institutional client business is mitigated by the use of industry-standard delivery versus payment through depositories and clearing banks. Our risk management functions have credit risk policies establishing appropriate credit limits and collateralization thresholds for customers and counterparties.
Concentration Risk - Concentration risk is the risk due to concentrated exposure to a particular product; individual issuer, borrower or counterparty; financial instrument; or geographic area. We are subject to concentration risk if we hold large individual securities positions, execute large transactions with individual counterparties or groups of related counterparties, or make substantial underwriting commitments. Potential concentration risk is monitored through review of counterparties and borrowers and is managed using policies and limits established by senior management.
We have concentrated counterparty credit exposure with four non-publicly rated entities totaling $24.0 million at December 31, 2020. This counterparty credit exposure is part of our matched-book derivative program related to our public finance business, consisting primarily of interest rate swaps. One derivative counterparty represented 84.0 percent, or $20.2 million, of this exposure. Credit exposure associated with our derivative counterparties is driven by uncollateralized market movements in the fair value of the interest rate swap contracts and is monitored regularly by our financial risk committee. We attempt to minimize the credit (or repayment) risk in derivative instruments by entering into transactions with high-quality counterparties that are reviewed periodically by senior management.
Operational Risk
Operational risk is the risk of loss, or damage to our reputation, resulting from inadequate or failed processes, people and systems or from external events. We rely on the ability of our employees and our systems, both internal and at computer centers operated by third parties, to process a large number of transactions. Our systems may fail to operate properly or become disabled as a result of events that are wholly or partially beyond our control. In the event of a breakdown or improper operation of our systems or improper action by our employees or third party vendors, we could suffer financial loss, a disruption of our businesses, regulatory sanctions and damage to our reputation. We also face the risk of operational failure or termination of our relationship with any of the exchanges, fully disclosed clearing firms, or other financial intermediaries we use to facilitate our securities transactions. Any such failure or termination could adversely affect our ability to effect transactions and manage our exposure to risk.
Our operations rely on secure processing, storage and transmission of confidential and other information in our internal and outsourced computer systems and networks. Our computer systems, software and networks may be vulnerable to unauthorized access, computer viruses or other malicious code, internal misconduct or inadvertent errors and other events that could have an information security impact. The occurrence of one or more of these events, which we have experienced, could jeopardize our or our clients' or counterparties' confidential and other information processed and stored in, and transmitted through, our computer systems and networks, or otherwise cause interruptions or malfunctions in our, our clients', our counterparties' or third parties' operations. We take protective measures and endeavor to modify them as circumstances warrant.
In order to mitigate and control operational risk, we have developed and continue to enhance policies and procedures that are designed to identify and manage operational risk at appropriate levels throughout the organization. We also have business continuity plans in place that we believe will cover critical processes on a company-wide basis, and redundancies are built into our systems as we have deemed appropriate. These control mechanisms attempt to ensure that operational policies and procedures are being followed and that our various businesses are operating within established corporate policies and limits.
We operate under a fully disclosed clearing model for all of our clearing operations. In a fully disclosed clearing model, we act as an introducing broker for client transactions and rely on Pershing, our clearing broker dealer, to facilitate clearance and settlement of our clients' securities transactions. The clearing services provided by Pershing are critical to our business
operations, and similar to other services performed by third party vendors, any failure by Pershing with respect to the services we rely upon Pershing to provide could cause financial loss, significantly disrupt our business, damage our reputation, and adversely affect our ability to serve our clients and manage our exposure to risk.
Human Capital Risk
Our business is a human capital business and our success is dependent upon the skills, expertise and performance of our employees. Human capital risks represent the risks posed if we fail to attract and retain qualified individuals who are motivated to serve the best interests of our clients, thereby serving the best interests of our company. Attracting and retaining employees depends, among other things, on our company's culture, management, work environment, geographic locations and compensation. There are risks associated with the proper recruitment, development and rewards of our employees to ensure quality performance and retention.
Legal and Regulatory Risk
Legal and regulatory risk includes the risk of non-compliance with applicable legal and regulatory requirements and loss to our reputation we may suffer as a result of failure to comply with laws, regulations, rules, related self-regulatory organization standards and codes of conduct applicable to our business activities. We are generally subject to extensive regulation in the various jurisdictions in which we conduct our business. We have established procedures that are designed to ensure compliance with applicable statutory and regulatory requirements, such as public company reporting obligations, regulatory net capital requirements, sales and trading practices, potential conflicts of interest, anti-money laundering, privacy and recordkeeping. We have also established procedures that are designed to require that our policies relating to ethics and business conduct are followed. The legal and regulatory focus on the financial services industry presents a continuing business challenge for us.
Our business also subjects us to the complex income tax laws of the jurisdictions in which we have business operations, and these tax laws may be subject to different interpretations by the taxpayer and the relevant governmental taxing authorities. We must make judgments and interpretations about the application of these inherently complex tax laws when determining the provision for income taxes.
Effects of Inflation
Because our assets are liquid and generally short-term in nature, they are not significantly affected by inflation. However, the rate of inflation affects our expenses, such as employee compensation, office space leasing costs and communications charges, which may not be readily recoverable in the price of services we offer to our clients. To the extent inflation results in rising interest rates and has adverse effects upon the securities markets, it may adversely affect our financial position and results of operations.