Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis or Plan of Operation.
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes, and other financial information included in this Form 10-K.
Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis contains not only statements that are historical facts, but also statements that are forward-looking. Forward-looking statements are, by their very nature risky, and are subject to uncertainties that could cause actual results or events to differ materially from those expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements in this Form 10-K. These risks and uncertainties include international, national, and local general economic and market conditions; our ability to sustain, manage, or forecast growth; our ability to successfully make and integrate acquisitions; new product development and introduction; existing government regulations and changes in, or the failure to comply with, government regulations; adverse publicity; competition; the loss of significant customers or suppliers; fluctuations and difficulty in forecasting operating results; change in business strategy or development plans; business disruptions; the ability to attract and retain qualified personnel; the ability to protect technology; the risk of foreign currency exchange rate; and other risks that might be detailed from time to time in our filings with the SEC. We do not undertake any obligation to update forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances occurring after the date of this Form 10-K.
Although the forward-looking statements in this Form 10-K reflect the good faith judgment of our management, such statements can only be based on facts and factors currently known by them. You are urged to carefully review and consider the various disclosures made by us in this Form 10-K as we attempt to advise interested parties of the risks and factors that may affect our business, financial condition, and results of operations and prospects. For a more detailed discussion of the inclusion of forward-looking statements in this Form 10-K, please refer to the discussion, above, entitled “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and Information.”
Overview
Our current business, and the primary source of our revenues to date, has been under a human capital fee-based SAAS business model. We have developed a comprehensive HRIS platform designed to provide real-time, agile business intelligence information for our clients as well as an employment marketplace designed to match client opportunities with a large workforce under a digital umbrella. Our market focus is to use this traditional approach, coupled with developed technology, to address underserved markets containing predominately lower wage employees with high turnover, beginning with light industrial, services, and food and hospitality markets. We provide human resources, employment compliance, insurance-related, payroll, and operational employment services solutions for our clients and shift work or gig opportunities for WSEs (or shifters). As consideration for providing these services, we receive administrative or processing fees, typically as a percentage of a client’s gross payroll, process and file payroll taxes and payroll tax returns, provide workers’ compensation insurance, and provide employee benefits. We have built a substantial business on a recurring revenue model since our inception in 2015. For Fiscal 2021, we processed approximately $79 million of payroll billings, our primary operating metric. Despite the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the worldwide economic crisis, by the end of Fiscal 2021 our billings had recovered to pre-pandemic levels, reaching over 3,000 WSEs on a recurring basis and annual billings growth of $14 million, representing a 22% increase above Fiscal 2020 gross payroll billings.
For the current fiscal year we have incurred approximately $30 million in operating losses, which were driven primarily by substantial investments in our technology platform, our SPAC sponsorships and our ShiftPixy Labs growth initiative, as well as by necessary upgrades to our back-office operations to facilitate servicing a large WSE base under a traditional staffing model.
For most of Fiscal 2021, our primary focus was on clients in the restaurant and hospitality industries, (market segments typically characterized by high employee turnover and low pay rates), and healthcare industries typically employing specialized personnel that command higher pay rates. We believe that these industries are better served by our HRIS platform and related mobile application, which provide payroll and human resources tracking for our clients and which we believe result in lower operating costs, improved customer experience and revenue growth acceleration. California continued to be our largest market during Fiscal 2021, accounting for approximately 70.3% of our gross billings during the year. Washington and New Mexico represented our other significant markets during Fiscal 2021, representing approximately 10.8% and 7.6%, of our total revenues, respectively. (Our other locations did not contribute revenue to a material degree.) All of our clients enter into CSAs with us or one of our wholly owned subsidiaries.
Our business focus during Fiscal 2021 was to complete our HRIS platform and to expand that platform to position the Company for rapid billings growth as well as to expand our product offerings to increase our monetization of our payroll billings. To that end, we identified and began to execute on various growth strategies described above, including our sponsorship of various SPACs and our investment in our ShiftPixy Labs initiative. We expect that our execution of these strategies, if successful, will yield significant customer growth driven by widespread adoption of our technology offerings, which we believe represents a substantial value proposition to our clients as a valuable source of agile human capital business intelligence.
Significant Developments in 2021
Sponsorship of SPACs
On April 29, 2021, (as detailed in Item 1, above), we announced our sponsorship of four SPAC IPOs. The IHC IPO closed on October 22, 2021, raising gross proceeds for IHC of $115 million. IHC currently intends to use the proceeds of the IHC IPO to acquire companies in the light industrial segment of the staffing industry, and our goal is to enter into CSAs with IHC following its IBC. Immediately following the IHC IPO, IHC began to evaluate acquisition candidates. IHC’s goal is to complete its IBC within one year of consummation of the IHC IPO.
We currently anticipate that two of our remaining sponsored SPACs, Vital and TechStackery, will seek to raise approximately $100 million each in capital investment to acquire companies in the healthcare and technology segments of the staffing industry, respectively. We expect that our other remaining sponsored SPAC, Firemark, will seek to raise approximately $100 million in capital investment to acquire one or more insurance entities to provide workers’ compensation and related insurance products. We currently own approximately 15% of the issued and outstanding stock of IHC, and we expect to own approximately 20% of each of the other SPACs upon their IPOs being declared effective and consummated, (which equity stake is likely to decrease). Assuming that the IPOs of each of the remaining SPACs are consummated pursuant to the same pricing terms of the IHC IPO, we expect to invest, through Investments, an aggregate amount of $17,531,408 in the SPACs (or up to $18,656,408 if the over-allotment option of each SPAC is exercised in full) through the purchase of placement warrants in addition to our initial $25,000 investment for the purchase of our Founder Shares in each SPAC. These investment amounts set forth above do not include loans that we may extend to each SPAC in an amount not to exceed $500,000 individually, (or $2 million in the aggregate), in our role as sponsor for the purpose of funding various organizational expenses of the SPACs.
We expect each SPAC to operate as a separately managed, publicly traded entity following the completion of their respective IBCs, or “De-SPAC”. We anticipate entering into CSAs with each of the staffing entities that will allow them to participate in our HRIS platform. We also expect to facilitate the procurement of workers’ compensation, personal liability, and other similar insurance products for these staffing entities through our anticipated relationship with Firemark, assuming that it is able to consummate its IPO and complete the De-SPAC process successfully.
We believe that our sponsorship of the SPACs seeking to complete IBCs with entities in the staffing industry has the potential to generate significant revenues and earnings for us, while also supporting a favorable business model for the SPACs. Similarly, we believe that Firemark has the potential to benefit from a relationship with us through both business referrals and licensed access to our technology, which should provide the means to expand its business in a profitable manner if and when it becomes operational.
ShiftPixy Labs
On July 29, 2020, we announced the launch of ShiftPixy Labs, which includes the development of ghost kitchens in conjunction with our wholly-owned subsidiary, ShiftPixy Ghost Kitchens, Inc. Through this initiative, we intend to bring various food delivery concepts to market that will combine with our HRIS platform to create an easily replicated, comprehensive food preparation and delivery solution. The initial phase of this initiative is being implemented in our dedicated kitchen facility located in close proximity to our Miami headquarters, which we are already showcasing through the distribution of video programming on social media produced and distributed by our wholly-owned subsidiary, ShiftPixy Productions, Inc. If successful, we intend to replicate this initiative in similarly constructed facilities throughout the United States and in selected international locations. We also intend to provide similar services via mobile kitchen concepts, all of which will be heavily reliant on our HRIS platform and which we believe will capitalize on trends observed during the COVID-19 pandemic toward providing customers with a higher quality prepared food delivery product that is more responsive to their needs.
The idea of ShiftPixy Labs, (as described in Item 1, above), originated from discussions with our restaurant clients, combined with our observations of industry trends that appear to have accelerated during the pandemic. Beginning in Calendar 2020, we recognized a significant uptick in the use of mobile applications to order take-out food either for individual pickup or third-party delivery, which grew even more dramatically as the pandemic took hold. Not surprisingly, the establishment of fulfillment kitchens for third party delivery also spread rapidly during this time period, initially among national fast food franchise chains but then among smaller QSRs.
We believe that the restaurant industry is in the midst of a food fulfillment paradigm shift that will ultimately result in the widespread use of “ghost kitchens” in a shared environment. Similar to shared office work locations, a shared kitchen can provide significant cost efficiencies and savings compared to the cost of operating multiple retail restaurant locations. Coupled with ShiftPixy’s technology stack, which includes order delivery and dispatch, we believe that the ghost kitchen solutions that emerge from ShiftPixy Labs will provide a robust and effective delivery order fulfillment option for our clients.
We have also observed the growing impact of social media platforms over the past five years, a trend which has accelerated through the pandemic. As this trend has gained steam, many social media influencers have successfully capitalized on their popularity by establishing new business concepts in a variety of industries, including within the QSR space. Some of these QSRs are identified as “virtual” restaurants with delivery-only service fulfilled by centralized ghost kitchens. We intend to capitalize on this trend by creating an extensive social media presence for ShiftPixy Labs.
Many restaurant entrepreneurs have also become successful during the pandemic by moving outside through the use of mobile food trucks, which can be used as a launching point for restaurants and ultimately expanded to traditional indoor dining locations. We have researched this phenomenon and, coupled with our experience in the restaurant industry, believe a significant business opportunity exists to assist with the fulfillment of new restaurant ideas and rapidly expand those ideas across a broad geographic footprint utilizing centralized ghost kitchen fulfillment centers. Again, we believe that ShiftPixy Labs will provide solutions that will facilitate the rapid growth of these new businesses, through a combination of centralized ghost kitchens and an available pool of human capital resources provided through our HRIS platform, as well as through other business assistance provided by our management team.
During Fiscal 2021, we established an industrial facility in Miami that we expect to be fully completed and operational shortly. We are equipping this facility with ten standardized kitchen stations in both single and double kitchen configurations built within standard cargo container shells. We expect this facility, upon completion, to function as a state of the art ghost kitchen space that will be used to incubate restaurant ideas through collaboration and partnerships with local innovative chefs, resulting in sound businesses that provide recurring revenue to us in a variety of ways, both through direct sales and utilization of the ShiftPixy Ecosystem, our HRIS platform, and other human capital services that we provide. To the extent that this business model is successful and can be replicated in other locations, it has the potential to contribute significant revenue to us in the future.
We may also take equity stakes in various branded restaurants that we develop and operate with our partners through ShiftPixy Labs. Such ownership interests will be held to the extent that it is consistent with our continued existence as an operating company, and to the extent that we believe such ownership interests have the potential to create significant value for our shareholders.
Software Development
We believe that our HRIS platform and the related mobile functionality that we are developing will be key differentiators and drivers of our low-cost customer acquisition strategy. As such, we have invested heavily in our HRIS platform over the past five years.
The heart of ShiftPixy’s employment services solutions is a technology platform, including a smartphone application, through which our WSEs will be able to find available shifts at our clients’ locations, solving a problem of finding available shifts for both the shifters looking for additional shifts when they want to work and businesses looking to fill open shifts.
A key element of our software development involves using our blockchain ledger to process and record our critical Peer-to-Peer (“P2P”) connections. While not necessarily a new development, we note that we intend to use blockchain technology to keep our data secure. Any data considered to be a human capital validation point or part of the hiring and onboarding process will be utilized and recorded in our blockchain ledger. For example, we expect the employee I-9 verification process-one of the most stringent, rigorous, and penalty-laden compliance procedures - to be positively impacted by blockchain utilization of biometric authentication and automatic verification of I-9 data, removing human error in the process of screening for fraudulent information. Verification of that data on the blockchain will allow both employers and auditing agencies to confidently validate additional criteria such as employment dates, and candidates’ backgrounds (i.e. education, references, certifications, etc.), and share the verification status directly on multiple distributed sources within the blockchain, further underscoring the reliability and accuracy of candidates’ information and corporate compliance.
Future implementation of blockchain technology within the ShiftPixy Ecosystem is anticipated to include extended applications for payroll and real-time payments, and utilization of smart contracts for employment contracts, which will facilitate recording of credible, trackable, and irreversible transactions without third parties. For purposes of clarification, we note that ShiftPixy has never, does not now and will never use its blockchain technology in any form of cryptocurrency or cryptocurrency-related application.
Our smartphone application is one of the software components of what we call the mobile platform, and together with the ShiftPixy “Command Hub” and the client portal, is being developed, tested and released in stages. We have released and are currently using the multilingual onboarding feature of our software, which enables us to capture all application process related data regarding our assigned WSEs and to introduce WSEs to and integrate them into the ShiftPixy Ecosystem. This multilingual feature will allow us to move faster into outside markets and will reduce the time and cost to bring new WSEs onto our HRIS platform.
Our smartphone onboarding functionality streamlines the typical burdensome pile of new employee paperwork into a seamless user-friendly workflow that is fully compliant with governmental requirements. By leveraging artificial intelligence capabilities, new hires are guided by a conversation with a “Pixy” chatbot that asks the necessary questions and generates the required employment documents in a highly personal and engaging way. Following completion of the questions, applicable onboarding paperwork is prepopulated with the data and prepared for the employee’s signature to be affixed digitally via the app as well.
We believe that our technology and approach to human capital management provides our clients’ management with a unique real-time business intelligence window into their human capital needs. In addition to standard management reporting, our technology provides real-time tools for management to quickly assess and plan their human capital staffing requirements.
Prior to March 2019, we primarily used turnkey contract software development firms to build the software code, mobile application, and license integrations required to build the functional solution, with our internal personnel maintaining principally an oversight role. Beginning in March 2019, we hired and assembled an internal development team for cost-cutting and for better feature and implementation control. Our development team was fully in place by August 2019 and focused on delivering a version of our mobile application and software solution using a combination of third-party licensed software and internally developed software.
We began building our internal software development team and transitioned away from our former software development vendor to expedite our technology deployment. We launched version 2.0 of our mobile application and enhanced user features, including onboarding, scheduling and driver management, during the fourth quarter of Calendar 2019.
We continued our software development internally primarily by focusing on feature enhancements such as delivery, scheduling, and onboarding functionality improvement, as well as better integration and more seamless process flow improvements. We believe that this has resulted in an improved user experience, reduced internal staff time required for onboarding, and increased trials of our future revenue generation features such as delivery and scheduling. Our software development team has continued to focus on intermediation functionality and integration work designed to prepare our HRIS platform to scale and support our growth initiatives described above.
From inception of the project in Fiscal 2017 through August 31, 2021, we spent approximately $26.9 million, consisting of outsourced research and development, IT related expenses, development contractors and employee costs, as well as marketing spending consisting of advertising, trade shows, and personnel costs. The following table shows the technology and marketing spending for each fiscal year ended August 31:
We capitalized no development spending into fixed assets for Fiscal 2021, since the development activities related to our software, as defined by GAAP, was completed during Fiscal 2020. For Fiscal 2019 and our fiscal year ended August 31, 2018 (“Fiscal 2018”), we capitalized $0.9 million and $2.8 million, respectively, of contract development spending into fixed assets.
Offices Update
In August 2020, we signed a lease to relocate our corporate headquarters to Miami, Florida, and largely completed the relocation of our administrative, marketing and East Coast sales and customer support staffs to Miami by the end of Calendar 2020. We currently maintain offices in California primarily for use by our research and development team and our West Coast sales and customer support, and plan to continue to maintain these offices for the foreseeable future.
Effective October 1, 2020, we entered into a non-cancelable 64-month lease for 23,500 square feet of light industrial space located in Miami, Florida, to house kitchen facilities, video production facilities, and certain marketing and technical functions, including those associated with ShiftPixy Labs. The lease contains escalation clauses relating to increases in real property taxes as well as certain maintenance costs.
Effective June 7, 2021, we entered into a sublease agreement with Verifone, Inc. to sublease premises consisting of approximately 8,000 square feet of office space located in Miami, Florida, that we are currently using primarily for our operations workforce. The lease has a term of three years expiring on May 31, 2024. The base rent is paid monthly and escalates annually pursuant to a schedule set forth in the sublease.
Effective June 21, 2021, we entered into a 77-month lease agreement, with an anticipated possession date of March 1, 2022, for premises consisting of approximately 13,418 square feet of office space located in Sunrise, Florida. We anticipate using this space primarily to house our operations personnel and other elements of our corporate workforce. The base rent is paid monthly and escalates annually pursuant to a schedule set forth in the lease.
Financing Activities
During Fiscal 2021, we closed a $12 million public offering in October 2020, and a $12 million private placement offering in May 2021. We also closed a $12 million private placement offering in September 2021, shortly after our fiscal year-end. As of August 31, 2021 and August 31, 2020, we had no convertible debt outstanding and no warrants outstanding that carry anti-dilutive provisions, except as otherwise noted below.
May 2021 Private Placement
On May 17, 2021, we closed a private placement with a large institutional investor pursuant to which we sold to the investor an aggregate of (i) 2,320,000 shares of our common stock, together with warrants (the “May 2021 Common Warrants”) to purchase up to 2,320,000 shares of our common stock, with each May 2021 Common Warrant exercisable for one share of our common stock at a price per share of $2.425, and (ii) 2,628,453 prefunded warrants (the “May 2021 Prefunded Warrants”), together with the May 2021 Common Warrants to purchase up to 2,628,453 shares of our common stock, with each May 2021 Prefunded Warrant exercisable for one share of Common Stock at a price per share of $0.0001. Each share of our common stock and accompanying May 2021 Common Warrant were sold together at a combined offering price of $2.425 and each May 2021 Prefunded Warrant and accompanying May 2021 Common Warrant were sold together at a combined offering price of $2.4249.
The May 2021 Prefunded Warrants were immediately exercisable, at a nominal exercise price of $0.0001, and may be exercised at any time until all of the May 2021 Prefunded Warrants are exercised in full. The May 2021 Common Warrants have an exercise price of $2.425 per share, were immediately exercisable, and will expire on June 15, 2026. The private placement generated gross proceeds of approximately $12 million, prior to deducting $940,000 of costs consisting of placement agent commissions and offering expenses payable by us. In addition to the seven percent (7.0%) of the aggregate gross proceeds cash fee, we issued warrants to the placement agent to purchase an aggregate of up to five percent (5%) of the aggregate number of shares of our common stock issuable upon exercise of the May 2021 Prefunded Warrants sold in the offering (the “May Placement Agent Warrants”). The May Placement Agent Warrants are exercisable for a period commencing on November 17, 2021 (six months after issuance), expire June 15, 2025, and have an initial exercise price of $2.6675 per share.
October 2020 Public Offering
On October 8, 2020, we entered into an underwriting agreement (the “October Underwriting Agreement”) with A.G.P./Alliance Global Partners (“AGP”), in connection with a public offering (the “October 2020 Offering”) of an aggregate of (i) 4,000,000 shares of our common stock and (ii) warrants to purchase 2,300,000 shares of our common stock (the “October 2020 Common Warrants”), which included the partial exercise of AGP’s over-allotment option to purchase 300,000 additional October 2020 Common Warrants.
Each share of our common stock was sold together with an October 2020 Common Warrant as a fixed combination, with each share of our common stock sold being accompanied by an October 2020 Common Warrant to purchase 0.5 shares of our common stock. Each share of our common stock and accompanying October 2020 Common Warrant was sold at a price to the public of $3.00. The October 2020 Common Warrants were immediately exercisable, will expire on October 14, 2025, and have an exercise price of $3.30 per share, subject to anti-dilution and other adjustments for certain stock splits, stock dividends, or recapitalization.
The October 2020 Offering closed on October 14, 2020, yielding gross proceeds to us of approximately $12.0 million, prior to deducting $1.4 million of costs consisting of underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by us, which includes a partial exercise of the underwriter’s over-allotment option to purchase additional October 2020 Common Warrants. Pursuant to the October Underwriting Agreement, we issued to AGP warrants to purchase up to 200,000 shares of common stock (the “October Underwriter Warrants”), which is equal to five percent (5.0%) of the aggregate number of shares of common stock sold in the October 2020 Offering. The October Underwriter Warrants are exercisable at any time and from time to time, in whole or in part, commencing from six months after the closing date and ending five years from the closing date, at a price per share equal to $3.30, which is 110% of the public offering price per share.
September 2021 PIPE Offering (Subsequent to year-end)
On September 3, 2021, we closed a private placement with a large institutional investor pursuant to which we sold to the investor an aggregate of (i) 2,850,000 shares of our common stock, together with warrants (the “September 2021 Common Warrants”) to purchase up to 2,850,000 shares of our common stock, with each September 2021 Common Warrant exercisable for one share of our common stock at a price per share of $1.595, and (ii) 4,673,511 prefunded warrants (the “September 2021 Prefunded Warrants”), together with the September 2021 Common Warrants to purchase up to 4,673,511 shares of our common stock, with each September 2021 Prefunded Warrant exercisable for one share of our common stock at a price per share of $0.0001. Each share of our common stock and accompanying September 2021 Common Warrant were sold together at a combined offering price of $1.595 and each September 2021 Prefunded Warrant and accompanying September 2021 Common Warrant were sold together at a combined offering price of $1.5949.
The September 2021 Prefunded Warrants were immediately exercisable, at a nominal exercise price of $0.0001, and may be exercised at any time until all of the September 2021 Prefunded Warrants are exercised in full. The September 2021 Common Warrants have an exercise price of $1.595 per share, are immediately exercisable, and will expire five years from the date that the registration statement relating to the resale of the shares underlying the September 2021 Common Warrants is declared effective (which has not yet occurred). The private placement generated gross proceeds of approximately $12.0 million, prior to deducting $890,000 of costs consisting of placement agent commissions and offering expenses payable by us. In addition to the seven percent (7.0%) of the aggregate gross proceeds cash fee, we issued warrants to the placement agent to purchase an aggregate of up to five percent (5.0%) of the aggregate number of shares of our common stock issuable upon exercise of the September 2021 Prefunded Warrants sold in the offering (the “September Placement Agent Warrants”). The September Placement Agent Warrants are exercisable for a period commencing on March 3, 2022 (six months after issuance) and expire four years from the effective date (which has not yet occurred) of a registration statement for the resale of the underlying shares, and have an initial exercise price of $1.7545 per share.
Performance Highlights
All figures below represent the continuing operations of the Company after segregating the operations of the assets sold to Vensure pursuant to the Vensure Asset Sale.
Fiscal 2021 vs. Fiscal 2020
• Served approximately 70 clients and employed an average of 3,000 WSEs, resulting in an increase in our administrative fees of approximately 20% above Fiscal 2020.
• Processed over $79 million in gross billings from continuing operations, representing an increase of 20.5% from Fiscal 2020. Our Fiscal 2021 continuing operations mix remained consistent with Fiscal 2020, primarily consisting of food and restaurant workers for QSRs. For further information, please refer to the section entitled “Non-GAAP Financial Measures”, below.
Our financial performance for Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020 included the following significant items:
Revenues increased approximately 171%, to $23.4 million, from $8.6 million in Fiscal 2020. This revenue growth was due to the combination of an increase in gross billings of 20.5%, to $79 million, from $65 million in Fiscal 2020, and the impact of the transition of some of our existing clients to a staffing revenue recognition model during Fiscal 2021, as described below. Recurring WSE counts as of the end of Fiscal 2021 averaged approximately 3,000, which is consistent with a recovery to our pre-pandemic WSE levels. Billings per WSE increased to $26,000 due primarily to business recoveries achieved by our QSR clients as the pandemic subsided, combined with an increase in the placement of nursing WSEs who earn higher wages and consequently generate higher billings.
Revenue associated with administrative fees increased by 20.0%, and tax revenues by 21.6%, both of which are consistent with our billed wages increase of 20.5% during Fiscal 2021. Revenue associated with workers’ compensation premiums increased $236,000, or 14.7%, due to the migration of our WSEs to a guaranteed cost program during Fiscal 2021 and a change in our client mix that resulted in lower billed workers’ compensation rates per wage dollar.
Impact of change in CSAs on prospective revenue recognition and cost of revenues. During Fiscal 2021, as part of our annual review process, we modified certain terms and conditions of our standard CSA applicable to a portion of our existing client base, which resulted in us recognizing revenue generated by these clients pursuant to a staffing model on a prospective basis. The staffing revenue recognition model provides for all gross billings, including employee payroll paid, to be recorded as revenue, and for cost of revenues to be recorded to include the employee payroll paid. Accordingly, for Fiscal 2021, all such revenue increases as a result of this change also yielded a corresponding increase in cost of revenues, and therefore had no impact on our gross margins. During Fiscal 2020, we recorded revenues as "net" (i.e. excluding the employee payroll paid portion), and the employee payroll paid was also excluded from cost of revenues. For further information, please refer to the section entitled "Non-GAAP Financial Measures", below.
For Fiscal 2021, gross billings from staffing and HCM services totaled approximately $15.2 million and $63.8 million, representing 19% and 81% of our gross revenue, respectively. For Fiscal 2020, all of our $65.5 million in gross billings came from HCM services.
Gross Profit decreased approximately 9.7%, or $0.6 million, compared to Fiscal 2020, due to additional workers’ compensation premium costs and an increase in actuarial cost for our legacy workers’ compensation insurance program, offset by an increase in gross profit associated with administrative fees and taxes. The additional workers’ compensation premium costs related to the migration of our clients to a guaranteed cost program in Fiscal 2021, which increased our workers’ compensation expense compared to Fiscal 2020.
Operating expenses increased by 22.8% to $27.7 million for Fiscal 2021, from $22.5 million for Fiscal 2020. The increase in operating expenses reflects the net effect of a $3.5 million reduction of non-recurring expense in Fiscal 2020 for asset impairment and $8.7 million of increased costs associated with our growth initiatives detailed above, (including payroll-related costs of $3.9 million, professional fees of $0.7 million, software development costs of $1.5 million, and costs classified in our statement of operations as general and administrative expenses of $2.4 million). Payroll-related costs increased due primarily to hiring additional executive, operations, and software development personnel to support our growth initiatives. Professional fees increased due to litigation arising in the normal course of business and legal fees we paid on behalf of our sponsored SPACs. Software development costs were driven primarily by our continuing investment in our HRIS platform, while general and administrative expenses grew primarily due to rent cost increases from our entry into leases covering the following: (i) our principal executive offices in Miami, Florida; (ii) our ShiftPixy Labs facility in Miami, Florida; and (iii) our new office facility in Sunrise, Florida, which will house the majority of our operations personnel and other elements of our workforce. Other contributors to the increase in general and administrative expenses include non-recurring costs to relocate certain employees, and marketing expenses related to our growth initiatives.
Operating loss increased by $5.8 million, or 26.7%, due to a decrease in gross margins of $0.6 million, and an increase of $5.8 million in operating expenses.
Other income (expense) increased to $0.1 million in Fiscal 2021, compared to expense totaling $68.9 during Fiscal 2020. The change in other income (expense) is primarily non-recurring in nature, and stems from our issuance during Fiscal 2020 of Preferred Options with an assigned value of $62.1 million to one of our co-founders, J. Stephen Holmes (which were cancelled unexercised subsequent to the close of Fiscal 2021). Other contributors to the increase in other income for Fiscal 2021 as compared to Fiscal 2020 include increases in combined interest expense, loss from debt conversion, inducement loss, and loss on debt extinguishment, offset by gains from the change in fair value of derivatives and the gain on convertible note penalties related to the settlement and extinguishment of certain convertible notes.
Loss from discontinued operations represents the reassessment of the workers' compensation claims reserve associated with our former clients that we transferred to Vensure as part of the Vensure Asset Sale. Loss from discontinued operations increased to a $2.5 million loss in Fiscal 2021.
Net Loss decreased to $29.9 million or $0.88 per share, from $75.3 million or $4.13 per share.
Results of Operations
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020
The following table summarizes our consolidated results of operations:
We report our revenues as gross billings, net of related direct labor costs for our EAS clients and revenues without reduction of labor costs for staffing services clients.
Fiscal 2021
Net revenue for our HCM services excludes the payroll cost component of gross billings. With respect to staffing services, employer payroll taxes, employee benefit programs, and workers’ compensation insurance, we believe that we are the primary obligor, and we have latitude in establishing price, selecting suppliers, and determining the service specifications. As such, the billings for those components are included as revenue. Revenues are recognized ratably over the payroll period as WSEs perform their services at the client worksite.
Net Revenue increased approximately 171.0% to $23.4 million, from $8.6 million in Fiscal 2020. The revenue increase was due to a 20.5% increase in gross billings to $79 million from $65 million, combined with the effect of the transition of some of our existing clients to a staffing revenue recognition model during Fiscal 2021, as described above. Recurring WSE counts as of the end of Fiscal 2021 averaged approximately 3,000, which is consistent with recovery to our pre-pandemic WSE levels. Our gross billings from staffing and HCM services totaled approximately $15.2 million and $63.8 million, representing 19% and 81% of our gross revenue, respectively.
Revenue associated with administrative fees increased by 20.0%, which is consistent with our billed wages increase of 20.5% as well as the 21.6% increase in our revenues associated with taxes during Fiscal 2021. Revenue associated with workers’ compensation increased $236,000, or 14.7%, due to price increases related to our migration to a guaranteed workers' compensation cost program during Fiscal 2021, combined with a change in our client mix yielding lower billed workers’ compensation rates per wage dollar.
Cost of Revenues includes our costs associated with employer taxes, workers’ compensation insurance premiums, and the gross wages paid by our staffing clients. Cost of revenues increased $15.4 million, or 200.6%, to $23.1 million in Fiscal 2021 from $7.7 million in Fiscal 2020. The change in cost of revenues was due primarily to the conversion of certain existing clients to a staffing revenue recognition model during Fiscal 2021, as described above.
Gross Profit decreased approximately 9.7%, or $0.6 million, compared to Fiscal 2020, primarily due to the migration of our clients to a guaranteed cost program workers’ compensation program during Fiscal 2021.
Net loss decreased by $45.5 million, or 60.3%, from $75.3 million for Fiscal 2020 to $29.9 million for Fiscal 2021. This reduction in net loss was due primarily to a decrease of $68.9 million in other expenses related to the Preferred Option exercises in Fiscal 2020, (mitigated by a $15.7 million gain from the Vensure Asset Sale, also recorded in Fiscal 2020), which was offset by a $5.1 million increase in operating losses during Fiscal 2021.
The following table presents certain information related to our operating expenses:
Operating expenses increased $5.1 million, or 22.8%, to $27.7 million in Fiscal 2021 from $22.5 million in Fiscal 2020. The components of operating expenses changed as follows :
Salaries, wages and payroll taxes increased by approximately $3.9 million, or 53.6%, between Fiscal 2020 and Fiscal 2021, from $7.2 million to $11.1 million. This increase resulted primarily from hiring additional employees in the executive, operations, and software development ranks of our business to support our various growth initiatives, including our SPAC sponsorships and ShiftPixy Labs. These costs consisted of gross salaries, benefits, and payroll taxes associated with our executive management team and corporate employees. Our corporate employee count increased from 45 employees at the end of Fiscal 2020 to 68 employees at the end of Fiscal 2021. As of the date of this Form 10-K, we employed 88 individuals at our corporate facilities.
Share-Based compensation increased by $0.1 million, or 5%, to $1.6 million for Fiscal 2021. This increase was primarily due to the increase in corporate employees during the year.
Commissions consist of commissions payments made to third party brokers and inside sales personnel and remained consistent year over year.
Professional fees consist of legal fees, accounting and public company costs, board fees, and consulting fees. Professional fees for Fiscal 2021 increased by $0.7 million, or 21.5%, to $4.1 million, from $3.4 million for Fiscal 2020. The increase is primarily attributable to an increase in legal fees paid related to several of our current active litigation.
Software development consists of costs associated with research and development outsourced to third parties. Software development costs increased $1.5 million, or 67.6%, to $3.8 million for Fiscal 2021, from $2.2 million in Fiscal 2020. The increased costs are due primarily to additional contracted developers to support our mobile application development.
Depreciation and amortization increased by $0.1 million, or 31.3%, for Fiscal 2021 as compared to Fiscal 2020 due to depreciation on asset purchases during Fiscal 2021.
Asset impairment expense decreased by $3.5 million due to the non-recurring impairment of an asset identified in Fiscal 2020.
General and administrative expenses consist of office rent and related overhead, software licenses, insurance, penalties, business taxes, travel and entertainment, and other general business expenses. General and administrative expenses for Fiscal 2021 increased by $2.4 million, or 57.1%, to $6.6 million, from $4.2 million for Fiscal 2020. The increase was due primarily to increased rent costs arising from new leases covering our principal executive offices, ShiftPixy Labs, and additional office space located in Sunrise, Florida to house our operations personnel and other elements of our workforce. Other components of the increase include non-recurring costs related to employee relocations, as well as marketing expenses related to our growth initiatives.
Other income (expense) decreased from $68.9 million in expense for Fiscal 2020 to $0.042 million in expense for Fiscal 2021 as follows:
Interest expense consists of cash interest on interest bearing notes, financing charges for the excess of fair value over carrying amounts of notes issued during any reporting period, amortization of recorded discount and associated deferred financing costs, and acceleration of discounts and deferred financing costs due to early conversions on notes payable. Interest expense decreased $2.5 million to $0.5 million in Fiscal 2021. The decrease was due to lower interest expense and financing costs associated with our June 2018 and March 2019 convertible notes. The June 2018 convertible notes were fully amortized in September 2020, and the March 2019 convertible notes were settled, repaid, or converted during Fiscal 2020.
Other income consists of a non-recurring insurance payment received in Fiscal 2021.
Change in fair value of note receivable consists of a fair value adjustment and amortization of the discount on the note receivable that was recorded on January 1, 2020. No comparable fair value adjustment or amortization was recorded during Fiscal 2021.
Expense related to Preferred Options represents a non-recurring charge reflecting the fair value estimate of the Preferred Options issued to our founders that were deemed to be exercisable in January 2020, and became exchangeable for common.
Expense related to modification of warrants represents the difference in fair value for the modification of warrants issued in conjunction with the June 2018 convertible notes, the exercise price of which was reduced from $70 to $40 per share in December 2019. No comparable expense was recognized during Fiscal 2021.
Loss from debt conversion represents the acceleration of the pro-rated remaining note discount and deferred financing fees associated with the March 2019 convertible notes, as exchanged in either December 2019 or March 2020, that were either converted or repaid in cash during Fiscal 2020. No comparable loss was recognized during Fiscal 2021.
Inducement loss represents the difference in fair value on the date of note conversion between the closing market price and the conversion price per share for Fiscal 2020. No comparable loss was recognized during Fiscal 2021.
Loss on debt extinguishment represents the fair value of the common stock issued in exchange for the March 2019 Warrants cancelled in the March 2020 convertible note amendment and exchange, and for the acceleration of the debt discount and deferred financing fees associated with the remaining March 2019 or December 2019 convertible note exchange. These convertible notes were amended in March 2020 and accounted for as debt extinguishment. No such transactions took place during Fiscal 2021.
Change in fair value derivatives represents the mark to market of our derivative liabilities created by the beneficial conversion feature and related detachable warrants contained in the March 2019 convertible notes. No such change in fair value was recognized in Fiscal 2021
Gain on convertible note penalties accrual represents the recovery of previously accrued convertible note penalties related to the June 2019 default. We settled all note related litigation, as described above and in Note 9 to the accompanying financial statements, in January 2020, which resulted in a gain due to the release of $760,000 for accrued liabilities in excess of paid claims. No such gain was recognized in Fiscal 2021.
Loss from continuing operations As a result of the explanations described above, the loss from continuing operations decreased by $63.1 million, or 69.8%, from a $90.5 million loss for Fiscal 2020 to a $27.4 million loss for Fiscal 2021. The decrease is due to non-recurring charges related to our recapitalization including expenses related to Preferred Options and convertible notes totaling $68.9 million in Fiscal 2020, offset by a $5.7 million increase in operating loss.
Discontinued operations
Gain/loss from discontinued operations. For Fiscal 2021, we recorded a loss primarily based upon our reassessment of our workers' compensation claims reserve associated with the clients that we transferred to Vensure in connection with the Vensure Asset Sale. For Fiscal 2020, we recorded both a loss from discontinued operations for the activity from September 1, 2019 until December 31, 2019 along with losses associated with additional workers’ compensation claims reserves for the period January 1, 2020 through August 31, 2020; and a gain on certain business-related assets sold in connection with the Vensure Asset Sale, as described above and in Note 3 to the accompanying financial statements.
Gain from Asset Sale. During Fiscal 2020, we recognized a gain of approximately $15,682,000 as a result of the Vensure Asset Sale, as described in Note 3 to the accompanying financial statements. No comparable transaction was recognized during Fiscal 2021.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Liquidity
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared in conformity with GAAP, which contemplate our continuation as a going concern. Historically, we have funded ourselves either through cash flow from operations or the raising of capital through equity sales. If we are unable to obtain additional capital, we may not be able to make payments in a timely manner or otherwise fund our operations.
The COVID-19 pandemic continued to negatively impact worldwide economic activity through most of Fiscal 2021, including within the United States where our operations are based. While these negative impacts began to ameliorate during the latter portion of Fiscal 2021, prolonged workforce disruptions still negatively impacted sales for the majority of the fiscal year, as well as our overall liquidity.
As of the end of Fiscal 2021, we had cash of $1.5 million and a working capital deficit of $10.9 million. During Fiscal 2021, we used approximately $21.5 million of cash in our continuing operations and incurred recurring losses, resulting in an accumulated deficit of $149.3 million as of August 31, 2021.
The following table sets forth a summary of changes in cash flows for Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020:
The recurring losses, negative working capital and cash used in operations are indicators of substantial doubt as to our ability to continue as going concern for at least one year from issuance of the financial statements in this Form 10-K. Our plans to alleviate this substantial doubt are discussed below. These plans include raising additional capital to fund expansion of our operations, including the continued development and support of our HRIS platform, our SPAC sponsorship activities, and ShiftPixy Labs, as described above.
We believe that IHC, after completing its IBC, will generate significant revenues for us during our fiscal year ending August 31, 2022 (“Fiscal 2022”), provided that IHC successfully completes its IBC and we are able to enter into CSAs with IHC on favorable terms. Similarly, we believe that our future relationship with Vital and TechStackery will generate significant revenues to us, provided that each of these SPACs is able to launch its IPO and complete its IBC successfully, and we are able to enter into CSAs with each of these SPACs on favorable terms. We also believe that Firemark will generate additional payroll billings for us through contractual arrangements by which we are able to provide low-cost insurance product offerings to our clients, provided that Firemark is able to launch its IPO and complete its IBC successfully, and we are able to enter into a contractual relationship with Firemark on favorable terms.
We also expect our ShiftPixy Labs growth initiative to generate substantial cash flow once launched, by functioning as a state of the art ghost kitchen space that will be used to incubate restaurant ideas through collaboration and partnerships with local innovative chefs. If successful, we believe that this initiative will produce sound businesses that provide recurring revenue to us through direct sales, as well as through utilization of the ShiftPixy Ecosystem, HRIS platform, and other human capital services that we provide. To the extent that this business model is successful and can be replicated in other locations, it has the potential to contribute significant revenue to ShiftPixy in the future. We may also take equity stakes in various branded restaurants that we develop and operate with our partners through ShiftPixy Labs. Such ownership interests will be held to the extent that it is consistent with our continued existence as an operating company, and to the extent that we believe such ownership interests have the potential to create significant value for our shareholders.
Further, on March 27, 2020, President Trump signed into law the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act. The CARES Act, among other things, includes provisions relating to refundable payroll tax credits, deferment of employer side social security payments, net operating loss carry-back periods, alternative minimum tax credit refunds, modifications to the net interest deduction limitations, increased limitations on qualified charitable contributions, and technical corrections to tax depreciation methods for qualified improvement property. Pursuant to Section 2302 of the CARES Act, we are deferring payment of taxes totaling $223,000 and $318,000 until December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2022, respectively. These deferrals will allow us to preserve capital for use in our growth initiatives which, in turn, we expect to generate substantial revenue and cash flow to us if successful.
Also, as detailed above, we closed a private placement transaction with a large institutional investor on September 3, 2021, (immediately following the close of Fiscal 2021), which yielded proceeds to the Company of approximately $11.9 million net of fees and expenses. We expect to engage in additional sales of our securities during Fiscal 2022, either through registered public offerings or private placements, the proceeds of which we intend to use to fund our operations and growth initiatives.
Our management believes that our current cash position, (including the proceeds of the September 2021 private placement transaction), along with our anticipated revenue growth and proceeds from future sales of our securities, when combined with prudent expense management, will be sufficient to alleviate substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern and to fund our operations for at least one year from the date these financials are available (especially when considering the absence of any funded debt outstanding on our balance sheet). If these sources do not provide the capital necessary to fund the Company’s operations during the next twelve months, we may need to curtail certain aspects of our operations or expansion activities, consider the sale of additional assets, or consider other means of financing. We can give no assurance that we will be successful in implementing our business plan and obtaining financing on terms advantageous to the Company, or that any such additional financing will be available. These consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments for this uncertainty.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
See Note 2 in the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Emerging Growth Reporting Requirements
We are a public reporting company under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (the “Exchange Act”). We are required to publicly report on an ongoing basis as an “emerging growth company” (as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, which we refer to as the “JOBS Act”) under the reporting rules set forth under the Exchange Act. For so long as we remain an “emerging growth company”, we may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other Exchange Act reporting companies that are not “emerging growth companies”, including but not limited to:
• not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act;
• taking advantage of extensions of time to comply with certain new or revised financial accounting standards;
• being permitted to comply with reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements; and
• being exempt from the requirement to hold a non-binding advisory vote on executive compensation and stockholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved.
We expect to take advantage of these reporting exemptions until we are no longer an emerging growth company. We are permitted to remain an “emerging growth company” for up to five years, although if the market value of our Common Stock that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million as of any June 30 before that time, we would cease to be an “emerging growth company” as of the following December 31.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to financial measures presented in accordance with GAAP, we monitor other non-GAAP measures that we use to manage our business, make planning decisions and allocate resources. These key financial measures provide an additional view of our operational performance over the long term and provide useful information that we use to maintain and grow our business. The presentation of these non-GAAP financial measures is intended to enhance the reader's understanding of certain aspects of our financial performance. It is not meant to be considered in isolation, superior to, or as a substitute for the directly comparable financial measures presented in accordance with GAAP.
Our revenue recognition policy differs for our EAS and staffing clients and is dependent on the respective CSA applicable to each client. During Fiscal 2021, some of our EAS clients migrated to a staffing CSA. Our policy is to report revenues as gross billings, net of related direct labor costs, for our EAS clients, and revenues without reduction for labor costs for staffing clients. For Fiscal 2021, our gross billings from HCM and staffing services totaled approximately $63.8 million and $15.2 million (total of $79.0), representing 81% and 19% of our gross revenue, respectively. For Fiscal 2020, our gross billings were approximately $65.5 million from our HCM services, and our gross billings generated from staffing were immaterial. (We had no revenues generated from technology services during Fiscal 2020 or Fiscal 2021).
Gross billings represent billings to our business clients and include WSE gross wages, employer payroll taxes, and workers’ compensation premiums as well as administrative fees for our value-added services and other charges for workforce management support. Gross billings for our HCM services are a non-GAAP measurement that we believe to represent a key revenue-based operating metric, along with number of WSEs and number of clients. Active WSEs are defined as employees on our HRIS platform that have provided services for at least one of our clients for any reported period. Our primary profitability metrics are gross profit, and our primary driver of gross profit is administrative fees.
Reconciliation of GAAP to Non-GAAP Measure
Gross Billings to Net Revenues
The following table presents a reconciliation of our Gross Billings (unaudited) to Revenues:
The following table provides the key revenue and our primary gross profit driver used by management.
Our billed WSEs as of the end of Fiscal 2021 averaged approximately 3,000, which is consistent with continuous growth and recovery to our pre-pandemic levels. The increase in administrative fees was consistent with our billings growth over the same time period. The increase in average gross billings per WSE was due to growth in the higher wages commanded by our healthcare WSEs, as well as an increase in billings to our restaurant clients as their operations recovered from the worst effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cancellation of Preferred Options
As disclosed in Note 17 to the accompanying financial statements, “Subsequent Events ”, we cancelled 11,790,000 of the remaining outstanding Preferred Options in October 2021. If the shares of our common stock underlying the conversion rights associated with these Preferred Options were eliminated, the resulting weighted average number of shares of our common stock outstanding for purposes of calculating earnings (loss) per share for Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020 would be adjusted to 21,932,537 and 10,394,875, respectively, which would yield the following per share results on a pro forma basis :