ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with PJT Partners Inc.’s Consolidated Financial Statements and the related notes included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our Business
PJT Partners is a premier global advisory-focused investment bank. We offer a unique portfolio of advisory services designed to help our clients achieve their strategic objectives. Our team of senior professionals delivers a range of strategic advisory, capital markets advisory, restructuring and special situations and shareholder advisory services to corporations, financial sponsors, institutional investors and governments around the world. We also provide, through PJT Park Hill, private fund advisory and fundraising services for alternative investment managers, including private equity funds, real estate funds and hedge funds.
We have world-class franchises in each of the areas in which we compete.
•
Our Strategic Advisory business offers a broad range of financial advisory and transaction execution capabilities, including advising clients on M&A, joint ventures, minority investments, asset swaps, divestitures and activism defense. Our capital markets advisory team specializes in advice and execution on public and private capital raises in the debt and equity capital markets. We provide in-depth advice on capital structure, acquisition finance, debt execution, SPACs, Pre-IPO and IPO, private capital raising and structured products. Through PJT Camberview, our industry leading shareholder advisory business, we provide investor-led advice to public company boards and management teams around the globe on shareholder engagement, strategic investor relations, activism and contested situations, ESG and sustainability and other complex corporate governance matters.
•
Our Restructuring and Special Situations business is one of the world’s leading advisors in restructurings and recapitalizations, both in and out of court, around the globe. With expertise in highly complex capital structure challenges, we advise companies, creditors and financial sponsors on liability management and related capital raise transactions including exchanges, recapitalizations, reorganizations, debt repurchases and distressed mergers and acquisitions.
•
PJT Park Hill, our leading global alternative asset advisory and fundraising business, provides private fund advisory and fundraising services for a diverse range of investment strategies. Moreover, PJT Park Hill is the only group among its peers with top-tier dedicated private equity, hedge fund, real estate and secondary advisory groups. PJT Park Hill’s Secondary Advisory business is a leading advisor to global alternative asset managers and provides clients with a breadth of expertise in the secondary markets, including GP liquidity solutions, GP tender offers, GP recapitalizations, LP portfolio solutions, asset strip sales, single asset SPVs and other structured solutions.
Business Environment
Economic and global financial conditions can materially affect our operational and financial performance. See “Part I. Item 1A. Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of some of the factors that can affect our performance.
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19 to be a pandemic. While we have not experienced a decline in the demand for our services to date as a result of the pandemic, we believe COVID-19’s longer-term potential impact on our business, financial performance and operating results will be significantly driven by a number of factors that we are unable to predict or control, such as the depth and duration of the pandemic and the extent of its impact on the U.S. and global economies. These external factors could have a material effect on our financial performance and operating results going forward.
M&A is a cyclical business that is impacted by macroeconomic conditions. According to Refinitiv, worldwide M&A announced volumes during 2020 were down 5% compared with 20191. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on future M&A activity levels and its resulting impact on our financial results remains uncertain. However, the M&A market remains quite active and we expect corporate boards and management teams to continue to use M&A as a strategic tool.
Source: Refinitiv Global Mergers & Acquisitions Review for Full Year 2020 as of December 31, 2020.
Global restructuring activity continued to be strong in the fourth quarter of 2020 given continued business disruptions across industries and sectors due to the COVID-19 pandemic. While restructuring activity is likely to slow in the near term from current elevated levels, many companies and industries continue to be adversely impacted by the pandemic. Therefore, balance sheets will ultimately need to be restructured given the inevitable tapering of government support programs and changing consumer behaviors over time.
The global fundraising market could continue to be affected by the COVID-19 pandemic with the uncertain environment presenting challenges for both primary and secondary transaction execution. We are experiencing an increased focus on existing relationships between fund managers and institutional investors, making the bar for new relationships in the near term extremely high. Highly successful and tenured firms continue to drive new investor demand as the flight to quality is even more prevalent. There are certain strategies and themes that remain extremely topical among the broader institutional investor base throughout private equity, hedge funds, credit and real estate.
The U.K. formally left the E.U. on December 31, 2020. Our U.K. entity, PJT Partners (UK) Limited, previously serviced U.K. as well as European-domiciled clients. The U.K.’s exit from the E.U. caused PJT Partners (UK) Limited to lose its E.U. financial services passporting rights, which allowed it to operate, on a cross-border and off-shore basis, in all E.U. countries. On October 1, 2020, PJT Partners Park Hill (Spain) A.V., S.A.U., the Company’s European licensed investment firm, became fully operational, following its successful registration with Spain’s National Securities Market Commission. This registration allows us to continue conducting certain regulated activities throughout the E.U.
On December 24, 2020, the U.K. and E.U. finalized the Trade and Cooperation Agreement that governs their future trading and security relationship from January 1, 2021. There remains uncertainty in the region as businesses, governments and regulatory authorities interpret and implement the provisions of the agreement.
Key Financial Measures
Revenues
Substantially all of our revenues are derived from Advisory Fees and Placement Fees. This revenue is primarily a function of the number of active engagements we have, the size of each of those engagements and the fees we charge for our services.
Advisory Fees - The Company provides a range of strategic advisory, capital markets advisory, restructuring and special situations and shareholder advisory services to corporations, financial sponsors, institutional investors and governments around the world. In conjunction with providing restructuring advice, we may also assist with raising various forms of financing, including debt and equity. Our secondary advisory services provided by PJT Park Hill include providing solutions to investing clients seeking portfolio liquidity, unfunded commitment relief and investments in secondary markets. Advisory Fees typically consist of retainer and transaction-based fee arrangements. The amount and timing of the fees paid vary by the type of engagement. The majority of our Advisory Fees recognized are dependent on the successful completion of a transaction.
A transaction can fail to be completed for many reasons, including global and/or regional economic conditions, failure of parties to agree upon final terms, to secure necessary board or shareholder approvals, to secure necessary financing or to achieve necessary regulatory approvals. In the case of bankruptcy engagements, fees are subject to approval of the court.
Placement Fees - Our fund placement services primarily serve private equity, real estate and hedge funds. Our team advises on all aspects of the fundraising process including competitive positioning and market assessment, marketing materials and related documentation and partnership terms and conditions most prevalent in the current environment. We also provide public and private placement fundraising services to our corporate clients and earn placement fees based on successful completion of the transaction.
Fund placement fees earned for services provided to alternative asset managers are typically recognized upon acceptance by a fund of capital or capital commitments (referred to as a “closing”), in accordance with terms set forth in individual agreements. For commitment based fees, revenue is recognized over time as commitments are accepted. Fees for such closed-end fund arrangements are generally paid in installments over three or four years and interest is charged to the outstanding balance at an agreed upon rate (typically LIBOR plus a market-based margin). For funds with multiple closings, the constraint on variable consideration is lifted upon each closing. For open-end fund structures, placement fees are typically calculated as a percentage of a placed investor’s month-end net asset
value. Typically, we earn fees for such open-end fund structures over a 48 month period. For these arrangements, revenue is recognized over time as the constraint over variable consideration is lifted.
We may receive non-refundable up-front fees in our contracts with customers, which are recorded as revenues in the period over which services are estimated to be provided.
Interest Income and Other - Interest Income and Other represents interest typically earned on Cash and Cash Equivalents, investments in Treasury securities and outstanding placement fees receivable; miscellaneous income; foreign exchange gains and losses arising from transactions denominated in currencies other than U.S. dollars; sublease income; and the amount of expense reimbursement invoiced to clients related to out-of-pocket expenses. Interest on placement fees receivable is earned from the time revenue is recognized and is calculated (typically based upon LIBOR) plus an additional percentage as mutually agreed upon with the receivable counterparty. Interest receivable is included in Accounts Receivable, Net in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition.
Expenses
Compensation and Benefits - Compensation and Benefits expense includes salaries, cash bonuses, benefits, employer taxes and equity-based compensation associated with the grants of equity-based awards to partners and employees. Changes in this expense are driven by fluctuations in the number of employees, business performance, compensation adjustments in relation to market movements, changes in rates for employer taxes and other cost increases affecting benefit plans. In addition, this expense is affected by the composition of our work force. The expense associated with our bonus and equity plans can also have a significant impact on this expense category and may vary from year to year.
We maintain compensation programs, including salaries, annual incentive compensation (that may include components of cash, restricted cash and/or equity-based awards) and benefits programs. We manage compensation to estimates of competitive levels based on market conditions and performance. Our level of compensation reflects our plan to maintain competitive compensation levels to retain key personnel and it reflects the impact of newly-hired senior professionals, including related grants of equity awards that are generally valued at their grant date fair value.
Increasing the number of high-caliber, experienced senior level employees is critical to our growth efforts. In our advisory businesses, these hires generally do not begin to generate significant revenue in the year they are hired.
Our remaining expenses are the other costs typical to operating our business, which generally consist of:
•
Occupancy and Related - consisting primarily of costs related to leased property, including rent, maintenance, real estate taxes, utilities and other related costs. Our company headquarters are located in New York, New York, and we maintain additional offices in the U.S. and throughout the world;
•
Travel and Related - consisting of costs for our partners and employees to render services where our clients are located;
•
Professional Fees - consisting primarily of consulting, audit and tax, recruiting and legal and other professional services;
•
Communications and Information Services - consisting primarily of costs for our technology infrastructure and telecommunications costs;
•
Depreciation and Amortization - consisting of depreciation and amortization on our furniture, equipment, leasehold improvements and intangible assets; and
•
Other Expenses - consisting primarily of provision for credit losses, regulatory fees, insurance, fees paid for access to external market data, advertising, other general operating expenses and transaction-related payable to The Blackstone Group Inc. (“Blackstone”).
Income Taxes - PJT Partners Inc. is a corporation subject to U.S. federal, state and local income taxes in jurisdictions where it does business. The Company’s businesses generally operate as partnerships for U.S. federal and state purposes and as corporate entities in non-U.S. jurisdictions. In the U.S. federal and state jurisdictions, taxes related to income earned by these entities generally represent obligations of the individual members and partners.
The operating entities have generally been subject to New York City Unincorporated Business Tax and to entity-level income taxes imposed by non-U.S. jurisdictions, as applicable. These taxes have been reflected in the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
PJT Partners Inc. is subject to U.S. corporate federal, state and local income tax on its allocable share of results of operations from the operating partnership (PJT Partners Holdings LP).
Non-Controlling Interests
PJT Partners Inc. is a holding company and its only material asset is its controlling equity interest in PJT Partners Holdings LP, and certain cash and cash equivalents it may hold from time to time. As the sole general partner of PJT Partners Holdings LP, PJT Partners Inc. operates and controls all of the business and affairs and consolidates the financial results of PJT Partners Holdings LP and its operating subsidiaries.
The portion of net income attributable to the non-controlling interests is presented separately in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Consolidated Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
N/M
Not meaningful.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 versus Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenues
Total Revenues were $1.05 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with $717.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of 47%. The change in Total Revenues was driven by increases of $300.5 million in Advisory Fees, $29.1 million in Placement Fees and $5.1 million in Interest Income and Other. Advisory Fees increased due to significant increases in both restructuring revenues and strategic advisory revenues. Placement Fees increased principally due to increased corporate private placement activity and fund placement activity for private equity clients. The increase in Interest Income and Other was primarily driven by increases in other income, partially offset by a decrease in reimbursable expenses.
The following table provides revenue statistics for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
Expenses
Expenses were $804.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $168.9 million compared with $635.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The change in expenses was primarily driven by increases of $181.2 million in Compensation and Benefits and $2.7 million in Occupancy and Related, partially offset by a decrease of $18.4 million in Travel and Related. The increase in Compensation and Benefits was principally the result of significantly improved operating performance during 2020. Occupancy and Related increased due to expansion in certain locations. Travel and Related decreased due to reduced travel and entertainment activity.
Provision for Taxes
The Company’s Provision for Taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $35.5 million compared with $18.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This resulted in an effective tax rate of 14.3% and 22.4%, respectively, based on our Income Before Provision (Benefit) for Taxes of $248.0 million and $82.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 from the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily driven by a decrease in permanent differences related to equity-based compensation, a lower state and local income tax rate and the tax benefit related to the carryback of certain net operating losses in accordance with the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”).
Non-Controlling Interests
Net Income Attributable to Non-Controlling Interests is derived from the Income Before Provision (Benefit) for Taxes and the percentage allocation of the income between the holders of Partnership Units and holders of Class A common stock of PJT Partners Inc. after considering any contractual arrangements that govern the allocation of income.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 versus Year Ended December 31, 2018
We have omitted the discussion of the earliest of the three years covered in the 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K. Such discussion is included in “Part II. Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in the 2019 Annual Report on Form 10-K, as filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on February 27, 2020, and is incorporated herein by reference.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
We regularly monitor our liquidity position, including cash and cash equivalents, investments, working capital assets and liabilities, any commitments and other liquidity requirements.
Our assets have historically comprised of cash and cash equivalents, investments, receivables arising from strategic advisory and placement engagements and operating lease right-of-use assets. Our liabilities primarily include accrued compensation and benefits, accounts payable and accrued expenses, taxes payable and operating lease liabilities. We expect to pay a significant amount of incentive compensation toward the end of each year or during the beginning of the next calendar year with respect to the prior year’s results. A portion of annual compensation may be awarded with equity-based compensation and thus requires less cash. We expect levels of cash to decline at year-end or during the first quarter of each year after incentive compensation is paid to our employees. We then expect cash to gradually build throughout the remainder of the year.
On October 1, 2018, PJT Partners Holdings LP, as borrower (the “Borrower”), entered into an Amended and Restated Loan Agreement (the “Amended and Restated Loan Agreement”) and related documents with First Republic Bank, as lender (the “Lender”). On February 1, 2021, the Borrower entered into a Renewal and Modification Agreement (the “Renewal Agreement”) and related documents with the Lender, amending the terms of the Borrower’s revolving credit facility with the Lender under the Amended and Restated Loan Agreement. The Renewal Agreement provides for a revolving credit facility with aggregate commitments in an amount equal to $60 million, which aggregate commitments may be increased, on the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in the Renewal Agreement, to up to $80 million during the period beginning December 1 each year through March 1 of the following year. The revolving credit facility will mature and the commitments thereunder will terminate on October 1, 2022, subject to extension by agreement of the Borrower and Lender.
The Renewal Agreement requires the Borrower to maintain certain minimum financial covenants and limits or restricts the ability of the Borrower (subject to certain qualifications and exceptions) to incur additional indebtedness in excess of $20 million. Outstanding borrowings under the Renewal Agreement are secured by the accounts receivable of PJT Partners LP.
Outstanding borrowings under the revolving credit facility bear interest equal to the greater of a per annum rate of (a) 2.75%, or (b) the prime rate minus 1.0%. During an event of default, overdue principal under the revolving credit facility bear interest at a rate 2.0% in excess of the otherwise applicable rate of interest. In connection with the closing of the Renewal Agreement, the Borrower paid the Lender certain closing costs and fees. In addition, on and after the closing date, the Borrower will also pay a commitment fee on the undrawn portion of the revolving credit facility of 0.125% per annum, payable quarterly in arrears.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we were in compliance with the debt covenants under the Amended and Restated Loan Agreement.
We evaluate our cash needs on a regular basis in light of current market conditions. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had cash, cash equivalents and investments of $437.4 million and $217.5 million, respectively.
Our liquidity is highly dependent upon cash receipts from clients, which are generally dependent upon the successful completion of transactions as well as the timing of receivable collections. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, total accounts receivable were $233.2 million and $227.5 million, respectively. The allowance for credit losses was $1.3 million at December 31, 2020 and there was no allowance for credit losses at December 31, 2019. Included in Accounts Receivable, Net are long-term receivables of $83.5 million and $77.6 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, related to placement fees that are generally paid in installments over a period of three to four years.
Sources and Uses of Liquidity
Our primary cash needs are for working capital, paying operating expenses, including cash compensation to our employees, funding the cash redemption of Partnership Units, repurchasing shares of the Company’s Class A common stock, paying income taxes, making distributions to our shareholders in accordance with our dividend policy, capital expenditures, commitments and strategic investments. We expect to fund these liquidity requirements through cash flows from operations and borrowings under our revolving credit facility. Our ability to fund these needs through cash flows from operations will depend, in part, on our ability to generate or raise cash in the future. This depends on our future financial results, which are subject to general economic, financial, competitive, legislative and regulatory factors.
Additionally, our ability to generate positive cash flow from operations will be impacted by global economic conditions, including the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic. If our cash flows from operations are significantly reduced, we may need to incur debt, issue additional equity or borrow from our revolving credit facility. Although we believe that the arrangements we have in place will permit us to finance our operations on acceptable terms and conditions for the foreseeable future, our access to, and the availability of, financing on acceptable terms and conditions in the future will be impacted by many factors, including: (a) our credit ratings or absence of a credit rating, (b) the liquidity of the overall capital markets, and (c) the current state of the economy. We cannot provide any assurance that such financing will be available to us on acceptable terms or that such financing will be available at all. We believe that our future cash from operations and availability under our revolving credit facility, together with our access to funds on hand, will provide adequate resources to fund our short-term and long-term liquidity and capital needs.
Estimating the amount of payments that may be made under the tax receivable agreement entered into with the holders of Partnership Units (other than PJT Partners Inc.) is by its nature imprecise, insofar as the calculation of amounts payable depends on a variety of factors. While the actual increase in tax basis, as well as the amount and timing of any payments under the tax receivable agreement, will vary depending upon a number of factors, including the timing of exchanges, the price of shares of our Class A common stock at the time of the exchange, the extent to which such exchanges are taxable and the amount and timing of our income, we expect that as a result of the size of the transfers and increases in the tax basis of the tangible and intangible assets of PJT Partners Holdings LP, the payments that PJT Partners Inc. may make under the tax receivable agreement will be substantial. There may be a material negative effect on our liquidity if, as a result of timing discrepancies or otherwise, the payments under the tax receivable agreement exceed the actual cash tax savings that PJT Partners Inc. realizes in respect of the tax attributes subject to the tax receivable agreement and/or distributions to PJT Partners Inc. by PJT Partners Holdings LP are not sufficient to permit PJT Partners Inc. to make payments under the tax receivable agreement after it has paid taxes. Late payments under the tax receivable agreement generally will accrue interest at an uncapped rate equal to LIBOR plus 500 basis points. The payments under the tax receivable agreement are not conditioned upon continued ownership of us by holders of Partnership Units.
Regulatory Capital
We actively monitor our regulatory capital base. We are subject to regulatory requirements in the U.S. and certain international jurisdictions to ensure general financial soundness and liquidity. This requires, among other things, that we comply with certain minimum capital requirements, recordkeeping, reporting procedures, experience and training requirements for employees and certain other requirements and procedures. These regulatory requirements may restrict the flow of funds to and from affiliates. See Note 16. “Regulated Entities” in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” in “-Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this filing for further information. The licenses under which we operate are meant to be appropriate to conduct our business. We believe that we provide each of these entities with sufficient capital and liquidity, consistent with their business and regulatory requirements.
Our activities may also be subject to regulation, including regulatory capital requirements, by various other foreign jurisdictions and self-regulatory organizations.
We do not anticipate that compliance with any and all such requirements will materially adversely impact the availability of funds for domestic and parent-level purposes.
Upon receipt of regulatory approval, on August 31, 2020, Park Hill Group LLC merged with and into PJT Partners LP and the net assets of Park Hill Group LLC were transferred to PJT Partners LP at their respective carrying values.
Exchange Agreement
Subject to the terms and conditions of the exchange agreement between us and certain of the holders of Partnership Units (other than PJT Partners Inc.), Partnership Units are exchangeable at the option of the holder for cash or, at our election, for shares of our Class A common stock on a one-for-one basis. Depending on our liquidity and capital resources, market conditions, the timing and concentration of exchange requests and other considerations, we may choose to fund exchanges of Partnership Units with available cash, borrowings or new issuances of Class A common stock or to settle exchanges by issuing Class A common stock to the exchanging Partnership Unitholder.
Certain Partnership Unitholders exchanged 1.7 million and 0.4 million Partnership Units, respectively, for cash in the amounts of $101.9 million and $19.0 million, respectively, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Share Repurchase Program
On February 1, 2021, our Board authorized the repurchase of shares of the Company’s Class A common stock in an amount up to $150 million, which is in addition to the previous authorizations, of which $36.4 million was remaining as of December 31, 2020. Under the repurchase program, shares of the Company’s Class A common stock may be repurchased from time to time in open market transactions, in privately negotiated transactions or otherwise. The timing and the actual number of shares repurchased depend on a variety of factors, including legal requirements, price and economic and market conditions. The repurchase program may be suspended or discontinued at any time and does not have a specified expiration date.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we repurchased 0.9 million shares of the Company’s Class A common stock at an average price per share of $52.20, or $48.7 million in aggregate, pursuant to this share repurchase program.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we repurchased 1.2 million shares of the Company’s Class A common stock at an average price of $40.11, or $47.8 million in aggregate, pursuant to this share repurchase program.
Contractual Obligations
The following table sets forth information relating to our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
(a)
We lease our office space under agreements that expire at various dates through 2036. Further disclosure regarding our leases is provided in Note 13. “Leases” in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” in “-Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this filing. In connection with these lease agreements, we are responsible for escalation payments. The contractual obligation table above includes fixed payments for such leases and does not project potential escalation or other lease-related payments. These leases are classified as operating leases and have been recorded as Operating Lease Liabilities in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition.
(b)
Pursuant to the employee matters agreement entered into with Blackstone (the “Employee Matters Agreement”), we have agreed to pay Blackstone the net realized cash benefit resulting from certain compensation-related tax deductions. Amounts are payable annually (for periods in which a cash benefit is realized) within nine months of the end of the relevant tax period. Further disclosure regarding this liability is provided in Note 15. “Commitments and Contingencies-Transactions and Agreements with Blackstone, Employee Matters Agreement” in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” in “-Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this filing.
(c)
As of December 31, 2020, we had an amount due of $19.6 million pursuant to the tax receivable agreement, which represents management’s best estimate of the amounts currently expected to be owed under the tax receivable agreement. Actual payments may differ significantly from estimated payments. Further disclosure regarding the tax receivable agreement is presented in Note 2. “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-Amount Due Pursuant to Tax Receivable Agreement” and Note 14. “Transactions with Related Parties-Tax Receivable Agreement” in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” in “-Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this filing.
Commitments and Contingencies
Litigation
With respect to our litigation matters, including the litigation discussed under the caption “Legal Proceedings” elsewhere in this report, we are not currently able to estimate the possible loss or range of loss until developments in such matters have provided sufficient information to support such an assessment, including quantification of a damage demand from plaintiffs, discovery from other parties and investigation of factual allegations, rulings by courts on motions or appeals, analysis by experts or the status of any settlement negotiations. However, the disposition of these contingencies could be material to our financial results in the period in which it occurs.
Guarantee
The Company provides a guarantee to a lending institution for certain loans held by employees for investment in funds of its former Parent, which are secured by the underlying investments in those funds. The amount guaranteed was $6.0 million and $8.0 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. In connection with this guarantee, the Company currently expects any associated risk of loss to be insignificant.
Indemnifications
We have entered and may continue to enter into contracts that contain a variety of indemnification obligations. Our maximum exposure under these arrangements is not known; however, we currently expect any associated risk of loss to be insignificant. In connection with these matters, we have incurred and may continue to incur legal expenses, which are expensed as incurred.
Other
See Notes 9, 11, 13 and 15 in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” in “-Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this filing for further information in connection with income taxes, equity-based and other deferred compensation plans, leasing arrangements and commitments, respectively.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company is not involved with any off-balance sheet arrangements that are not elsewhere reflected in our consolidated financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. In applying many of these accounting principles, we need to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, which are often subjective. Actual results may be affected negatively based on changing circumstances. If actual amounts are ultimately different from our estimates, the revisions are included in our results of operations for the period in which the actual amounts become known. We believe the following critical accounting policies could potentially produce materially different results if we were to change underlying assumptions, estimates and/or judgments. (See Note 2. “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” in “-Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this filing.)
Revenue from Contracts with Customers
The services provided under contracts with customers include advisory and placement services, which are recorded as Advisory Fees and Placement Fees, respectively, in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. Additionally, we are typically reimbursed for certain professional fees and other expenses incurred that are necessary in order to provide services to the customer. These expenses are recorded in the relevant expense caption in the Consolidated Statements of Operations when incurred and recognized as revenue and recorded in Accounts Receivable, Net when these amounts are invoiced to the customer. Such revenue amounts are recorded in Interest Income and Other in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
At contract inception, we assess the services promised in our contracts with customers and identify a performance obligation for each promise to transfer to the customer a service (or a bundle of services) that is distinct. To identify the performance obligations, we consider all of the services promised in the contract regardless of whether they are explicitly stated or are implied by customary business practices. Additionally, we allocate the transaction price to the respective performance obligation(s) by estimating the amount of consideration in which we expect to be entitled in exchange for transferring the promised services to the customer.
For performance obligations that are satisfied over time, determining a measure of progress requires management to make judgments that affect the timing of revenue recognized.
For performance obligations that are satisfied at a point in time, we have determined that the customer is able to direct the use of, and obtain substantially all of the benefits from, the output of the service at the time it is provided to the client. Additionally, at that point we have a present right to payment, we have transferred the output of the service and the customer has significant risks and rewards of ownership.
Expenses
Compensation and Benefits - Compensation and Benefits includes salaries, cash bonuses, benefits, employer taxes and equity-based compensation associated with the grants of equity-based awards to partners and employees. Compensation cost relating to the issuance of equity-based awards with a requisite service period to partners and employees is measured at fair value at the grant date, taking into consideration expected forfeitures, and expensed over the vesting period on a straight-line basis. Equity-based awards that do not require future service are expensed immediately. Cash settled equity-based awards are classified as liabilities and are remeasured at the end of each reporting period.
In certain instances, we may grant equity-based awards containing both a service and a market condition. The effect of the market condition is reflected in the grant date fair value of the award. Compensation cost is recognized for an award with a market condition over the requisite service period, provided that the requisite service period is completed, irrespective of whether the market condition is satisfied. If a recipient terminates employment before completion of the requisite service period, any compensation cost previously recognized is reversed unless the market condition has been satisfied prior to termination. If the market condition has been satisfied during the vesting period, the remaining unrecognized compensation cost is accelerated.
At our discretion, we may provide compensation to certain employees with repayment obligations and/or service provisions. Such payments are recorded in Compensation and Benefits in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. We assess the potential risk of forfeiture and likelihood of recouping amounts paid, and if deemed necessary, record a provision for forfeitures in the financial statements.
Income Taxes
We use the asset and liability method of accounting for deferred tax assets and liabilities. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, using the enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period when the change is enacted. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance when we believe that it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
The realization of deferred tax assets arising from timing differences and net operating losses requires taxable income in future years in order to deduct the reversing timing differences and absorb the net operating losses. We assess positive and negative evidence in determining whether to record a valuation allowance with respect to deferred tax assets. This assessment is performed separately for each taxing jurisdiction.
Recent Accounting Developments
Information regarding recent accounting developments and their impact on PJT Partners can be found in Note 2. “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-Recent Accounting Developments” in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” in “-Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this filing.