Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from August 6, 2020 (inception) to December 31, 2020 were organizational activities and those necessary to consummate the IPO, described below. Following our initial public offering, we do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our business combination. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and marketable securities held after the IPO. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $310 which consists of operating and formation costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had no cash. Until the consummation of our initial public offering, our liquidity needs were satisfied through the receipt of $25,000 from our sale of the Founder Shares, and unsecured loans of $80,000 from our sponsor.
On February 1, 2021, we consummated our initial public offering of 5,000,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the shares of common stock included in the Units being offered, the “Public Shares”), at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $50,000,000.
Simultaneously with the closing of our initial public offering, we consummated the sale of 2,350,000 Private Placement Warrants (the “Private Placement Warrants”) at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant in a private placement to the Sponsor, generating total gross proceeds of $2,350,000.
On February 2, 2021, the underwriters in our initial public offering purchased an additional 750,000 Units to exercise its over-allotment option in full at a purchase price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $7,500,000.
Simultaneously with the closing of the fully exercise of the over-allotment option, we completed the private sale of an aggregate of 150,000 Private Placement Warrants to the Sponsor, at a purchase price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant, generating gross proceeds of $150,000.
Transaction costs amounted to $1,547,486 consisting of $1,150,000 of underwriting discount and $397,486 of other offering costs.
Following the closing of our initial public offering and the sale of over-allotment units, an aggregate of $57,500,000 ($10.00 per Unit) from the net proceeds and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants was held in a Trust Account (“Trust Account”),
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less taxes payable) to complete our initial Business Combination. We may withdraw interest from the trust account to pay franchise and income taxes. To the extent that our equity or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
We have engaged underwriters as advisors in connection with our business combination to assist us in holding meetings with our stockholders to discuss the potential business combination and the target business’s attributes, introduce us to potential investors that are interested in purchasing our securities in connection with the potential business combination, assist us in obtaining stockholder approval for the business combination and assist us with our press releases
and public filings in connection with the business combination. We will pay the Marketing Fee for such services upon the consummation of our initial business combination in an amount equal to, in the aggregate, 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the IPO, including any proceeds from the full or partial exercise of the over-allotment option.
We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business prior to our initial business combination. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements; Commitments and Contractual Obligations
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have not identified any critical accounting policies.