ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
General:
Park Aerospace Corp. (“Park” or the “Company”) is an aerospace company which develops and manufactures solution and hot-melt advanced composite materials used to produce composite structures for the global aerospace markets. Park’s advanced composite materials include film adhesives (undergoing qualification) and lightning strike materials. Park offers an array of composite materials specifically designed for hand lay-up or automated fiber placement (AFP) manufacturing applications. Park’s advanced composite materials are used to produce primary and secondary structures for jet engines, large and regional transport aircraft, military aircraft, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs commonly referred to as “drones”), business jets, general aviation aircraft and rotary wing aircraft. Park also offers specialty ablative materials for rocket motors and nozzles and specially designed materials for radome applications. As a complement to Park’s advanced composite materials offering, Park designs and fabricates composite parts, structures and assemblies and low volume tooling for the aerospace industry. Target markets for Park’s composite parts and structures (which include Park’s proprietary composite SigmaStrut™ and AlphaStrut™ product lines) are, among others, prototype and development aircraft, special mission aircraft, spares for legacy military and civilian aircraft and exotic spacecraft.
The Company’s fiscal year is the 52- or 53-week period ending the Sunday nearest to the last day of February. The 2021, 2020 and 2019 fiscal years ended on February 28, 2021, March 1, 2020 and March 3, 2019, respectively. The 2019 fiscal year consisted of 53 weeks. The 2021 and 2020 fiscal years each consisted of 52 weeks. Unless otherwise indicated in this Discussion and Analysis, all references to years and quarters in this Discussion and Analysis are to the Company’s fiscal years and fiscal quarters and all annual and quarterly information in this Discussion and Analysis is for such fiscal years and quarters, respectively.
2021 Financial Overview
In 2019, the Company announced the major expansion of its aerospace manufacturing, development and design facilities located at the Newton City-County Airport in Newton, Kansas. This expansion includes the construction of a redundant manufacturing facility located adjacent to Park’s existing Newton, Kansas facilities. This facility, which is being constructed in part to support a major aerospace customer, will include approximately 90,000 square feet of manufacturing and office space, and will essentially double the size of Park’s existing Newton, Kansas manufacturing footprint. The total cost of the expansion is expected to be approximately $18.8 million, and the expansion is expected to be completed in the second half of the 2021 calendar year. The expansion includes new resin mixing and delivery systems, new hot-melt film and tape manufacturing lines, space to accommodate an additional hot-melt tape line or solution treating line, space to accommodate a confidential joint development project with a major aerospace customer, additional slitting capability, significant additional freezer and storage space, an expanded production lab, a new R&D lab and additional office space. Through February 28, 2021, the Company had incurred $14.9 million on the expansion.
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus was reported in Wuhan, China and has since spread worldwide, including to the United States, posing public health risks that have reached pandemic proportions (the “COVID-19 Pandemic”).
The COVID-19 Pandemic and resultant global economic crisis had significant impacts on the Company’s results of operations and cash flow for the year ended February 28, 2021. The COVID-19 Pandemic and crisis had significant impacts on the markets the Company sells into, particularly the commercial and business aircraft markets. As a result, the Company has experienced a significant reduction in sales and backlog.
Even after the COVID-19 Pandemic has subsided, the Company may continue to experience adverse impacts to its business as a result of the potential continuing impact of the economic crisis on the markets the Company serves.
The Company's total net sales worldwide in 2021 were 23% lower than in 2020 due primarily to the lower sales to commercial aerospace and business aircraft customers due to the impacts of the pandemic on those markets partially offset by higher military sales during 2021.
The Company’s gross profit margin, measured as a percentage of sales, decreased to 28.5% in 2021 from 31.1% in 2020. Lower sales and production levels combined with the fixed nature of certain overhead costs led to lower gross margins.
The Company recorded restructuring charges of $1.6 million in 2021, related to the closure of the Company’s Park Aerospace Technologies Asia, Pte, Ltd. business unit located Singapore.
The Company’s earnings from continuing operations in 2021 were 49% lower than in 2020, primarily as a result of the aforementioned decreases in sales and gross profit partially offset by a 23% reduction in selling, general and administrative expenses. The Company’s net earnings from continuing operations in 2021 were 49% lower than in 2020, primarily due to lower sales and to lower interest income partially offset by lower selling, general and administrative expenses.
The Company has a number of long-term contracts pursuant to which certain of its customers, some of which represent a substantial portion of the Company’s revenue, place orders. Long-term contracts with the Company’s customers are primarily requirements based and do not guarantee quantities. An order forecast is generally agreed concurrently with pricing for any applicable long-term contract. This order forecast is then typically updated periodically during the term of the underlying contract. Purchase orders are generally received in excess of three months in advance of delivery.
Results of Operations:
2021 Compared to 2020
Net Sales
The Company's total net sales worldwide in 2021 were 23% lower than in 2020 due primarily to the lower sales to commercial aerospace and business aircraft customers as a result of the inverse impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on those markets, partially offset by higher military sales during 2021.
Gross Profit
The Company’s gross profit margin, measured as a percentage of sales, decreased to 28.5% in 2021 from 31.1% in 2020. Lower sales and production levels combined with the fixed nature of certain overhead costs lead to lower gross margins.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased by $1.8 million, or 23%, during 2021 compared to 2020. Such expenses, measured as percentages of sales, were 13.2% during both the 2021 and 2020 fiscal years. The decrease in such expenses in 2021 was due primarily to decreased travel and entertainment, salaries and lower stock option expenses, excluding stock option modification charges in 2020.
Selling, general and administrative expenses in 2021 included $0.2 million of stock option expenses compared to $0.7 million of such expenses in 2020, including $0.2 million due to the modification of previously granted stock options.
Restructuring Charges
The Company recorded restructuring charges of $1.6 million in the 2021 related to the closure of the Company’s Park Aerospace Technologies Asia, Pte, Ltd. business unit located Singapore.
Earnings from Continuing Operations
For the reasons set forth above, the Company’s earnings from continuing operations were $5.5 million for 2021, including the pretax charges of $1.6 million for the closure of the facility located in Singapore. The Company’s earnings from continuing operations were $10.7 million in 2020, including a pre-tax stock option modification charge of $0.2 million resulting from the special dividend of $1.00 per share paid in February 2020.
Interest and Other Income
Interest and other income were $1.8 million and $3.3 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease from 2020 was due primarily to lower average invested cash during the period and lower weighted average interest rates. During 2021 and 2020, the Company earned interest income principally from its investments, which were primarily in short-term instruments and money market funds.
Income Tax Provision
The Company’s effective income tax rate of 28.7% for 2021 was due primarily to the U.S. Federal rate and state income taxes. The Company’s effective income tax rate was lower in 2020, due to favorable adjustments to valuation allowances on state tax credits and a lower state effective tax rate in 2020.
Net Earnings from Continuing Operations
The Company’s net earnings from continuing operations for 2021 were $5.2 million, including the pretax charges of $1.6 million for the closure of the facility located in Singapore. The Company’s net earnings from continuing operations for 2020 were $10.2 million, including the stock option modification pre-tax charge of $0.2 million in connection with the special dividend of $1.00 per share paid in February 2020.
Discontinued Operations
On December 4, 2018, Park completed the previously announced sale of its Electronics Business, including manufacturing facilities in Singapore, France, California and Arizona and R&D facilities in Singapore and Arizona, to AGC Inc. for an aggregate purchase price of $145 million in cash, subject to post-closing adjustments for changes in working capital compared to the target net working capital, excluding cash in certain acquired subsidiaries and certain accrued and unpaid taxes of certain acquired subsidiaries. See Note 12, “Discontinued Operations”, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements elsewhere in this Report for additional information on the sale.
The operating results of the Electronics Business are classified, together with certain costs related to the sale, as discontinued operations, net of tax, in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
The Company’s loss from discontinued operations was lower in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily as a result of exiting the facility in Fullerton California, previously used in the electronics operations, at the beginning of the Company’s third fiscal quarter of 2021.
Basic and Diluted Earnings Per Share
Basic and diluted earnings per share from continuing operations for 2021 were $0.25, including the pretax charges for the closure of the facility located in Singapore, compared to basic and diluted earnings per share for 2020 of $0.50, including the stock option modification charge in connection with the special dividend paid in February 2020. The net impact of the items described above was to decrease basic and diluted earnings per share by $0.07 in 2021 and $0.01 in 2020.
2020 Compared to 2019
Net Sales
The Company's total net sales worldwide in 2020 were 17% higher than in 2019 due primarily to the “end customer” of a major Company customer ramping up commercial jet production and to an increase in military sales during 2020.
Gross Profit
The Company’s gross profit margin, measured as a percentage of sales, decreased to 31.1% in 2020, from 31.7% in 2019. Higher sales and the partially fixed nature of overhead expenses were more than offset by the increased labor and supplies expenses.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased by $1.0 million, or 12%, during 2020 compared to 2019. Such expenses, measured as percentages of sales, were 13.2% during 2020 compared to 17.5% during 2019. The decrease in such expenses in 2019 was due primarily to decreased legal and professional fees and lower stock option expenses, excluding the stock option modification charges in each period.
Selling, general and administrative expenses in 2020 included $0.7 million of stock option expenses, including $0.2 million due to the modification of previously granted stock options, compared to $1.2 million of such expenses in 2019, including $0.5 million due to the modification of previously granted stock options.
Earnings from Continuing Operations
For the reasons set forth above, the Company’s earnings from continuing operations were $10.7 million for 2020, including a pre-tax stock option modification charge of $0.2 million resulting from the special dividend of $1.00 per share paid in February 2020. The Company’s earnings from continuing operations were $7.2 million in 2019, including a pre-tax stock option modification charge of $0.5 million resulting from the special dividend of $4.25 per share paid in February 2019.
Loss on Sales of Marketable Securities
Loss on sales of marketable securities was $0 in 2020 and $1.5 million in 2019 in connection with the liquidation of securities to fund the special cash dividend of $4.25 per share paid in February 2019.
Interest and Other Income
Interest and other income were $3.3 million and $2.4 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase from 2019 was primarily the result of higher average invested cash during the period and higher weighted average interest rates. As mentioned above, the Company paid a special cash dividend of $4.25 per share in February 2019. During 2020 and 2019, the Company earned interest income principally from its investments, which were primarily in short-term instruments and money market funds.
Income Tax Provision
The Company’s effective income tax rate of 27.5% for 2020 was due primarily to the U.S. Federal rate and state income taxes and lost tax deductions from expiring unexercised non-qualified stock options. The Company’s effective income tax rate was lower in 2019, due to favorable adjustments to valuation allowances on state tax credits and a lower state effective tax rate in 2019.
Net Earnings from Continuing Operations
The Company’s net earnings from continuing operations for 2020 were $10.2 million, including the stock option modification pre-tax charge of $0.2 million in connection with the special dividend of $1.00 per share paid in February 2020. The Company’s net earnings from continuing operations for 2019 were $6.3 million, including the stock option modification pre-tax charge of $0.5 million in connection with the special dividend of $4.25 per share paid in February 2019.
Discontinued Operations
On December 4, 2018, Park completed the previously announced sale of its Electronics Business, including manufacturing facilities in Singapore, France, California and Arizona and R&D facilities in Singapore and Arizona, to AGC Inc. for an aggregate purchase price of $145 million in cash, subject to post-closing adjustments for changes in working capital compared to the target net working capital, excluding cash in certain acquired subsidiaries and certain accrued and unpaid taxes of certain acquired subsidiaries. See Note 12, “Discontinued Operations”, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements elsewhere in this Report for additional information on the sale.
The operating results of the Electronics Business are classified, together with certain costs related to the sale, as discontinued operations, net of tax, in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
The Company’s net earnings from discontinued operations were lower in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily as a result of the gain recognized on the sale of the electronics business of $102,145 in 2019 and the gain of $2,945 recognized on the sale of its New England Laminates Co., Inc. facility located in Newburgh, New York in 2019.
Basic and Diluted Earnings Per Share
Basic and diluted earnings per share from continuing operations for 2020 were $0.50, including the stock option modification charge in connection with the special dividend paid in February 2020, compared to basic and diluted earnings per share for 2019 of $0.31, including the stock option modification charge in connection with the special dividend paid in February 2019 and the pre-tax loss on the sales of marketable securities described above. The net impact of the items described above was to decrease basic and diluted earnings per share by $0.01 in 2020 and decrease basic and diluted earnings per share by $0.08 in 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources:
Cash and Marketable Securities
The Company believes it has sufficient liquidity to fund its operating activities for the 12 months from the date of the filing of this Form 10-K Annual Report and for the foreseeable future thereafter.
The change in cash and marketable securities at February 28, 2021 compared to March 1, 2020 was primarily the result of positive operating cash flow more than offset by capital expenditures and regular quarterly dividends paid by the Company to its shareholders during 2021 and a number of additional factors. The significant changes in cash provided by operating activities were as follows:
●
accounts receivable decreased by 30% at February 28, 2021 compared to March 1, 2020 due primarily to the decrease in total net sales in the last month of 2021;
●
inventory decreased 25% due primarily to lower raw material purchases at the end of February 2021 as a result of lower production rates;
●
prepaid expenses and other current assets decreased 39% due primarily to the decrease in income tax receivable;
●
accounts payable decreased 30% due primarily to the lower raw material purchases and capital expenditures at the end of February 2021;
●
income taxes payable increased 40% at February 28, 2021 compared to March 1, 2020 due to the current tax provision in excess of the tax payments.
In addition, the Company paid $8.2 million and $28.7 million in cash dividends during 2021 and 2020, respectively, including special dividends of $20.5 million paid in 2020.
Working Capital
Working capital at February 28, 2021 was lower compared to March 1, 2020. Decreases in cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities, decreases in accounts receivable, inventories and prepaid and other assets and increases taxes payable were partially offset by decreases in accounts payable.
The Company's current ratio (the ratio of current assets to current liabilities) was 16.6 to 1 at February 28, 2021 compared to 16.7 to 1 at March 1, 2020.
Cash Flows
During 2021, the Company's net earnings from continuing operations, before depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, amortization of bond premium, gain on sale of fixed assets and non-cash restructuring, were $8.3 million. Such earnings were decreased by changes in operating assets and liabilities of $5.0 million, resulting in $13.0 million of cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations. During 2021, the Company expended $7.5 million for the purchase of property, plant and equipment compared to $6.8 million during 2020, the Company paid $1.6 million for the repurchase of the Company’s stock and the Company paid $8.2 million and $28.7 million in cash dividends in 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Other Liquidity Factors
In December 2018, the Company entered into a Development Agreement with the City of Newton, Kansas and the Board of County Commissioners of Harvey County, Kansas. Pursuant to this agreement, the Company agreed to construct and operate an additional manufacturing facility approximately 90,000 square feet in size for the design, development and manufacture of advanced composite materials and parts, structures and assemblies for aerospace. the Company further agreed to equip the facility through the purchase of machinery, equipment and furnishings and to create additional new full-time employment of specified levels during a five-year period. In exchange for these agreements, the City and the County agreed to lease to the Company three acres of land at the Newton City/County Airport, in addition to the eight acres previously leased to the Company by the City and County. The City and the County further agreed to provide financial and other assistance toward the construction of the additional facility as set forth in the Development Agreement. The Company estimates the total cost of the additional facility to be approximately $18.8 million, and the Company expects to complete the construction of the additional facility in the first half of the 2021 calendar year. As of February 28, 2021, the Company had $748 in equipment purchase obligations and $14,874 of construction-in-progress related to the additional facility. (See Note 1, Consolidated Financial Statements).
On December 22, 2017, the U.S. government enacted comprehensive tax reform commonly referred to as the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (“TCJA” or “Tax Act”) and significantly revised U.S. corporate income tax by, among other things, lowering corporate income tax rates, imposing a one-time transition tax on deemed repatriated earnings of non-U.S. subsidiaries, and implementing a territorial tax system. As a result of the Tax Act, the Company recorded tax payable to be paid in installments over eight years. The remaining balance of these installment payments, as of February 28, 2021, was approximately $16 million to be paid over the next five years.
The Company believes that our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, and cash flow from operations will be sufficient to fund necessary capital expenditures and operating cash requirements for at least the next twelve months from the date of the filing of this Form 10-K Annual Report. The Company further believes that its balance sheet and financial position to be very strong, and the Company believes it is well positioned to weather the impact of the Pandemic on its business as a result.
Contractual Obligations:
The Company's contractual obligations and other commercial commitments to make future payments under contracts, such as lease agreements, consist only of operating lease commitments, commitments to purchase raw materials and commitments to purchase equipment, as described in Note 10 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Report. The Company has no other long-term debt, capital lease obligations, unconditional purchase obligations or other long-term obligations, standby letters of credit, guarantees, standby repurchase obligations or other commercial commitments or contingent commitments, other than two standby letters of credit in the total amount of $0.3 million to secure the Company's obligations under its workers’ compensation insurance program.
As of February 28, 2021, the Company’s significant contractual obligations, including payments due by fiscal year, were as follows:
At February 28, 2021, the Company had unrecognized tax benefits and related interest of $4.5 million. A reasonable estimate of the timing of the payment of these liabilities is not possible.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements:
The Company's liquidity is not dependent on the use of, and the Company is not engaged in, any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, such as securitization of receivables or obtaining access to assets through special purpose entities.
Environmental Matters:
The Company is subject to various Federal, state and local govern-ment and foreign government requirements relating to the protection of the environment. The Com-pany believes that, as a general matter, its policies, practices and procedures are properly designed to prevent unreasonable risk of environmental damage and that its handling, manufacture, use and disposal of hazardous or toxic substances are in accord with environmental laws and regulations. However, mainly because of past opera-tions of the Company’s former Electronics Business and operations of predecessor companies, which were generally in compliance with applicable laws at the time of the operations in question, the Company, like other companies engaged in similar businesses, is a party to claims by govern-ment agencies and third parties and has incurred remedial response and voluntary cleanup costs associated with environmental matters. Additional claims and costs involving past environmental matters may continue to arise in the future. It is the Company's policy to record appropriate liabilities for such matters when remedial efforts are probable and the costs can be reasonably estimated.
In 2021, 2020 and 2019, the Company incurred approximately $9,000, $41,000 and $70,000, respectively, for remedial response and voluntary cleanup costs and related legal fees, and the Company received, or expects to receive, reimbursement pursuant to general liability insurance coverage for approximately $9,000, $38,000 and $68,000, respectively, of such amounts. While annual environmental remedial response and voluntary cleanup expenditures, including legal fees, have generally been constant from year to year, and may increase over time, the Company expects it will be able to fund such expenditures from cash flow from operations. The timing of expenditures depends on a number of factors, including regulatory approval of cleanup projects, remedial techniques to be utilized and agreements with other parties. At February 28, 2021 and March 1, 2020, there were no amounts recorded in accrued liabilities for environmental matters.
Management does not expect that environmental matters will have a material adverse effect on the liquidity, capital resources, busi-ness, consolidated results of operations or consolidated financial position of the Company. See Note 11 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of Part II of this Report for a discussion of the Company's contin-gencies, includ-ing those related to environmental matters.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates:
The following information is provided regarding critical accounting policies that are important to the Consolidated Financial Statements and that entail, to a significant extent, the use of estimates, assumptions and the application of management's judgment.
General
The Company's Discussion and Analysis of its Financial Condition and Results of Operations are based upon the Company's Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these Consolidated Financial Statements requires the Company to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the related disclosure of contingent liabilities. On an ongoing basis, the Company evaluates its estimates, including those related to sales allowances, allowances for doubtful accounts, inventories, valuation of long-lived assets, income taxes, restructurings, contingencies and litigation, and employee benefit programs. The Company bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
The Company believes the following critical accounting policies affect its more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of its Consolidated Financial Statements.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncement
See Note 15 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of Part II of this Report for a discussion of the Company's recently adopted accounting pronouncements.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the providing entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. We recognize revenue when all of the following criteria are met: (1) we have entered into a binding agreement, (2) the performance obligations have been identified, (3) the transaction price to the customer has been determined, (4) the transaction price has been allocated to the performance obligations in the contract, and (5) the performance obligations have been satisfied. The majority of the Company’s shipping terms define the performance obligation to be satisfied upon shipment.
Sales Allowances and Product Warranties
The Company records estimated reductions to revenue for customer returns, allowances, and warranty claims. Provisions for such reductions are recorded in the period the sale is recorded and are derived from historical trends and other relevant information. The Company’s products are made to customer specifications and tested for adherence to such specifications before shipment to customers. Composite structures and assemblies may be subject to “airworthiness” acceptance by customers after receipt at the customers’ locations. There are no future performance requirements other than the products’ meeting the agreed specifications. The Company’s basis for providing sales allowances for returns are known situations in which products may have failed due to manufacturing defects in the products supplied by the Company. The Company is focused on manufacturing the highest quality advanced composite materials, structures and assemblies and tooling possible and employs stringent manufacturing process controls and works with raw material suppliers who have dedicated themselves to complying with the Company’s specifications and technical requirements. The amounts of returns and allowances resulting from defective or damaged products have averaged approximately 1.0% of sales for the Company’s last three fiscal years.
Accounts Receivable
The Company’s accounts receivable are due from purchasers of the Company’s products. Credit is extended based on evaluation of a customer’s financial condition and, generally, collateral is not required. Accounts receivable are due within established payment terms and are stated at amounts due from customers net of an allowance for doubtful accounts. Accounts outstanding longer than established payment terms are considered past due. The Company determines its allowance by considering a number of factors, including the length of time accounts receivable are past due, the Company’s previous loss history, the customer’s current ability to pay its obligation to the Company, and the conditions of the general economy and the aerospace industry. If the financial condition of the Company’s customers were to deteriorate, resulting in an impairment of their ability to make payments, additional allowances may be required. The Company writes off accounts receivable when they become uncollectible.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost (first-in, first-out method) or net realizable value. The Company writes down its inventory for estimated obsolescence or unmarketability based upon the age of the inventory and assumptions about future demand for the Company's products and market conditions.
Valuation of Long-Lived Assets
The Company assesses the impairment of long-lived assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of such assets may not be recoverable. In addition, the Company assesses the impairment of goodwill at least annually. Important factors that could trigger an impairment review include, but are not limited to, significant negative industry or economic trends and significant changes in the use of the Company’s assets or strategy of the overall business.
Income Taxes
As part of the processes of preparing its consolidated financial statements, the Company is required to estimate the income taxes in each of the jurisdictions in which it operates. This process involves estimating the actual current tax expense together with assessing temporary differences resulting from differing treatment of items for tax and accounting purposes. These differences result in deferred tax assets and liabilities, which are included in the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheets. Deferred income taxes are provided for temporary differences in the reporting of certain items, such as depreciation and undistributed earnings of foreign subsidiaries, for income tax purposes compared to financial accounting purposes. In evaluating the Company’s ability to recover the deferred tax assets within the jurisdiction from which they arise, all positive and negative evidence is considered, including the scheduled reversal of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, tax planning strategies and results of recent acquisitions. If these estimates and assumptions change in the future, the Company may be required to record additional valuation allowances against its deferred tax assets, resulting in additional income tax expense in the Company's Consolidated Statements of Operations, or conversely to further reduce the existing valuation allowance, resulting in less income tax expense. The Company evaluates the realizability of the deferred tax assets and assesses the need for additional valuation allowances quarterly.
Tax benefits are recognized for an uncertain tax position when, in the Company’s judgment, it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon examination by a taxing authority. For a tax position that meets the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold, the tax benefit is measured as the largest amount that is judged to have a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with a taxing authority. The liability associated with unrecognized tax benefits is adjusted periodically due to changing circumstances and when new information becomes available. Such adjustments are recognized entirely in the period in which they are identified. The effective tax rate includes the net impact of changes in the liability for unrecognized tax benefits and subsequent adjustments as considered appropriate by the Company. While it is often difficult to predict the final outcome or the timing of resolution of any particular tax matter, the Company believes its liability for unrecognized tax benefits is adequate. Interest and penalties recognized on the liability for unrecognized tax benefits are recorded as income tax expense.
Contingencies and Litigation
The Company is subject to a number of proceedings, lawsuits and other claims related to environmental, employment, product and other matters. The Company is required to assess the likelihood of any adverse judgments or outcomes in these matters as well as potential ranges of probable losses. A determination of the amount of reserves required, if any, for these contingencies is made after careful analysis of each individual issue. The required reserves may change in the future due to new developments in each matter or changes in approach, such as a change in settlement strategy in dealing with these matters.
Employee Benefit Programs
The Company's obligations for workers' compensation claims prior to fiscal year 2019 are effectively self-insured, although the Company maintains individual and aggregate stop-loss insurance coverage for such claims. The Company accrues its workers’ compensation liability based on estimates of the total exposure of known claims using historical experience and projected loss development factors less amounts previously paid out.
The Company has a non-contributory profit sharing retirement plan covering their regular full-time employees. In addition, the Company has various bonus and incentive compensation programs, most of which are determined at management's discretion.
The Company's reserves associated with these self-insured liabilities and benefit programs are reviewed by management for adequacy at the end of each reporting period.