ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
We are headquartered in Flushing, NY. For the fiscal year 2020, our primary business, which is carried out by Fast Approach Inc and Xianning Bozhuang, is:
● Black tea product cultivation, packaging, and sales;
● Multimedia design and online advertising services;
Reorganization
On May 18, 2018, the Company incorporated Planet Green Holdings Corporation, a limited company incorporated in the British Virgin Islands. On September 28, 2018, Planet Green BVI acquired JianShi Technology Holding Limited, a limited company incorporated in Hong Kong on February 21, 2012, and Shanghai Xunyang Internet Tech Co., Ltd., a wholly-owned foreign entity incorporated in Shanghai, PRC, on August 29, 2012 (“Shanghai Xunyang”).
On May 9, 2019, the Company entered into a share exchange agreement to acquire Xianning Bozhuang Tea Products Co., Ltd, Then the Company’s business activities added the production line of green tea and black tea and sales of tea products, of which business activities are carried out in Xianning City, Hubei Province, China.
On August 12, 2019, through Lucky Sky Holdings Corporations (H.K.) Limited, formerly known as JianShi Technology Holding Limited, Company established Lucky Sky Petrochemical Technology (Xianning) Co., Ltd., a wholly foreign-owned enterprise incorporated in Xianning City, Hubei Province, China.
On December 20, 2019, The Lucky Sky Holdings Corporations (H.K.) Limited sold 100% of equity interest in Shanghai Xunyang.
On May 29, 2020, the Planet Green Holdings Corporation (BVI) incorporated Lucky Sky Planet Green Holdings Co., Limited, a limited company incorporated in Hong Kong.
On June 5, 2020, the Company issued an aggregate of 1,800,000 shares of our common stock to acquire all of the outstanding equity interest of Fast Approach Inc. As a result, the Planet Green Holdings Corporation (BVI) acquired all of the outstanding equity interests of Fast Approach Inc. It was incorporated under Canada’s laws and the business of operation of a demand-side platform targeting the Chinese education market in North America, besides, Shanghai Shuning Advertising Co., Ltd, a PRC entity as the subsidiary of Fast Approach Inc, conducted the multimedia design, advertising, import, and export business in China.
On June 16, 2020, Lucky Sky Holdings Corporations (H.K.) transferred its 100% equity interest in Lucky Sky Petrochemical to Lucky Sky Planet Green Holdings Co., Limited (H.K.).
On August 10, 2020, Planet Green Holdings Corporation (BVI) transferred its 100% equity interest in Lucky Sky Holdings Corporations (H.K.) Limited to Rui Tang, an unrelated party, at nominal price.
On September 15, 2020, Lucky Sky Petrochemical terminated the VIE agreements with Shenzhen Lorain and Taishan Muren.
On December 9, 2020, Lucky Sky Petrochemical Technology (Xianning) Co., Ltd. changed its name to Jiayi Technologies (Xianning) Co., Ltd.
On January 4, 2021, the Company and Jiayi Technologies (Xianning) Co., Ltd. (the “Subsidiary”), a subsidiary of the Company, entered into a Share Exchange Agreement (the “Share Exchange Agreement”) with Jingshan Sanhe Luckysky New Energy Technologies Co., Ltd. (“Target”), and each of shareholders of the Target (collectively, the “Sellers”), pursuant to which, among other things and subject to the terms and conditions contained therein, the Subsidiary agreed to effect an acquisition of the Target by acquiring from the Sellers 85% of the outstanding equity interests of the Target (the “Acquisition”). Jingshan Sanhe Luckysky New Energy Technologies Co., Ltd, engaged in researching, manufacturing, and selling high-grade synthetic fuel products. Jingshan Sanhe has four production lines on an 11,000-square-meter facility and capacities to complete manufacturing, labeling, and packaging. It is the primary facility for Green Energy products. Besides, this facility also serves research and sales purpose with an office space of 3,400 square meters. On January 4, 2021, the Company closed the Acquisition.
On March 9, 2021, Planet Green Holdings Corp. (the “Company”) and Jiayi Technologies (Xianning) Co., Ltd. (the “Subsidiary”), a subsidiary of the Company, entered into a Share Exchange Agreement (the “Share Exchange Agreement”) with Jilin Chuangyuan Chemical Co., Ltd. (“Target”). Each of shareholders of the Target (collectively, the “Sellers”), under which, among other things and subject to the terms and conditions contained therein, the subsidiary agreed to effect an acquisition of the Target by acquiring from the Sellers 75% of the outstanding equity interests of the Target (the “Acquisition”). Jilin Chuangyuan Chemical Co., Ltd’s main products are formaldehyde, urea-formaldehyde glue, methylal, and clean fuel oil; it has two formaldehyde production lines, eight rubber production lines methylal production line, and one clean fuel oil production line. There are 367 sets of leading production equipment, the entire plant covering an area of 43,661 square meters, construction area of 16,090 square meters. On March 10, 2021, the Company closed the acquisition.
After that, through Jiayi Technologies (Xianning) Co., Ltd, the Company entered into a new variable interest entity agreement. Jingshan Sanhe Luckysky New Energy Technologies Co., Ltd and Jilin Chuangyuan Chemical Co., Ltd became the Company’s new contractually controlled affiliate. The New VIE Agreements allow us to:
a. exercise effective control over Jingshan Sanhe Luckysky New Energy Technologies Co., Ltd and Jilin Chuangyuan Chemical Co., Ltd;
b. receive 85% of the economic benefits of Jingshan Sanhe Luckysky New Energy Technologies Co., Ltd and receive 75% of the economic benefits of Jilin Chuangyuan Chemical Co., Ltd substantially;
c. have an exclusive option to purchase all or part of the equity interests in Jingshan Sanhe Luckysky New Energy Technologies Co., Ltd and Jilin Chuangyuan Chemical Co., Ltd when and to the extent permitted by the laws of the PRC;
As a result of the New VIE Agreements, The Company has become the primary beneficiary of Jingshan Sanhe Luckysky New Energy Technologies Co., Ltd and Jilin Chuangyuan Chemical Co., Ltd; They treat these above entities as its variable interest entity under U.S. GAAP. The Company will continue to consolidate the financial results of Xianning Bozhuang Tea Products Co., Ltd in our consolidated financial statements following U.S. GAAP.
The table below illustrates the business the Company conduct through our subsidiaries and consolidated affiliated entities:
The above reorganization which occurred during the subsequent period after December 31, 2020 does not affect the Company’s consolidated financial statements for the current period.
Coronavirus (COVID-19) Update
Recently, an ongoing outbreak of a novel strain of coronavirus (COVID-19) was first identified in China and has since spread rapidly globally. The pandemic has resulted in quarantines, travel restrictions, and the temporary closure of stores and business facilities globally for the past few months. In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 as a pandemic. Given the rapidly expanding nature of the COVID-19 pandemic, and because substantially all of our business operations and workforce are concentrated in China, our business, results of operations, and financial condition have been and will continue to be adversely affected. Potential impact to the results of our operations will also depend on future developments and new information that may emerge regarding the duration and severity of the COVID-19 and the actions taken by government authorities and other entities to contain the COVID-19 or mitigate its impact, almost all of which are beyond our control.
1) The impacts of COVID-19 on our business, financial condition, and results of operations include, but are not limited to, the following:
2) We temporally closed our offices and production facilities to adhere to the policy from February 2020 until April 2020, as required by relevant PRC regulatory authorities. Our offices are slowly reopening pursuant to local guidelines. During the past 12 months in the fiscal year 2020, the COVID-19 outbreak had caused disruptions in our manufacturing operations, which had resulted in delays in the shipment of products to certain of our customers.
3) Some of our employees were in mandatory self-quarantine from January 2020 to April 2020.
4) Our customers have been negatively impacted by the outbreak, which may reduce the demand for our products. As a result, our revenue and income have been being negatively impacted in 2020.
5) The situation may worsen if the COVID-19 pandemic continues. We will continue to closely monitor our collections throughout 2021.
A prolonged disruption or any further unforeseen delay in our operations of the manufacturing, delivery, and assembly process within any of our production facilities could continue to result in delays in the shipment of products to our customers, increased costs, and reduced revenue.
We cannot foresee whether the outbreak of COVID-19 will be effectively contained, nor can we predict the severity and duration of its impact. If the outbreak of COVID-19 is not effectively and timely controlled, our business operations and financial condition may be materially and adversely affected as a result of the deteriorating market outlook, the slowdown in regional and national economic growth, weakened liquidity, and financial condition of our customers or other factors that we cannot foresee. Any of these factors and other factors beyond our control could have an adverse effect on the overall business environment, cause uncertainties in the regions where we conduct business, cause our business to suffer in ways that we cannot predict, and materially and adversely impact our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the company’s audited consolidated financial statement for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019 and related notes to that.
Year Ended December 31, 2020, Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net Revenues. Our net revenues amounted to $3.64 million in 2020, representing an increase of approximately $2.53 million, from 2019, in which our net revenue was $1.11 million. This increase was attributable to the fact that the Company has acquired Xianning Bozhuang Tea Products Co., Ltd in May 2019 and expanded enterprise sales distribution channel in the fiscal year 2020.
Cost of Revenues. In 2020, we experienced an increase in the cost of revenues of $1.91 million compared to 2019, from approximately $0.46 million to $2.37 million. This soaring in cost of goods sold was in line with the increase in sales in the fiscal year 2020.
Gross Profit. Our gross profit increased by $0.63 million, or 98%, to $1.27 million in 2020 from $0.64 million in 2019, For the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, our overall gross margin was 35% and 58%, respectively. The decrease in gross margin was primarily due to the reshaping of the brand and the adjustment of the product lines.
Operating Expenses
Selling and Marketing Expenses. Our selling and marketing expenses increased by $0.12 million or 300%, to $0.16 million in 2020, compared to $0.04 million in 2019. The increase in our selling and marketing expenses is mainly due to the development of new sales channels; it includes the adjustment of promotion strategies, marketing strategies, and Channel strategies. Specifically, in the fiscal year 2020, the Company began to engage in online wholesales business.
General and Administrative Expenses. We experienced an increase in general and administrative expenses of $2.99 million from $0.90 million to approximately $3.90 million in 2020, compared to 2019. The increase was mainly because the Company incurred approximately $1.75million on stock compensation expense concerning our ordinary shares issued to the management.
Net Income
For the 12 months ended December 31, 2020, our net loss amounted to approximately $11 million, comparing approximately 3 million net income in the fiscal year 2019. This decrease in net income was attributable to the outbreak of COVID-19 and the disposal of certain VIEs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
In assessing our liquidity, we monitor and analyze our cash-on-hand and our operating and capital expenditure commitments. Our liquidity needs are to meet our working capital requirements, operating expenses, and capital expenditure obligations. In the reporting period in the fiscal year 2020, our primary sources of financing have been cash generated from operations and private placements.
On February 10, 2020, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with Mengru Xu and Zhichao Du, pursuant to which Mr. Xu and Mr. Du agreed to invest an aggregate of $3.51 million in the Company in exchange for an aggregate of 1,350,000 shares of our common stock, representing a purchase price of approximately $2.60 per share.
Management anticipates that our existing capital resources and anticipated cash flows from operations are adequate to satisfy our liquidity requirements for the next 12 months. Our primary capital needs have been to fund our working capital requirements. In the past, our primary sources of financing have been cash generated from operations and financing activities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents (including restricted cash) of $3.42 million compared to $7.4 million as of December 31, 2019. The debt to assets ratio was 16.7% and 19.9% as of December 31, 2020, and 2019. We expect to continue to finance our operations and working capital needs in 2021 from cash generated from operations and, if needed, private financings. If available liquidity is not sufficient to meet our operating and loan obligations as they come due. In that case, our plans include pursuing alternative financing arrangements or reducing expenditures as necessary to meet our cash requirements.
However, there is no assurance that we will raise additional capital or reduce discretionary spending to provide liquidity if needed. We cannot be sure of the availability or terms of any alternative financing arrangements.
The following table provides detailed information about our net cash flow for all financial statement periods presented in this report.
Cash Flows Data:
Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $3.5 million, which consisted primarily of net loss of $11.1 million, and was adjusted by depreciation and amortization of $0.4 million, write off receivables of $6.1 million, impairment of goodwill of $2.3 million and exchange loss of $1.8 million.
The Company had an increase of $1.5 million in accounts and other receivables, an increase of $4.1 million in prepayments and other current assets and an increase of $0.9 million in payables and other current liabilities.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in operating activities was $5.4 million, which consisted primarily of net income of $8.5 million, and was adjusted by depreciation and amortization of $0.2 million, gain from disposal of investment and subsidiaries of $8.8 million.
The Company had an increase of $1.5 million in prepayments and other current assets and a reduction of $3.5 million in payables and other current liabilities.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for 2020 was $0.9 million, representing an increase of $0.4 million in net cash used in investing activities from $0.5 million for the same period of 2019. This is mainly due to the purchasing of plant and equipment and intangible assets.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $0.2million, representing a decrease of $13.0 million in net cash provided by financing activities from $13.2 million for the same period of 2019. This is mainly due to repayment to related party and decrease from proceed from issuance of common stock.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with the United States generally accepted accounting principles requires our management to make assumptions, estimates, and judgments that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements, including the notes to that, and related disclosures of commitments contingencies, if any.
We consider our critical accounting policies to require the more significant judgments and estimates in the preparation of financial statements, including those outlined in Note 2 to the financial statements included herein.
The Company has evaluated the timing and the impact of the guidance above on the financial statements.
As of December 31, 2020, there were no other recently issued accounting standards not yet adopted that would or could have a material effect on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance arrangements.