Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a former blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on November 12, 2019 for the purpose of effecting a capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses.
We completed our IPO on June 4, 2020. On February 10, 2021, we consummated the previously announced acquisition of all of the issued and outstanding shares of Playboy, in accordance with the Merger Agreement, by and among MCAC, Merger Sub, Playboy and Suying Liu. As contemplated in the Merger Agreement, Merger Sub merged with and into Playboy with Playboy surviving as a wholly-owned subsidiary of MCAC. In addition, in connection with the closing of the Business Combination, MCAC changed its name to “PLBY Group, Inc.”
Results of Operations
Our only activities from inception to December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the IPO, identifying a target company for the Business Combination and consummating the acquisition of Playboy. We generated non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the IPO and prior to the Business Combination. We have incurred expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses related to the Business Combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $1,061,802 which consisted of operating costs of $1,093,833 offset by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $31,669 and an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in our Trust Account of $362.
For the period from November 12, 2019 (inception) through December 31, 2019, we had net loss of $492, which consisted of operating costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On June 9, 2020, we consummated the IPO of 5,000,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $50,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the sale of 321,500 Private Units at a price of $10.00 per Private Unit in a private placement to the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $3,215,000.
On June 19, 2020, in connection with the underwriters’ election to partially exercise their over-allotment option, we consummated the sale of an additional 749,800 Units and the sale of an additional 33,741 Private Units, generating total gross proceeds of $7,835,410.
Following the IPO, the partial exercise of the over-allotment option and the sale of the Private Units, a total of $58,647,960 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $4,010,359 in transaction costs, including $1,437,450 of underwriting fees, $2,012,430 of deferred underwriting fees and $560,479 of other offering costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 cash used in operating activities was $371,622. Net loss of $1,061,802 was impacted by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $31,669, an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $362 and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which provided $722,211 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and marketable securities in the Trust Account of $58,679,991 (including approximately $32,000 of interest income and unrealized losses).
As a result of and at the Closing of the Business Combination, on February 10, 2021, MCAC acquired all of the outstanding Playboy shares for approximately $381.3 million in aggregate consideration, comprising an aggregate of 20,916,812 shares of common stock to existing stockholders of Playboy, assumed Playboy options exercisable for an aggregate of 3,560,541 shares of common stock at a weighted average exercise price of $5.61, and assumed the obligation to issue shares in respect of terminated Playboy restricted stock units for an aggregate of 2,045,634 shares of common stock to be settled approximately one year following the Closing. As a result of the Business Combination, the Company became obligated with respect to debt of Playboy and its subsidiaries that remained outstanding after the consummation of the Business Combination under its credit agreement, which totaled approximately $158.2 million at the Closing.
As previously announced, on September 30, 2020, concurrently with the execution of the Merger Agreement, MCAC entered into the Subscription Agreements and registration rights agreements with certain institutional and accredited investors pursuant to, and on the terms and subject to the conditions of which, the PIPE Investors collectively subscribed for an aggregate 5,000,000 shares of common stock at $10.00 per share for aggregate gross proceeds of $50.0 million. The PIPE was consummated substantially concurrently with the Closing.
Prior to the Business Combination, MCAC’s liquidity needs were satisfied from the proceeds obtained through the initial public offering not held in the trust account. Following consummation of the Business Combination, the Company’s main source of liquidity is cash on hand, including cash received from the Trust Account and proceeds from the PIPE received at the closing of the Business Combination, and cash generated from operating and financing activities, which primarily includes cash derived from revenue generating activities and proceeds from the issuance of debt including term loans, promissory notes and convertible promissory notes. The Company believes its existing sources of liquidity will be sufficient to fund its operations, including lease obligations, debt service requirements, capital expenditures and working capital obligations for the next 12 months. The Company may seek additional equity or debt financing in the future to satisfy capital requirements or fund organic or inorganic growth opportunities. In the event that additional financing is required from third party sources, the Company may not be able to raise it on acceptable terms or at all.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of our Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support. We began incurring these fees on June 4, 2020 and continued to incur those fees monthly until the completion of the Business Combination.
The underwriters of the IPO were entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $2,012,430. The deferred fee became payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account upon the completion of the Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement. The deferred fee was paid upon the closing of the Business Combination.
In addition, subject to certain conditions, we granted Chardan, for a period of 15 months after the date of the consummation of the Business Combination, a right of first refusal to act as lead underwriters or minimally as a co-manager: (i) for any and all future public and private equity offerings with at least 30% of the economics, or, in the case of a three-handed deal, 20% of the economics, and (ii) for any and all future public and private debt offerings, with at least 15% of the economics. In accordance with Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (“FINRA”) Rule 5110(f)(2)(E)(i), such right of first refusal shall not have a duration of more than three years from the effective date of the registration statement related to the IPO.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our common stock subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock featured certain redemption rights that were considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheets.
Net Loss Per Common Share
The Company’s consolidated statement of operations includes a presentation of income (loss) per share for common shares subject to possible redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of income (loss) per share. Net income per common share, basic and diluted, for common stock subject to possible redemption is calculated by dividing the proportionate share of income or loss on marketable securities held by the Trust Account, net of applicable franchise and income taxes, by the weighted average number of common stock subject to possible redemption outstanding since original issuance.
Net loss per share, basic and diluted, for non-redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing the net loss, adjusted for income or loss on marketable securities attributable to Common stock subject to possible redemption, by the weighted average number of non-redeemable common stock outstanding for the period.
Non-redeemable common stock includes Insider Shares and non-redeemable shares of common stock as these shares do not have any redemption features. Non-redeemable common stock participates in the income or loss on marketable securities based on non-redeemable common stock shares’ proportionate interest.
Recent accounting pronouncements
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.