ITEM 7.-MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION
AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and notes thereto included in Part IV, Item 15.-Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules. This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, including but not limited to statements relating to the Company’s strategic initiatives. Forward-looking statements typically are identified by use of terms such as “may”, “will”, “should”, “plan”, “project”, “expect”, “anticipate”, “estimate”, and similar words, although some forward-looking statements are expressed differently. These forward-looking statements are based upon the Company’s current expectations and assumptions and are subject to various risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results and performance to differ materially. Some of these risks and uncertainties are described in the Company’s filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, including in Part I, Item 1A - Risk Factors section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 30, 2021. Included among the risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results and performance to differ materially are the risk that the Company will be unsuccessful in gauging fashion trends and changing consumer preferences, the risks resulting from the highly competitive nature of the Company’s business and its dependence on consumer spending patterns, which may be affected by changes in economic conditions, the risks related to the COVID-19 pandemic, including the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business or the economy in general (including decreased customer traffic, schools adopting remote and hybrid learning models, closures of businesses and other activities causing decreased demand for our products and negative impacts on our customers’ spending patterns due to decreased income or actual or perceived wealth, and the impact of the CARES Act and other legislation related to the COVID-19 pandemic, and any changes to the CARES Act or such other legislation), the risk that the Company’s strategic initiatives to increase sales and margin are delayed or do not result in anticipated improvements, the risk of delays, interruptions and disruptions in the Company’s global supply chain, including resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic or other disease outbreaks, or foreign sources of supply in less developed countries or more politically unstable countries, the risk that the cost of raw materials or energy prices will increase beyond current expectations or that the Company is unable to offset cost increases through value engineering or price increases, various types of litigation, including class action litigations brought under consumer protection, employment, and privacy and information security laws and regulations, the imposition of regulations affecting the importation of foreign-produced merchandise, including duties and tariffs, and the uncertainty of weather patterns. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date they were made. The Company undertakes no obligation to release publicly any revisions to these forward-looking statements that may be made to reflect events or circumstances after the date hereof or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events.
As used in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, references to the “Company”, “The Children’s Place”, “we”, “us”, “our”, and similar terms refer to The Children’s Place, Inc. and its subsidiaries. Our fiscal year ends on the Saturday on or nearest to January 31. Other terms that are commonly used in our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are defined as follows:
•Fiscal 2020 - The fifty-two weeks ended January 30, 2021
•Fiscal 2019 - The fifty-two weeks ended February 1, 2020
•Fiscal 2018 - The fifty-two weeks ended February 2, 2019
•Fiscal 2021 - Our next fiscal year representing the fifty-two weeks ending January 29, 2022
•FASB - Financial Accounting Standards Board
•FASB ASC - FASB Accounting Standards Codification, which serves as the source for authoritative U.S. GAAP, except that rules and interpretive releases by the SEC are also sources of authoritative U.S. GAAP for SEC registrants
•GAAP - U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
•SEC - The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission
•AUR - Average unit retail price
•Comparable Retail Sales - Net sales, in constant currency, from stores that have been open for at least 14 consecutive months and from our e-commerce store, excluding postage and handling fees. Store closures in the current fiscal year will be excluded from Comparable Retail Sales beginning in the fiscal quarter in which the store closes. A store that is closed for a substantial remodel, relocation, or material change in size will be excluded from Comparable Retail Sales for at least 14 months beginning in the fiscal quarter in which the closure occurred. However, stores that temporarily close will be excluded from Comparable Retail Sales until the store is re-opened for a full fiscal month.
•Gross Margin - Gross profit expressed as a percentage of net sales
•SG&A - Selling, general, and administrative expenses
OVERVIEW
Our Business
We are the largest pure-play children’s specialty apparel retailer in North America. We design, contract to manufacture, sell at retail and wholesale, and license to sell trend right, high quality merchandise predominately at value prices, under our proprietary “The Children’s Place”, “Place”, “Baby Place”, and “Gymboree” brand names. As of January 30, 2021, we had 749 stores across North America, our e-commerce business at www.childrensplace.com and www.gymboree.com, and had 230 international points of distribution open and operated by our eight franchise partners in 19 countries.
Segment Reporting
In accordance with FASB ASC 280-Segment Reporting, we report segment data based on geography: The Children’s Place U.S. and The Children’s Place International. Each segment includes an e-commerce business located at www.childrensplace.com and www.gymboree.com. Included in The Children’s Place U.S. segment are our U.S. and Puerto Rico based stores and revenue from our U.S.-based wholesale business. Included in The Children’s Place International segment are our Canadian-based stores, revenue from the Company’s Canada wholesale business, as well as revenue from international franchisees. We measure our segment profitability based on operating income, defined as income before interest and taxes. Net sales and direct costs are recorded by each segment. Certain inventory procurement functions such as production and design as well as corporate overhead, including executive management, finance, real estate, human resources, legal, and information technology services, are managed by The Children’s Place U.S. segment. Expenses related to these functions, including depreciation and amortization, are allocated to The Children’s Place International segment based primarily on net sales. The assets related to these functions are not allocated. We periodically review these allocations and adjust them based upon changes in business circumstances. Net sales to external customers are derived from merchandise sales, and we have no major customers that account for more than 10% of our net sales.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly impacted regions all around the world, resulting in restrictions and shutdowns of business and other activities implemented by national, state, and local authorities and private entities, leading to significant adverse economic conditions and business disruptions, as well as significant volatility in global financial and retail markets. Federal, state, and local governments and health officials worldwide have imposed and continue to impose varying degrees of preventative and protective actions, such as travel bans, restrictions on public gatherings, forced closures of businesses and other activities, social distancing, the adoption of remote or hybrid learning models for schools, and stay-at-home orders, all in an effort to reduce the spread of the virus. In addition, certain mall owners have restricted hours of operation and the number of people permitted in stores. Such factors, among others, have resulted in a significant decline in retail traffic and consumer spending on discretionary items.
As a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have experienced significant business disruption, and on March 18, 2020, we temporarily closed all of our stores across the U.S. and Canada. We re-opened the majority of our stores during the last two weeks of June and, as of January 30, 2021, we had 680 of 749 stores open to the public in the U.S., Canada, and Puerto Rico, with all but one store of the temporarily closed stores located in Canada. In early March 2021, the government mandate on temporary store closures in Canada was lifted for all of our locations. Our distribution centers remain open and operating to support our e-commerce business, which has significantly increased since the temporary store closures.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we took the following actions designed to preserve our financial flexibility:
•Executing a substantial reduction and/or deferral of all non-essential expenses and capital expenditures;
•Collaborating with vendor partners to extend payment terms and balance forward inventory receipts to reflect reduced demand;
•Temporarily suspended rent payments on all of our U.S. and Canadian retail stores during the first quarter of Fiscal 2020 and resumed rent payments on a modified basis as stores began to re-open during the second quarter of Fiscal 2020. Our lease flexibility gave us the opportunity to strategically secure rent abatements for Fiscal 2020 and/or forward rent reductions. We have reached agreements in principle with many of our major landlords and are in discussions with most of the remaining landlords;
•We are targeting 300 retail store closures through Fiscal 2021, inclusive of the 178 stores permanently closed in Fiscal 2020, and 122 planned store closures in Fiscal 2021;
•Effective April 1, 2020, Jane Elfers, President and Chief Executive Officer, forfeited 100% of her salary. In addition, the senior leadership team took a 25% reduction in salary and the independent Directors of the Board unanimously approved to forgo their cash compensation. Effective June 28, 2020, the base salaries of the executives noted above and the cash compensation of the independent Directors of the Board were reinstated to 100% of pre-reduction levels;
•Effective April 5, 2020, all U.S. and Canadian field management and store associates were temporarily furloughed, with the Company continuing to provide health benefits, until needed to support ship-from-store activities or stores were re-opened;
•Effective April 5, 2020, we instituted a combination of temporary furloughs and pay reductions for the substantial majority of our corporate staff. During the second quarter of Fiscal 2020 a majority of our furloughed employees returned to work and, effective June 28, 2020, salaries were reinstated to 100% of pre-reduction levels;
•Temporarily suspended the Company’s capital return program, inclusive of share repurchases and dividends;
•Finalized an amendment to our revolving credit facility, which increased borrowing capacity from $325 million to $360 million for a period of one year;
•Secured an $80 million term loan on October 5, 2020. We used all of the net proceeds from the term loan to pay down revolving credit facility borrowings; and
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we took the following steps to address the health, safety, and welfare of our employees and customers: instituted incentive pay, emergency leave, sick pay, and health insurance payment programs for our employees; provided training, health screening, onsite clinical services at our U.S. distribution center, personal protective equipment, and plexiglass health guard partitions, as well as rigorous cleaning routines and other measures in accordance with Federal, state and local guidance; and limited retail store and distribution center capacity.
Operating Highlights
Net sales decreased by $348.1 million, or 18.6%, to $1,522.6 million during Fiscal 2020 from $1,870.7 million during Fiscal 2019. The net sales decrease was driven primarily by the disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, resulting in a significant acceleration of permanent store closures, extensive temporary store closures, and a significant decrease in back-to-school demand due to schools adopting remote and hybrid learning models, partially offset by increased e-commerce sales. During Fiscal 2020, we opened three new stores and closed 178 stores.
Gross profit decreased by $322.0 million, or 49.1%, to $333.3 million during Fiscal 2020 from $655.3 million during Fiscal 2019. Consolidated gross margin decreased approximately 1,310 basis points to 21.9% during Fiscal 2020 from 35.0% during Fiscal 2019. The decrease in gross margin resulted primarily from increased penetration of our e-commerce business and its higher fulfillment costs, a decrease in merchandise margin resulting from strategic actions taken in the first half of Fiscal 2020 in response to the pandemic-driven temporary closure of our entire store fleet, and the deleverage of fixed expenses resulting from the decline in net sales.
Selling, general, and administrative expenses decreased $49.9 million, or 10.4%, to $428.2 million during Fiscal 2020 from $478.1 million during Fiscal 2019. As a percentage of net sales, SG&A increased approximately 250 basis points to 28.1% during Fiscal 2020 from 25.6% during Fiscal 2019. The increase was primarily as a result of the deleverage of fixed expenses resulting from the decline in net sales and higher incentive compensation accruals, partially offset by a reduction in store expenses resulting from our permanent store closures, as well as a reduction in overall operating expenses associated with strategic actions taken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Interest expense was $11.8 million in the twelve months ended January 30, 2021, compared to $7.9 million in the twelve months ended February 1, 2020. The increase in interest expense was driven by a higher debt balance and the higher interest rate associated with the term loan.
Benefit for income taxes was $71.4 million during Fiscal 2020 compared to an expense of $15.1 million during Fiscal 2019. Our effective tax rate was a benefit of 33.7% and an expense of 17.1% during Fiscal 2020 and Fiscal 2019, respectively. The Fiscal 2020 benefit was primarily driven by the net loss in the period as well as the impact of the enactment of the CARES Act. The Fiscal 2019 income tax rate was impacted by an excess tax benefit related to the vesting of equity shares.
We reported net loss of $(140.4) million during Fiscal 2020 compared to net income of $73.3 million during Fiscal 2019, due to the factors discussed above. Diluted earnings (loss) per share was $(9.59) in Fiscal 2020 compared to $4.68 in Fiscal 2019. This decrease in earnings per diluted share is due to the net loss, partially offset by lower diluted weighted average number of common shares outstanding of approximately 1.0 million shares.
Although we are facing a period of uncertainty regarding the future impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, we continue to focus on our key strategic growth initiatives--superior product, digital transformation, and fleet optimization.
Focus on product remains our top priority. We reintroduced the iconic Gymboree brand in February 2020 on an enhanced Gymboree website and in co-branded locations in certain Company stores in the U.S. and Canada and were encouraged by the initial customer response to the relaunch prior to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The transformation of our digital capabilities continues to expand with the development of a completely redesigned responsive site and mobile application, providing an online shopping experience geared towards the needs of our “on-the-go” customers, expanded customer personalization, which delivers unique, relevant content designed to drive sales, loyalty and retention, and the ability to have our entire store fleet equipped with ship-from-store capabilities. Also, in response to increased digital demand, including as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company has increased and will continue to increase the utilization of its third-party logistics provider to further support both our U.S. and Canadian e-commerce operations.
We continue to evaluate our store fleet as part of our fleet optimization initiative. We have closed 449 stores, including the 178 stores closed during Fiscal 2020, since the announcement of our fleet optimization initiative in 2013. As accelerated demand for online purchasing has increased our digital business, partly as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have accelerated our planned store closures and are targeting 300 retail store closures in Fiscal 2020 and Fiscal 2021, bringing our total closures since the fleet optimization initiative began in 2013 to approximately 570 stores.
During Fiscal 2020, we repurchased approximately 0.3 million shares for approximately $15.5 million, inclusive of shares repurchased and surrendered to cover tax withholdings associated with the vesting of equity awards held by management. As of January 30, 2021, there was approximately $92.8 million in aggregate remaining on the 2018 Share Repurchase Program.
We have subsidiaries whose operating results are based in foreign currencies and are thus subject to the fluctuations of the corresponding translation rates into U.S. dollars. The below table summarizes the average translation rates most impacting our operating results:
____________________________________________
(1)The average translation rates are the average of the monthly translation rates used during each fiscal year to translate the respective income statements. The rates represent the U.S. dollar equivalent of each foreign currency.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenues and expenses during the reported period. In many cases, there are alternative policies or estimation techniques that could be used. We continuously review the application of our accounting policies and evaluate the appropriateness of the estimates used in preparing our financial statements; however, estimates routinely require adjustment based on changing circumstances and the receipt of new or better information. Consequently, actual results could differ materially from our estimates.
The accounting policies and estimates discussed below include those that we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our financial results. Senior management has discussed the development and selection of our critical accounting policies and estimates with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors, which has reviewed our related disclosures herein.
Inventory Valuation- We value inventory at the lower of cost or net realizable value, with cost determined using an average cost method. The estimated market value of inventory is determined based on an analysis of historical sales trends of our individual product categories, the impact of market trends and economic conditions, and a forecast of future demand, as
well as plans to sell through inventory. Estimates may differ from actual results due to the quantity, quality, and mix of products in inventory, consumer and retailer preferences, and market conditions such as those resulting from disease pandemics and other catastrophic events. Our historical estimates have not differed materially from actual results.
Reserves for inventory shrinkage, representing the risk of physical loss of inventory, are estimated based on historical experience and are adjusted based upon physical inventory counts. A 0.5% difference in our shrinkage rate as a percentage of cost of goods sold would have impacted each quarter’s net income by approximately $0.6 million.
Stock-Based Compensation- We account for stock-based compensation according to the provisions of FASB ASC 718- Compensation-Stock Compensation.
Time Vesting and Performance-Based Awards
We generally grant time vesting and performance-based stock awards to employees at management levels and above. We also grant time vesting stock awards to our non-employee directors. Time vesting awards are granted in the form of restricted stock units that require each recipient to complete a service period (“Deferred Awards”). Deferred Awards granted to employees generally vest ratably over three years. Deferred Awards granted to nonemployee directors generally vest after one year. Performance-based stock awards are granted in the form of restricted stock units which have performance criteria that must be achieved for the awards to be earned in addition to a service period requirement (“Performance Awards”), and each Performance Award has a defined number of shares that an employee can earn (the “Target Shares”). With the approval of the Board’s Compensation Committee, the Company may settle vested Deferred Awards and Performance Awards to the employee in shares, in a cash amount equal to the market value of such shares at the time all requirements for delivery of the award have been met, or in part shares and cash. For Performance Awards awarded in Fiscal 2020, an employee may earn from 0% to 250% of their Target Shares based on the Company’s achievement of certain performance goals established at the beginning of the applicable performance period. The Performance Awards cliff vest, if earned, after completion of the applicable performance period, which is generally three years. The fair value of these Performance Awards granted is based on the closing price of our common stock on the grant date. Compensation expense is recognized ratably over the related service period reduced for estimated forfeitures of those awards not expected to vest due to employee turnover. While actual forfeitures could vary significantly from those estimated, a 10% change in our estimated forfeiture rate would have impacted our Fiscal 2020 net income by approximately $1.2 million.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets- We periodically review our long-lived assets when events indicate that their carrying value may not be recoverable. Such events include a historical or projected trend of cash flow losses or a future expectation that we will sell or dispose of an asset significantly before the end of its previously estimated useful life. In reviewing for impairment, we group our long-lived assets at the lowest possible level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities.
We review all stores that have reached comparable sales status, or sooner if circumstances should dictate, on at least an annual basis. We believe waiting this period of time allows a store to reach a maturity level where a more comprehensive analysis of financial performance can be performed. For each store that shows indications of impairment, we project future cash flows over the remaining life of the lease, adjusted for lease payments, and compare the total undiscounted cash flows to the net book value of the related long-lived assets, including ROU assets. If the undiscounted cash flows are less than the related net book value of the long-lived assets, they are written down to their fair market value. We primarily use discounted future cash flows directly associated with those assets to determine fair market value of long-lived assets and ROU assets. In evaluating future cash flows, we consider external and internal factors. External factors comprise the local environment in which the store resides, including mall traffic and competition and their effect on sales trends, as well as macroeconomic factors, such as global pandemics. Internal factors include our ability to gauge the fashion taste of our customers, control variable costs such as cost of sales and payroll, and in certain cases, our ability to renegotiate lease costs. If external factors should change unfavorably, if actual sales should differ from our projections, or if our ability to control costs is insufficient to sustain the necessary cash flows, future impairment charges could be material.
Asset impairment charges during Fiscal 2020 were related to underperforming stores identified in our ongoing store portfolio evaluation primarily as a result of decreased net revenues and cash flow projections resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Income Taxes- We utilize the liability method of accounting for income taxes as set forth in FASB ASC 740-Income Taxes. Under the liability method, deferred taxes are determined based on the temporary differences between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities, as well as for net operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using currently enacted tax rates that apply to taxable income in effect for the years in which the basis differences and tax assets are expected to be realized. A valuation allowance is recorded when it is more likely than not that some of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. In determining the need for valuation allowances, we consider projected future taxable income, the availability of tax planning strategies, taxable income in prior carryback years, and future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences. If, in the future, we determine that we would not be able to realize our
recorded deferred tax assets, an increase in the valuation allowance would decrease earnings in the period in which such determination is made.
We assess our income tax positions and record tax benefits for all years subject to examination based upon our evaluation of the facts, circumstances, and information available at the reporting date. For those tax positions where it is more likely than not that a tax benefit will be sustained, we have recorded the largest amount of tax benefit with a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with a taxing authority that has full knowledge of all relevant information. For those income tax positions where it is not more likely than not that a tax benefit will be sustained, no tax benefit has been recognized in the financial statements.
Fair Value Measurement and Financial Instruments- FASB ASC 820-Fair Value Measurement provides a single definition of fair value, together with a framework for measuring it and requires additional disclosure about the use of fair value to measure assets and liabilities.
This topic defines fair value as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date and establishes a three-level hierarchy, which encourages an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value. The three levels of the hierarchy are defined as follows:
•Level 1 - inputs to the valuation techniques that are quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities
•Level 2 - inputs to the valuation techniques that are other than quoted prices but are observable for the assets or liabilities, either directly or indirectly
•Level 3 - inputs to the valuation techniques that are unobservable for the assets or liabilities
Our cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, assets of the Company’s Deferred Compensation Plan, accounts payable, and revolving loan are all short-term in nature. As such, their carrying amounts approximate fair value and fall within Level 1 of the fair value hierarchy. The Company stock included in the Deferred Compensation Plan is not subject to fair value measurement.
Our derivative assets and liabilities include foreign exchange forward contracts that are measured at fair value using observable market inputs such as forward rates, our credit risk, and our counterparties’ credit risks. Based on these inputs, our derivative assets and liabilities are classified within Level 2 of the fair value hierarchy.
Our assets measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis include long-lived assets, such as intangible assets, fixed assets, and ROU assets. We review the carrying amounts of such assets when events indicate that their carrying amounts may not be recoverable. Any resulting asset impairment would require that the asset be recorded at its fair value. The resulting fair value measurements of the assets are considered to fall within Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy.
Insurance and Self-Insurance Liabilities- Based on our assessment of risk and cost efficiency, we self-insure as well as purchase insurance policies to provide for workers’ compensation, general liability and property losses, cyber-security coverage, as well as directors’ and officers’ liability, vehicle liability, and employee medical benefits. We estimate risks and record a liability based upon historical claim experience, insurance deductibles, severity factors, and other actuarial assumptions. These estimates include inherent uncertainties due to the variability of the factors involved, including type of injury or claim, required services by the providers, healing time, age of claimant, case management costs, location of the claimant, and governmental regulations. While we believe that our risk assessments are appropriate, these uncertainties or a deviation in future claims trends from recent historical patterns could result in our recording additional or reduced expenses, which may be material to our results of operations. Our historical estimates have not differed materially from actual results and a 10% difference in our insurance reserves as of January 30, 2021 would have impacted net income by approximately $0.5 million.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
Adopted in Fiscal 2020
In August 2018, the FASB issued guidance related to the accounting for implementation costs incurred in a cloud computing arrangement that is a service contract. The guidance aligns the requirements for capitalizing implementation costs incurred in a hosting arrangement that is a service contract with the requirements for capitalizing implementation costs incurred to develop or obtain internal-use software and hosting arrangements that include an internal-use software license. We adopted this guidance in the first quarter of Fiscal 2020. This adoption did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In August 2018, the FASB issued guidance related to disclosure requirements for fair value measurement. The amendments modify current fair value measurement disclosure requirements by removing, adding, or modifying certain fair
value measurement disclosures. We adopted this guidance in the first quarter of Fiscal 2020. This adoption did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In June 2016, the FASB issued guidance related to the accounting for financial instrument credit losses. The guidance provides more decision useful information about the expected credit losses on financial instruments by replacing the incurred loss impairment methodology under current U.S. GAAP with a methodology that reflects expected credit losses and requires consideration of a broader range of reasonable and supportable information to inform credit loss estimates. We adopted this guidance in the first quarter of Fiscal 2020. This adoption did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
To Be Adopted After Fiscal 2020
In December 2019, the FASB issued guidance related to the accounting for income taxes. The guidance aims to simplify the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions to the general principles within the current guidance and by clarifying and amending the current guidance. The guidance is effective for annual reporting periods, and interim periods within those years, beginning after December 15, 2020. We do not expect the guidance to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, selected income statement data expressed as a percentage of net sales. We primarily evaluate the results of our operations as a percentage of net sales rather than in terms of absolute dollar increases or decreases by analyzing the year over year change in our business expressed as a percentage of net sales (i.e., “basis points”). For example, SG&A increased approximately 250 basis points to 28.1% of net sales during Fiscal 2020 from 25.6% during Fiscal 2019. Accordingly, to the extent that our sales have increased at a faster rate than our costs (i.e., “leveraging”), the more efficiently we have utilized the investments we have made in our business. Conversely, if our sales decrease or if our costs grow at a faster pace than our sales (i.e., “de-leveraging”), we have less efficiently utilized the investments we have made in our business. Results in Fiscal 2020 were significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, including the government mandated temporary closure of all of our stores for substantial periods of time during Fiscal 2020.
The following table sets forth net sales by segment, for the periods indicated:
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019
Net sales decreased by $348.1 million, or 18.6%, to $1,522.6 million during Fiscal 2020 from $1,870.7 million during Fiscal 2019. The net sales decrease was driven primarily by the disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, resulting in a significant acceleration of permanent store closures, extensive government mandated temporary store closures, and a significant decrease in back-to-school demand due to schools adopting remote and hybrid learning models, partially offset by increased e-commerce sales.
We believe that our e-commerce and brick-and-mortar retail store operations are highly interdependent, with both sharing common customers purchasing from a common pool of product inventory. Accordingly, we believe that consolidated omni-channel reporting presents the most meaningful and appropriate measure of our performance, including Comparative Retail Sales and revenues.
The Children’s Place U.S. net sales decreased $299.1 million, or 17.9%, to $1,372.1 million during Fiscal 2020 compared to $1,671.2 million during Fiscal 2019. The net sales decrease was driven primarily by the disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, resulting in a significant acceleration of permanent store closures, extensive government mandated temporary store closures, and a significant decrease in back-to-school demand due to schools adopting remote and hybrid learning models, partially offset by increased e-commerce sales.
The Children’s Place International net sales decreased $49.0 million, or 24.6%, to $150.5 million during Fiscal 2020 compared to $199.5 million during Fiscal 2019. The net sales decrease was driven primarily by the disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, resulting in a significant acceleration of permanent store closures, extensive government mandated temporary store closures, and a decrease in revenue from international franchisees due to the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by increased e-commerce sales.
Total e-commerce sales, which include postage and handling, increased to approximately 53% of net sales during Fiscal 2020 from approximately 31% during Fiscal 2019.
Gross profit decreased by $322.0 million, or 49.1%, to $333.3 million during Fiscal 2020 from $655.3 million during Fiscal 2019. Consolidated gross margin decreased approximately 1,310 basis points to 21.9% during Fiscal 2020 from 35.0% during Fiscal 2019. The decrease in gross margin resulted primarily from increased penetration of our e-commerce business and its higher fulfillment costs, a decrease in merchandise margin resulting from strategic actions taken in the first half of Fiscal 2020 in response to the pandemic-driven temporary closure of our entire store fleet, and the deleverage of fixed expenses resulting from the decline in net sales.
Gross profit as a percentage of net revenues is dependent upon a variety of factors, including changes in the relative sales mix among distribution channels, changes in the mix of products sold, the timing and level of promotional activities, foreign currency exchange rates, and fluctuations in material costs. These factors, among others, may cause gross profit as a percentage of net revenues to fluctuate from period to period.
Selling, general, and administrative expenses decreased $49.9 million, or 10.4%, to $428.2 million during Fiscal 2020 from $478.1 million during Fiscal 2019. As a percentage of net sales, SG&A increased approximately 250 basis points to 28.1% during Fiscal 2020 from 25.6% during Fiscal 2019. The increase was primarily as a result of the deleverage of fixed expenses resulting from the decline in net sales and higher incentive compensation accruals, partially offset by a reduction in store expenses resulting from our permanent store closures, as well as a reduction in overall operating expenses associated with strategic actions taken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Asset impairment charges were $38.5 million during Fiscal 2020 including the ROU assets recorded in connection with Topic 842, primarily for 419 stores. These charges were related to underperforming stores identified in our ongoing store portfolio evaluation primarily as a result of decreased net revenues and cash flow projections resulting from the COVID-19 disruption. Asset impairment charges during Fiscal 2019 were $6.0 million, of which $3.2 million related to the full impairment of 29 stores, and $2.8 million related to the write-down of information technology systems.
Depreciation and amortization was $66.4 million during Fiscal 2020 compared to $74.8 million during Fiscal 2019, primarily reflecting decreased depreciation associated with lower capital expenditures and the write-off of store fixed assets as a result of the impairment charge incurred in the first quarter of Fiscal 2020.
Benefit / provision for income taxes was a benefit of $71.4 million during Fiscal 2020 compared to an expense of $15.1 million during Fiscal 2019. Our effective tax rate was a benefit of 33.7% and an expense of 17.1% during Fiscal 2020 and Fiscal 2019, respectively. The Fiscal 2020 benefit was primarily driven by the net loss in the period as well as the impact of the enactment of the CARES Act. The Fiscal 2019 income tax rate was impacted by an excess tax benefit related to the vesting of equity shares.
Net income (loss) was $(140.4) million during Fiscal 2020 compared to $73.3 million during Fiscal 2019, due to the factors discussed above. Diluted earnings (loss) per share was $(9.59) in Fiscal 2020 compared to $4.68 in Fiscal 2019. This decrease in earnings per diluted share is due to the net loss, partially offset by lower diluted weighted average number of common shares outstanding of approximately 1.0 million shares.
Fiscal 2019 Compared to Fiscal 2018
Net sales decreased by $67.4 million, or 3.5%, to $1,870.7 million during Fiscal 2019 from $1,938.1 million during Fiscal 2018. The net sales decrease was driven primarily by a Comparable Retail Sales decrease of 2.7%, the adverse impact of competitor liquidations, and operating fewer stores. During Fiscal 2019, we opened 12 new stores and closed 60 stores.
We believe that our e-commerce and brick-and-mortar retail store operations are highly interdependent, with both sharing common customers purchasing from a common pool of product inventory. Accordingly, we believe that consolidated omni-channel reporting presents the most meaningful and appropriate measure of our performance, including Comparative Retail Sales and revenues.
The Children’s Place U.S. net sales decreased $56.7 million, or 3.3%, to $1,671.2 million during Fiscal 2019 compared to $1,727.9 million during Fiscal 2018. Our net sales decrease resulted primarily from a U.S. Comparable Retail Sales decrease of 2.8%, the adverse impact of competitor liquidations, and operating fewer stores.
The Children’s Place International net sales decreased $10.7 million, or 5.1%, to $199.5 million during Fiscal 2019 compared to $210.2 million during Fiscal 2018. Our net sales decrease resulted primarily from a Canadian Comparable Retail Sales decrease of 1.6% and unfavorable changes in the Canadian exchange rate.
Total e-commerce sales, which include postage and handling, increased to approximately 31% of net sales during Fiscal 2019 from approximately 28% during Fiscal 2018.
Gross profit decreased by $28.3 million, or 4.1%, to $655.3 million during Fiscal 2019 from $683.6 million during Fiscal 2018. Consolidated gross margin decreased approximately 30 basis points to 35.0% during Fiscal 2019 from 35.3% during Fiscal 2018. The decrease in gross margin resulted primarily from the de-leverage of fixed expenses resulting from a decrease in Comparable Retail Sales and the increased penetration of our e-commerce business, which operates at a lower gross margin rate due to higher fulfillment costs, partially offset by increased merchandise margins.
Gross profit as a percentage of net revenues is dependent upon a variety of factors, including changes in the relative sales mix among distribution channels, changes in the mix of products sold, the timing and level of promotional activities, foreign currency exchange rates, and fluctuations in material costs. These factors, among others, may cause gross profit as a percentage of net revenues to fluctuate from period to period.
Selling, general, and administrative expenses decreased $20.2 million, or 4.1%, to $478.1 million during Fiscal 2019 from $498.3 million during Fiscal 2018. As a percentage of net sales, SG&A decreased approximately 10 basis points to 25.6% during Fiscal 2019 from 25.7% during Fiscal 2018. The leverage was primarily due to a reduction in expenses associated with our transformation initiatives and lower incentive compensation, partially offset by the de-leverage of fixed expenses resulting from the decline in Comparable Retail Sales.
Asset impairment charges were $6.0 million during Fiscal 2019, of which $3.2 million related to the impairment of primarily 29 stores, and $2.8 million related to the write-down of information technology systems. Asset impairment charges during Fiscal 2018 were $6.1 million, of which $1.7 million related to the full impairment of 11 stores, and $4.4 million related to the write-down of information technology systems.
Depreciation and amortization was $74.8 million during Fiscal 2019 compared to $68.9 million during Fiscal 2018, reflecting increased depreciation associated with our investment in business transformation initiatives and the opening of 12 new stores.
Operating income decreased $14.9 million, or 13.4%, to $96.4 million during Fiscal 2019 from $111.3 million during Fiscal 2018. As a percentage of net sales, operating income decreased approximately 50 basis points to 5.2% during Fiscal 2019 from 5.7% during Fiscal 2018, due to the factors discussed above.
Provision for income taxes increased $7.5 million to $15.1 million in Fiscal 2019 compared to $7.6 million in Fiscal 2018. Our effective tax rate was 17.1% and 7.0% during Fiscal 2019 and Fiscal 2018, respectively. The effective tax rate was higher for Fiscal 2019 primarily due to a lower excess tax benefit related to the vesting of equity shares during Fiscal 2019 when applied to income before provision for income taxes year over year.
Net income was $73.3 million during Fiscal 2019 compared to $101.0 million during Fiscal 2018, a decrease of $27.7 million, due to the factors discussed above. Diluted earnings per share was $4.68 in Fiscal 2019 compared to $6.01 in Fiscal
2018. This decrease in earnings per diluted share is due to lower net income, partially offset by lower diluted weighted average number of common shares outstanding of approximately 1.2 million shares, virtually all of which is related to our share repurchase programs.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Liquidity
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company took the following actions to preserve financial flexibility:
•Executing a substantial reduction and/or deferral of all non-essential expenses and capital expenditures;
•Collaborating with vendor partners to extend payment terms and balance forward inventory receipts to reflect reduced demand;
•Temporarily suspended rent payments on all of our U.S. and Canadian retail stores during the first quarter of Fiscal 2020 and resumed rent payments on a modified basis as stores began to re-open during the second quarter of Fiscal 2020. Our lease flexibility gave us the opportunity to strategically secure rent abatements for Fiscal 2020 and/or forward rent reductions. We have reached agreements in principle with many of our major landlords and are in discussions with most of the remaining landlords;
•We are targeting 300 retail store closures through Fiscal 2021, inclusive of the 178 stores permanently closed in Fiscal 2020, and 122 planned store closures in Fiscal 2021;
•Effective April 1, 2020, Jane Elfers, President and Chief Executive Officer, forfeited 100% of her salary. In addition, the senior leadership team took a 25% reduction in salary and the independent Directors of the Board unanimously approved to forgo their cash compensation. Effective June 28, 2020, the base salaries of the executives noted above and the cash compensation of the independent Directors of the Board were reinstated to 100% of pre-reduction levels;
•Effective April 5, 2020, all U.S. and Canadian field management and store associates were temporarily furloughed, with the Company continuing to provide health benefits, until needed to support ship-from-store activities or stores were re-opened;
•Effective April 5, 2020, we instituted a combination of temporary furloughs and pay reductions for the substantial majority of our corporate staff. During the second quarter of Fiscal 2020 a majority of our furloughed employees returned to work and, effective June 28, 2020, salaries were reinstated to 100% of pre-reduction levels;
•Temporarily suspended the Company’s capital return program, inclusive of share repurchases and dividends;
•Finalized an amendment to our revolving credit facility, which increased borrowing capacity from $325 million to $360 million for a period of one year; and
•Secured an $80 million term loan on October 5, 2020. We used all of the net proceeds from the term loan to pay down revolving credit facility borrowings.
Our working capital needs typically follow a seasonal pattern, peaking during the third fiscal quarter based on seasonal inventory purchases. Our primary uses of cash are for working capital requirements, which are principally inventory purchases, and the financing of capital projects, including investments in new systems, and, prior to the suspension of our capital return program, the repurchases of our common stock and payment of dividends.
Our working capital deficit increased $26.3 million to a deficit of $171.4 million at January 30, 2021 compared to a working capital deficit of $145.1 million at February 1, 2020, primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by strategic cash management. During Fiscal 2020, prior to the suspension of our capital return program, we repurchased approximately 0.3 million shares for approximately $15.5 million. During Fiscal 2019, we repurchased approximately 1.6 million shares for approximately $131.4 million, inclusive of shares repurchased and surrendered to cover tax withholdings associated with the vesting of equity awards, and paid cash dividends of approximately $34.9 million.
Our credit facility provides for borrowings up to the lesser of $360 million, until April 2021, when it reduces to $325 million, or our borrowing base, as defined by the credit facility agreement (see “Credit Facility” below). At January 30, 2021, we had $169.8 million of outstanding borrowings and $104.2 million available for borrowing. In addition, at January 30, 2021, we had $8.2 million of outstanding letters of credit with an additional $41.8 million available for issuing letters of credit.
We expect to be able to meet our working capital and capital expenditure requirements for the foreseeable future by using our cash on hand, cash flows from operations, and availability under our credit facility.
Credit Facility
We and certain of our subsidiaries maintain an asset-based revolving credit facility (the “ABL Credit Facility”) with Wells Fargo Bank, National Association (“Wells Fargo”), Bank of America, N.A., HSBC Business Credit (USA) Inc., and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as lenders (collectively, the “Lenders”) and Wells Fargo, as Administrative Agent, Collateral Agent, and Swing Line Lender.
The ABL Credit Facility, which expires in May 2024, consists of a $360 million asset-based revolving credit facility that was increased from $325 million as a result of finalizing an amendment with the Lenders on April 24, 2020 to secure the Company an additional $35 million available under the accordion feature for a period of one year, and including a $25 million Canadian sublimit, with a $50 million sublimit for standby and documentary letters of credit. On October 5, 2020, we further amended the ABL Credit Facility to provide for certain changes that permitted the issuance of an $80 million Term Loan (the “Term Loan”) on that date and align certain terms of the ABL Credit Facility to those of the Term Loan. The Term Loan is discussed in more detail below.
Borrowings outstanding under the ABL Credit Facility bear interest, at our option, at:
(i)the prime rate plus a margin of 1.75% to 1.88% based on the amount of our average excess availability under the facility; or
(ii)the London InterBank Offered Rate, or “LIBOR”, for an interest period of one, two, three, or six months, as selected by us, plus a margin of a) 2.50% to 2.75% and b) 1.00% based on the amount of our average excess availability under the facility.
We are charged an unused line fee of 0.25% on the unused portion of the commitments. Letter of credit fees range from 1.25% to 1.38% for commercial letters of credit and range from 2.00% to 2.25% for standby letters of credit. Letter of credit fees are determined based on the amount of our average excess availability under the facility. The amount available for loans and letters of credit under the Credit Agreement is determined by a borrowing base consisting of certain credit card receivables, certain trade and franchise receivables, certain inventory, and the fair market value of certain real estate, subject to certain reserves.
The outstanding obligations under the Credit Agreement may be accelerated upon the occurrence of certain events, including, among others, non-payment, breach of covenants, the institution of insolvency proceedings, defaults under other material indebtedness, and a change of control, subject, in the case of certain defaults, to the expiration of applicable grace periods. We are not subject to any early termination fees.
Credit extended under the ABL Credit Facility is secured by a first priority security interest in substantially all of our U.S. and Canadian assets excluding intellectual property, software, equipment, and fixtures. In connection with the Term Loan, the Lenders under the ABL Credit Facility entered into an intercreditor agreement with the Term Loan lender and were granted a second priority security interest in the Term Loan collateral, which includes our intellectual property, certain furniture, fixtures and equipment, and pledges of subsidiary capital stock.
As of January 30, 2021, we have capitalized an aggregate of approximately $5.9 million in deferred financing costs related to the Credit Agreement. The unamortized balance of deferred financing costs at January 30, 2021 and February 1, 2020 was approximately $1.2 million and $0.9 million, respectively. Unamortized deferred financing costs are amortized over the remaining term of the Credit Agreement.
The table below presents the components of our credit facility:
____________________________________________
(1)Lower of the credit facility maximum or the total borrowing base collateral.
(2)The sublimit availability for letters of credit was $41.8 million and $43.8 million at January 30, 2021 and February 1, 2020, respectively.
Term Loan
On October 5, 2020, we and certain of our subsidiaries entered into a loan agreement (the “Loan Agreement”) dated October 5, 2020 with SLR Credit Solutions (formerly known as Crystal Financial LLC), as Lender, Administrative Agent, and Collateral Agent, providing for an $80 million Term Loan. The net proceeds from the Term Loan, after deducting related fees and expenses, were used to repay borrowings under our ABL Credit Facility.
The Term Loan: (i) matures on the earlier of October 5, 2025 or the maturity date under the ABL Credit Facility, currently in May 2024; (ii) bears interest, payable monthly, at the greater of (a) the three month LIBOR Rate published in the Wall Street Journal, and (b) 1.00%, plus 7.75% or 8.00% depending on the average excess availability of credit under the ABL Credit Facility, adjusted quarterly; and (iii) amortizes by (x) 5.00% per annum payable quarterly beginning with the fiscal quarter ending on or around July 31, 2021 through the fiscal quarter ending on or around April 30, 2022, (y) 7.50% per annum payable quarterly beginning with the fiscal quarter ending on or around July 31, 2022 through the fiscal quarter ending on or around April 30, 2023, and (z) 10.00% per annum payable quarterly thereafter.
The Term Loan is secured by a first priority security interest in our intellectual property, certain furniture, fixtures and equipment, and pledges of subsidiary capital stock, and a second priority security interest in the collateral securing the ABL Credit Facility. The Term Loan is guaranteed, subject to certain exceptions, by each of our subsidiaries that guarantee the ABL Credit Facility.
The Term Loan is, in whole or in part, pre-payable any time and from time to time, subject to certain prepayment premiums specified in the Loan Agreement, plus accrued and unpaid interest.
Among other covenants, the Loan Agreement limits our ability to incur certain liens, to incur certain indebtedness, including under the ABL Credit Facility, to make certain investments, acquisitions, dispositions or restricted payments, or to change the nature of its business. These covenants are substantially the same covenants as provided in the ABL Credit Facility.
The Loan Agreement contains customary events of default, which include (subject in certain cases to customary grace and cure periods) nonpayment of principal or interest, breach of other covenants in the Loan Agreement, failure to pay certain other indebtedness, including under the ABL Credit Facility, and certain events of bankruptcy, insolvency or reorganization.
Cash Flows/Capital Expenditures
During Fiscal 2020, cash flows used in operating activities were $35.7 million compared to cash flows provided by operating activities of $177.9 million during Fiscal 2019. Fiscal 2020 cash flows used in operating activities were primarily the result of a net loss in the year due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic disruption, resulting in the acceleration of
permanent store closures and extensive government mandated temporary store closures, partially offset by strategic working capital management and the extension of vendor payment terms. During Fiscal 2019, cash flows provided by operating activities were $177.9 million compared to $139.9 million during Fiscal 2018. The net increase of $38.0 million in cash from operating activities resulted primarily from working capital management.
Cash flows used in investing activities were $30.4 million during Fiscal 2020 compared to $134.4 million during Fiscal 2019. This change was primarily due to the Gymboree intellectual property and related assets acquisition during Fiscal 2019 and a reduction in capital expenditures during Fiscal 2020 compared to Fiscal 2019. Cash flows used in investing activities were $134.4 million during Fiscal 2019 compared to $56.9 million during Fiscal 2018. This change was primarily due to the Gymboree Assets acquisition of $77.0 million during Fiscal 2019.
During Fiscal 2020, cash flows provided by financing activities were $60.9 million compared to cash flows used in financing activities of $44.4 million during Fiscal 2019. The change primarily resulted from the proceeds received from an $80 million Term Loan during Fiscal 2020, a decrease in purchases of our common stock, and the temporary suspension of the payment of dividends. In March 2020, we temporarily suspended our capital return program, inclusive of share repurchases and dividends. Future declarations of quarterly dividends, the establishment of future record dates, and the resulting payment dates are subject to approval by the Company’s Board of Directors based on a number of factors, including business and market conditions, the Company’s future financial performance, and other investment priorities. During Fiscal 2019, cash flows used in financing activities were $44.4 million compared to $259.2 million during Fiscal 2018. The decrease primarily resulted from an increase in borrowings under our revolving credit facility and a decrease in purchases of our common stock, primarily related to our share repurchase programs and shares repurchased to cover tax withholdings associated with the vesting of equity awards.
Our ability to meet our capital requirements in Fiscal 2021 depends on our cash on hand, our ability to generate cash flows from operations, and our available borrowings under our credit facility. Cash flow generated from operations depends on our ability to achieve our financial plans. During Fiscal 2020, we were able to fund our capital expenditures with cash on hand and cash generated from operating activities supplemented by funds from our credit facility. We believe that our existing cash on hand, cash generated from operations, and funds available to us through our credit facility will be sufficient to fund our capital and other cash requirements for the foreseeable future.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS AND COMMERCIAL COMMITMENTS
The following tables summarize our contractual and commercial obligations as of January 30, 2021:
____________________________________________
(1)Represents letters of credit issued to landlords, banks, and insurance companies.
We self-insure and purchase insurance policies to provide for workers’ compensation, general liability, and property losses, as well as directors’ and officers’ liability, vehicle liability, and employee medical benefits, as described in Note 1 of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements. Insurance reserves of approximately $2.2 million are included in other long-term
liabilities as of January 30, 2021. The long-term portion represents the total amount estimated to be paid beyond one year. We are not able to further estimate in which periods the long-term portion will be paid.
As discussed more fully in Note 13 of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements, our long-term liabilities include unrecognized tax benefits of approximately $6.3 million, which includes $0.3 million of accrued interest and penalties, at January 30, 2021. We cannot make a reasonable estimate of the amount and period of related future payments for any of this amount.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.
QUARTERLY RESULTS AND SEASONALITY
Our quarterly results of operations have fluctuated and are expected to continue to fluctuate materially depending on a variety of factors, including overall economic conditions, the timing and number of store closures, net sales contributed by new stores, increases or decreases in Comparable Retail Sales, weather conditions (such as unseasonable temperatures or storms), shifts in timing of certain holidays, and changes in our merchandise mix and pricing strategy, including changes to address competitive factors. The combination and severity of one or more of these factors could result in material fluctuations. Results in Fiscal 2020 were significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, including the government mandated temporary closure of all of our stores for substantial periods of time during Fiscal 2020.
The following table sets forth certain statement of operations data and selected operating data for each of our last four fiscal quarters. Quarterly information for Fiscal 2020 is included in Note 16 of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements. The quarterly statement of operations data and selected operating data set forth below were derived from our audited consolidated financial statements and reflect, in our opinion, all adjustments (consisting only of normal recurring adjustments) necessary to fairly present the results of operations for these fiscal quarters (unaudited):