Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A) is intended to help the readers of our financial statements better understand our results of operations, financial condition and present business environment. The MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report.
The MD&A is organized as follows:
➣
Overview
➣
Market Overview
➣
Preface
➣
Results of Operations
➣
Working Capital, Liquidity and Capital Resources
➣
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
➣
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
➣
New Accounting Standards to be Adopted
OVERVIEW
Preformed Line Products Company (the “Company”, “PLPC”, “we”, “us”, or “our”) was incorporated in Ohio in 1947. We are an international designer and manufacturer of products and systems employed in the construction and maintenance of overhead and underground networks for the energy, telecommunication, cable operators, information (data communication), and other similar industries. Our primary products support, protect, connect, terminate, and secure cables and wires. We also provide solar hardware systems, mounting hardware for a variety of solar power applications, and fiber optic and copper splice closures. PLPC is respected around the world for quality, dependability and market-leading customer service. Our goal is to continue to achieve profitable growth as a leader in the research, innovation, development, manufacture, and marketing of technically advanced products and services related to energy, communications and cable systems and to take advantage of this leadership position to sell additional quality products in familiar markets. We have 30 sales and manufacturing operations in 21 different countries.
We report our segments in four geographic regions: PLP-USA (including corporate), The Americas (includes operations in North and South America without PLP-USA), EMEA (Europe, Middle East & Africa) and Asia-Pacific, in accordance with accounting standards codified in Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 280, “Segment Reporting”. Each segment distributes a full range of our primary products. Our PLP-USA segment is comprised of our U.S. operations manufacturing our traditional products primarily supporting our domestic energy, telecommunications and solar products. Our other three segments, The Americas, EMEA and Asia-Pacific, support our energy, telecommunications, data communication and solar products in each respective geographical region.
The segment managers responsible for each region report directly to the Company’s Chief Executive Officer, who is the chief operating decision maker, and are accountable for the financial results and performance of their entire segment for which they are responsible. The business components within each segment are managed to maximize the results of the entire operating segment and the Company rather than the results of any individual business component of the segment.
We evaluate segment performance and allocate resources based on several factors primarily based on sales and net income.
MARKET OVERVIEW
Our business continues to be highly concentrated in the energy and communications markets. During the past several years, industry consolidation continued as distributor and service provider integrations occurred in our major markets. The fluctuation of foreign currencies coupled with the varying degrees of recovery throughout the global economy has led to a challenging environment. In addition, low oil prices, increasing commodity prices and changes in governmental leadership in certain markets have affected construction projects worldwide and there has been a historical lack of commitment by developed countries to upgrade and strengthen their electrical grids and communication networks, despite the growing need. While these factors are likely to continue to provide inherent uncertainty going forward, the Company has increased its sales over the past few years despite the global economic instability.
In 2020, sales in the energy market continued to increase due to the number and scale of energy and communication projects in North America. We believe that our leadership position in the market and ability to deliver reliable products quickly will enable us to take advantage of prospects for continued growth as transmission grids are enhanced and extended. As communication networks continue to be upgraded and expanded, our product offering positions us well to participate in the expansion.
Our international business is more concentrated in the energy and communications markets, which is where we experienced our most significant top line growth in 2020. Historically, our international sales were primarily related to the medium voltage distribution segment of the energy market but have grown through acquisition and new product development to include a significant contribution from the transmission and telecommunications markets. We believe that we are well positioned to supply the needs of the world’s diverse energy market requirements as a result of our strategically located operations and array of product designs and technologies.
As economic conditions evolve, we believe our efforts internationally will lead to growth in our communications business from opportunities where deployment of fixed line and wireless telecommunications services and broadband penetration rates remain low as a percentage of the total population.
PREFACE
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). Our discussions of the financial results include non-GAAP measures (e.g., foreign currency impact) to provide additional information concerning our financial results and provide information that we believe is useful to the readers of our financial statements in the assessment of our performance and operating trends.
The following discussion describes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The first quarter of 2020 saw the global outbreak of a novel strain of coronavirus (“COVID-19”), which in the latter part of the quarter created significant global economic disruption. While the recent outbreak did not have a material impact on our results for the reported periods, it created challenges for us in countries that were the earliest to be impacted by the pandemic, namely countries in our Asia-Pacific business segment. Due to restrictions on our operations, the operations of our customers and the global supply chain, we are continuing to actively monitor the impact of COVID-19 on future periods.
As the virus spread, we took action to protect the health and safety of our employees while we maintained critical operations to protect our customers and suppliers. Many of our customers are considered “essential” and remained open for business, although in a limited capacity in some cases, which slowed demand into the second and third quarter, most notably for specific customers in our Asia Pacific business segment. Our North American plants have remained fully operational and only some of our international plants were closed temporarily. There are some restrictions on the supply of products and potential price increases globally. The possibility of these restrictions may continue or expand to other regions, but our global supply chain currently remains strong.
Due to the uncertainty created by COVID-19, we are actively managing costs and our liquidity position to provide additional flexibility while still supporting our customers and their specific needs. We have reduced and may continue to reduce operating expenses and could experience lower variable SG&A, primarily through a decrease in travel-related expenses incurred by our associates, due to travel restrictions.
While we expect the COVID-19 outbreak could continue to have an adverse impact on our business, the businesses of our customers and the global economy, we cannot predict the duration or scope of the COVID-19 pandemic or the magnitude of its impact on our business and results of operations. In addition, the impact of COVID-19 could potentially exacerbate other risks discussed, any of which could have a material adverse effect on the Company. We continue to assess all challenges related to COVID-19 and plan accordingly.
Our financial statements are subject to fluctuations in the exchange rates of foreign currencies in relation to the U.S. dollar. As foreign currencies weaken against the U.S. dollar, our sales and costs decrease as the foreign currency-denominated financial
statements translate into fewer U.S. dollars. In total, foreign currencies weakened against the U.S. dollar in both 2020 and 2019. The fluctuations of foreign currencies during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 had an unfavorable impact on net sales of $16.9 million and $14.2 million, respectively. On a reportable segment basis, the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation on net sales and net income for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, was as follows:
The effect of currency translation had an unfavorable impact on net income in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 of $1.3 million and $.3 million, respectively. There were $2.1 million in losses on foreign currency translation on operating income for the year ended December 31, 2020. There were transaction losses of $1.5 million that were partially mitigated by forward currency contract gains of $.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 and $.2 million of transaction losses in the year ended December 31, 2019 as summarized in the following table:
Despite the continued changes in the current global economy, we believe our business fundamentals and our financial position are sound and strategically well-positioned. We remain focused on assessing our global market opportunities and overall manufacturing capacity in conjunction with the requirements of local manufacturing in the markets that we serve. If necessary, we will utilize our global manufacturing network to manage costs, while driving sales and delivering value to our customers. We have continued to invest in the business to expand into new markets for us to improve efficiency, develop new products, increase our capacity and become an even stronger supplier to our current and new customers. We currently have a bank debt to equity ratio of 19.2% and can borrow needed funds at a competitive interest rate under our credit facility. A consolidated decrease in debt of $9.8 million as of December 31, 2020 was partially a result of prior year funding needs for two acquisitions and the 2020 sale of a corporate aircraft, which contributed to the decrease in our bank debt to equity ratio from 24.5% at December 31, 2019. See Note E in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information related to our debt position.
The following table sets forth a summary of the Company’s Statements of Consolidated Income and the percentage of net sales for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The Company’s past operating results are not necessarily indicative of future operating results.
2020 RESULTS OF OPERATIONS COMPARED TO 2019
Net sales. In 2020, net sales were $466.4 million, an increase of $21.6 million, or 5%, compared to 2019. Excluding the unfavorable effect of currency translation, net sales increased 9% as summarized in the following table:
The increase in PLP-USA net sales of $23.0 million, or 13%, was primarily due to a volume increase in energy and communication product sales. International net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 were unfavorably affected by $16.9 million when local currencies were converted to U.S. dollars. The following discussion of changes in net sales excludes the effect of currency translation. The Americas net sales of $74.2 million increased $21.4 million, or 31%, primarily due to higher volume in energy and communication product sales. EMEA net sales of $91.1 million increased $12.7 million, or 16%, primarily due to volume increases in communication products in the region, including incremental sales from businesses acquired in 2019. The Asia-Pacific net sales of $99.9 million decreased $18.7 million, or 16%, compared to 2019 primarily due to a combined volume decrease mostly as a result of the disruption to the global economy caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Gross Profit. Gross profit of $154.0 million for 2020 increased $13.4 million, or 10%, compared to 2019. Excluding the unfavorable effect of currency translation, gross profit increased $18.5 million, or 13%, as summarized in the following table:
PLP-USA gross profit of $75.2 million increased by $11.6 million, or 18%, compared to 2019 mostly due to an increase in sales volume and a shift in mix toward higher margin products. International gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was unfavorably impacted by $5.1 million when local currencies were translated to U.S. dollars. The following discussion of gross profit changes excludes the effects of currency translation. The Americas gross profit increased $5.8 million, which was primarily the result of the year-over-year increase in sales of $21.4 million combined with approximately $.3 million of COVID-19 subsidies. EMEA gross profit increased $7.8 million due to the $12.7 million increase in sales in the region, which continued to include the incremental growth from businesses acquired in 2019. Asia-Pacific’s gross profit decreased $6.6 million primarily as a result of a year-over-year reduction in sales volume, largely caused by negative impact related to the COVID-19 pandemic. The gross profit decrease in Asia-Pacific was partially offset by $.4 of COVID-19 subsidies.
Costs and expenses. Costs and expenses of $113.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $5.8 million, or 5%, compared to 2019. Excluding the favorable effect of currency translation, costs and expenses increased $8.8 million, or 8%, as summarized in the following table:
PLP-USA costs and expenses of $52.8 million increased $1.6 million, or 3%. PLP-USA’s year-over-year increase was attributable to higher personnel related expenses, including benefits, of $1.4 million, a loss on sale of capital assets of $1.0 million, increased commissions of $1.0 million and higher insurance expense of $.4 million. Offsetting these losses were lower travel expenses of $1.5 million, decreases in both professional fees and allowance for doubtful accounts of $.3 million and a year-over-year net incremental gain on foreign currency transactional exchange. PLP’s foreign currency exchange losses were primarily related to translating into U.S. dollars its foreign currency denominated loans, trade receivables and royalty receivables from its foreign subsidiaries at the December 2020 year-end exchange rates. PLP’s costs and expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were favorably impacted by $3.0 million when local currencies were translated to U.S. dollars. The following discussions of costs and expenses exclude the effect of currency translation. The Americas costs and expenses increase of $4.9 million was primarily due to higher expenses related to a litigation reserve of $2.0 million, higher personnel related costs of $1.3 million, an incremental net loss on foreign currency transactions exchange of $.9 million, higher commissions of $.5 million and combined increases in allowance for doubtful accounts and professional fees of $.2 million. EMEA costs and expenses of $22.6 million increased $2.8 million mainly due to higher personnel related costs of $1.7 million, increased rental expense of $.5 million, higher amortization expense of $.4 million, associated with acquired businesses, higher allowance for doubtful accounts of $.4 million and an increase in professional fees of $.1 million. The increases were partially offset by a government subsidy of $.2 million. Asia-Pacific costs and expenses of $22.4 million decreased $.4 million primarily due to a decrease in travel and entertainment expenses related to business conditions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic combined with a government subsidy of $.4 million, which was partially offset by an incremental loss on foreign currency transactional exchange of $.7 million and an increase in professional fees of $.1 million.
Other income (expense). Other income of $.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was favorable by $1.6 million when compared to other (expense) for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019 of $1.2 million. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, Asia-Pacific received government subsidies of $1.1 million related to COVID-19.
Income taxes. Income taxes for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $10.8 million and $8.1 million, respectively, based on pre-tax income of $40.6 million and $31.5 million, respectively. The effective tax rate for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was 26.6% and 25.7%, respectively, compared to the U.S. federal statutory rate of 21%. Our effective tax rate is affected by recurring items, such as tax rates in foreign jurisdictions, which differ from the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate, and the relative amount of income earned in those jurisdictions where such earnings are permanently reinvested. It is also affected by discrete items that may occur in any given period but are not consistent from year to year. The following items had the most significant impact on the difference between our statutory U.S. federal income tax rate of 21%:
1.
A $.7 million, or 1.7%, net increase resulting from higher U.S. permanent items primarily related to limitations on the deductibility of executive compensation.
2.
A $.2 million, or .6%, net decrease resulting from losses in certain jurisdictions where no tax benefit was previously recognized.
3.
A $1.3 million, or 3.2%, net increase resulting from earnings in jurisdictions with higher tax rates than the U.S. federal statutory rate where such earnings are permanently reinvested.
4.
A $.9 million, or 2.2%, net increase resulting from state and local taxes, net of federal benefit.
1.
A $.9 million, or 2.9%, net increase resulting from higher U.S. permanent items primarily related to limitations on the deductibility of executive compensation
2.
A $.4 million, or 1.3%, net decrease resulting from losses in certain jurisdictions where no tax benefit was previously recognized.
3.
A $.9 million, or 2.9%, net increase resulting from earnings in jurisdictions with higher tax rates than the U.S. federal statutory rate where such earnings are permanently reinvested.
Net income. As a result of the preceding items, net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $29.8 million, compared to $23.3 million for 2019. Excluding the effect of currency translation, net income increased $7.8 million as summarized in the following table:
PLP-USA’s net income of $16.6 million increased $8.5 million year over year, mainly due to a year-over-year increase in operating income of $10.0 million and a $1.4 million increase in other income, partially offset by an increase in income tax expense of $2.9 million. International net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was unfavorably affected by approximately $1.3 million when local currencies were converted to U.S. dollars. The following discussion of net income excludes the effect of currency translation. The Americas net income of $5.1 million decreased $.2 million mainly as a result of a $.9 million increase in operating income, partially offset by an increase in other expense, net of $.6 million and an increase in income tax expense of $.5 million. EMEA net income increased $3.7 million as a result of a $5.0 million increase in operating income, partially offset by an increase in income tax expense of $1.3 million and an increase in other expense, net, of $.2 million. Asia-Pacific net income decreased $4.2 million mainly as a result of a $6.0 million decrease in operating income partially offset by a decrease in income tax expense for the region of $1.2 million and an increase in other income, net, of $.6 million.
WORKING CAPITAL, LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Management Assessment of Liquidity
We measure liquidity on the basis of our ability to meet short-term and long-term operating needs, fund additional investments, including acquisitions, and make dividend payments to shareholders. Significant factors affecting the management of liquidity are cash flows from operating activities, capital expenditures, cash dividends, business acquisitions and access to bank lines of credit.
Our investments include expenditures required for equipment and facilities as well as expenditures in support of our strategic initiatives. In 2020, we used cash of $24.6 million for capital expenditures. We ended 2020 with $45.2 million of cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash (collectively “Cash”). Our Cash is held in various locations throughout the world. At December 31, 2020, the majority of our cash is held outside the U.S.
We expect the majority of accumulated non-U.S. cash balances will remain outside of the U.S. and that we will meet U.S. liquidity needs through future cash flows, use of U.S. cash balances, external borrowings, or some combination of these sources.
We complete comprehensive reviews of our significant customers and their creditworthiness by analyzing financial statements for customers where we have identified a measure of increased risk. We closely monitor payments and developments that may signal possible customer credit issues. We currently have not identified any potential material impact on our liquidity from customer credit issues.
Our financial position remains strong and our current ratio at December 31, 2020 and 2019 was 2.4 to 1 and 2.9 to 1, respectively. Total debt at December 31, 2020 was $56.0 million. At December 31, 2020, our unused availability under our line of credit was $39.6 million and our bank debt to equity percentage was 19.2%. On April 17, 2020, the Company extended the term on its $65.0 million credit facility from June 30, 2021 to June 30, 2024 and added its Austrian subsidiary as a borrower on the facility. All other terms remain the same, including the interest rate at LIBOR plus 1.125% unless the Company’s funded debt to Earnings before Interest, Taxes and Depreciation ratio exceeds 2.25 to 1, at which point the LIBOR spread becomes 1.500%. At December 31, 2020, the Company’s Polish subsidiary had borrowed $6.7 million U.S. dollars at a rate of 1.125% plus the Warsaw Interbank Offer Rate with a term expiring June 30, 2024. At December 31, 2020, the Company’s Australian subsidiary had borrowed $5.3 million U.S. dollars, also with a term expiring June 30, 2024. At December 31, 2020, the interest rates on the U.S., Polish and Australian line of credit agreement were 1.27%, 1.33% and 1.15%, respectively. Under the credit facility, at December 31, 2020, the Company had utilized $25.4 million with $39.6 million available under the line of credit, net of long-term outstanding letters of credit of $.1 million. The line of credit agreement contains, among other provisions, requirements for maintaining levels of net worth and profitability. At December 31, 2020, the Company was in compliance with all covenants.
On February 28, 2019, the Company acquired its Austrian subsidiary, SubCon Electrical Fittings GmbH (“SubCon”), headquartered in Dornbirn, Austria. The Company’s Austrian subsidiary had a 1.0 million euros, or $1.1 million U.S. dollars line of credit with a term expiring on May 31, 2021 with the option to renew for an additional twelve months indefinitely. On June 26, 2020, the Company’s Austrian subsidiary borrowed $.6 million on the Company’s line of credit at an interest rate of 1.273%. The proceeds were used to repay the previously outstanding local line of credit. At repayment, the local line of credit was cancelled.
On April 25, 2019, the Company borrowed $8.0 million U.S. dollars on behalf of its Indonesian subsidiary at a rate of 3.501% with a term expiring on April 30, 2024. At December 31, 2020, $6.7 million was outstanding on this debt facility, of which $.8 million is classified as current.
On August 14, 2019, the Company’s New Zealand subsidiary borrowed $5.3 million U.S. dollars at a rate of 3.900% with a term expiring on August 26, 2021. At December 31, 2020, $4.4 million was outstanding on this facility, all of which is classified as current and is has an interest rate of 3.250%. This loan is secured by the Company’s New Zealand subsidiary’s land and building.
The Company’s Asia Pacific segment had $.6 million and $.3 million in restricted cash at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The restricted cash was used to secure bank debt and is included in Cash and Other assets for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, on the balance sheet.
The Company sold its corporate aircraft in December of 2020, thereby eliminating the balance due on the loan which was secured by the corporate aircraft. Of the of $8.1 million previously outstanding, $1.4 million was classified as short-term. The proceeds of the sale were used to pay off the debt associated with the former aircraft. On January 19, 2021, the Company received funding for a term loan in the amount of $20.5 million to fund the purchase of a corporate aircraft. See Note Q for more information.
We expect that our major source of funding for 2021 and beyond will be our operating cash flows, our existing cash and cash equivalents as well as our line of credit agreement. We earn a significant amount of our operating income outside the United States, which, except for current earnings in certain jurisdictions, is deemed to be indefinitely reinvested in foreign jurisdictions. We
currently do not intend nor foresee a need to repatriate these funds. We believe our future operating cash flows will be more than sufficient to cover debt repayments, other contractual obligations, capital expenditures and dividends for the next 12 months and thereafter for the foreseeable future. In addition, we believe our borrowing capacity provides substantial financial resources, if needed, to supplement funding of capital expenditures and/or acquisitions. We also believe that we can expand our borrowing capacity, if necessary; however, we do not believe we would increase our debt to a level that would have a material adverse impact upon results of operations or financial condition.
Sources and Uses of Cash
Cash at December 31, 2020 increased $5.9 million compared to December 31, 2019. Net Cash provided by operating activities was $41.6 million. The most significant net investing and financing uses of Cash were net payments of long-term debt of $38.3 million, capital expenditures of $24.6 million, share repurchases of $9.5 million and dividends paid of $4.2 million. Currency had a positive $1.5 million impact on Cash when translating foreign denominated financial statements to U.S. dollars.
Net Cash provided by operating activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $41.6 million and $27.2 million, respectively. The $14.4 million increase was primarily a result of an increase in net income of $6.4 million and decrease in cash used to fund working capital of $7.5 million, partially offset by miscellaneous net unfavorable movements in non-cash and cash items of $.1 million.
Net Cash used in investing activities of $14.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 represents a decrease of $34.8 million when compared to Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decreased use of Cash was primarily related to the prior year Cash being used for the acquisitions of SubCon and MICOS Telcom of $18.9 million, current-year proceeds from the sale of property and equipment of $10.5 million, primarily from the sale of the corporate aircraft, a reduction in Cash used for capital expenditures of $4.9 million and a reduction resulting from net Cash used during 2019 of $.5 million related to the purchase of marketable securities.
Cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $23.2 million compared to Cash generated from financing activities of $17.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $40.9 million unfavorable change was primarily a result of an increase in net debt payments of $38.3 million, $8.1 million of which was related to payment of remaining debt on the corporate aircraft and a year-over-year increase in cash used in capital stock transactions of $2.6 million.
We have commitments under operating leases primarily for office and manufacturing space, transportation equipment, office and computer equipment and capital leases primarily for equipment.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had total outstanding guarantees of $9.8 million. Additionally, certain domestic and foreign customers require the Company to issue letters of credit or performance bonds as a condition of placing an order. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had total outstanding letters of credit of $8.0 million.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon the consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amount of assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Critical accounting policies are defined as those that are reflective of significant judgment and uncertainties, and potentially may result in materially different outcomes under different assumptions and conditions.
Revenue Recognition
Net sales include products and shipping and handling charges, net of estimates for product returns. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration the Company expects to receive in exchange for transferring products. All revenue is recognized when the Company satisfies the performance obligations under the contract and control of the product is transferred to the customer, primarily based on shipping terms. Revenue for shipping and handling charges are recognized at the time the products are shipped to, delivered to or picked up by the customer. The Company estimates product returns based on historical return rates.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
We maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts for estimated losses resulting from the inability of our customers to make required payments. We record estimated allowances for uncollectible accounts receivable based upon the number of days the accounts are past due, the current business environment, and specific information such as bankruptcy or liquidity issues of customers. If the financial condition of our customers were to deteriorate, resulting in an impairment of their ability to make payments, additional allowances may be required. The allowance for doubtful accounts represents approximately less than 2.8% and 3.7% of our trade receivables balance at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Excess and Obsolescence Reserves
We provide excess and obsolescence reserves to state inventories at the lower of cost or estimated net realizable value. We identify inventory items that have had no usage or are in excess of the usages over the historical 12 to 24 months. A management team with representatives from marketing, manufacturing, engineering and finance reviews these inventory items, determines the disposition of the inventory and assesses the net realizable value based on their knowledge of the product and market conditions. These conditions include, among other things, future demand for product, product utility, unique customer order patterns or unique raw material purchase patterns, changes in customer and quality issues. The reserve for excess and obsolete inventory was 7.5% and 7.7% of gross inventory for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. If the impact of market conditions deteriorates from those projected by management, additional inventory reserves may be necessary.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We record impairment losses on long-lived assets used in operations when events and circumstances indicate that the assets are impaired and the undiscounted cash flows estimated to be generated by those assets are less than the carrying value of those items. Our cash flows are based on historical results adjusted to reflect the best estimate of future market and operating conditions. The net carrying value of assets not recoverable is then reduced to fair value. The estimates of fair value represent the best estimate based on industry trends and reference to market rates and transactions.
Goodwill
We perform our annual impairment test for goodwill utilizing a combination of the income approach, which uses a discounted cash flow methodology, and the market approach, which uses comparable market multiples, and an overall market capitalization reasonableness test in computing fair value by reporting unit. We then compare the fair value of the reporting unit with our carrying value to assess if goodwill has been impaired. The fair value estimates are subjective and sensitive to significant assumptions, such as revenue growth rates, operating margins, the weighted-average cost of capital (WACC), and estimated market multiples, of which are affected by expectations of future market or economic conditions. We believe that the methodologies, significant assumptions, and weightings used are reasonable and result in appropriate fair values of the reporting units.
Our measurement date for our annual impairment test is October 1 of each year. We performed our annual impairment tests for goodwill as of October 1, 2020. We did not have any impairment for goodwill for the years ended December 31, 2020 or 2019. See Note J for additional information.
Deferred Tax Assets
Deferred taxes are recognized at currently enacted tax rates for temporary differences between the financial reporting and income tax basis of assets and liabilities and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. We establish a valuation allowance to record our deferred tax assets at an amount that is more-likely-than-not to be realized. In the event we were to determine that we would be able to realize our deferred tax assets in the future in excess of their recorded amount, an adjustment to the valuation allowance would increase income in the period such determination was made. Likewise, should we determine that we would not be able to realize all or part of our net deferred tax assets in the future, an adjustment to the valuation allowance would be charged to expense in the period such determination was made.
Uncertain Tax Positions
We identify tax positions taken on the federal, state, local and foreign income tax returns filed or to be filed. A tax position can include: a reduction in taxable income reported in a previously filed tax return or expected to be reported on a future tax return that impacts the measurement of current or deferred income tax assets or liabilities in the period being reported; a decision not to file a tax return; an allocation or a shift of income between jurisdictions; the characterization of income or a decision to exclude reporting taxable income in a tax return; or a decision to classify a transaction, entity or other position in a tax return as tax exempt. We determine whether a tax position is an uncertain or a routine business transaction tax position that is more-likely-than-not to be sustained at the full amount upon examination.
Under FASB ASC 740 (“ASC 740”), “Tax Benefits from Uncertain Tax Positions” that reduce our current or future income tax liability are reported in our financial statements only to the extent that each benefit is recognized and measured under a two-step approach. The first step requires us to assess whether each tax position based on its technical merits and facts and circumstances as of the reporting date, is more-likely-than-not to be sustained upon examination. The second step measures the amount of tax benefit that we would recognize in the financial statements based on a cumulative probability approach. A tax position that meets the more-likely-than-not threshold that is not highly certain is measured based on the largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement with the tax authority, assuming that the tax authority has examined the position and has full knowledge of all relevant information.
ASC 740 requires subjectivity to identify outcomes and to assign probability in order to estimate the settlement amount. We provide estimates in order to determine settlement amounts. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded $.1 million of reserves for uncertain tax positions.
Pensions
We record obligations and expenses related to a pension benefit plan based on actuarial valuations, which include key assumptions on discount rates, expected returns on plan assets and compensation increases. These actuarial assumptions are reviewed annually and modified as appropriate. The effect of modifications is generally recorded or amortized over future periods. The discount rate of 2.69% at December 31, 2020 reflects an analysis of yield curves as of the end of the year and the schedule of expected cash needs of the plan. The expected long-term return on plan assets of 7.00% reflects the plan’s historical returns and represents our best estimate of the likely future returns on the plan’s asset mix. We believe the assumptions used in recording obligations under the plans are reasonable based on prior experience, market conditions and the advice of plan actuaries. However, an increase in the discount rate would decrease the plan obligations and the net periodic benefit cost, while a decrease in the discount rate would increase the plan obligations and the net periodic benefit cost. In addition, an increase in the expected long-term return on plan assets would decrease the net periodic pension cost, while a decrease in expected long-term return on plan assets would increase the net periodic pension cost.