Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Forward-Looking Statements
General
Through January 2021 we conducted certain of our operations under a Master Product Development and Supply Agreement (the “Development Agreement”) and Management and Services Agreement with Ceed2Med, LLC (“C2M”) entered in 2018 in order rapidly enter into the CBD business. C2M agreed to provide the Company access to expertise, resources, skills and experience suitable for producing products with active phyto-cannabinoid (CBD) rich ingredients including isolates, distillates, water soluble, and proprietary formulations. Under the Development Agreement, we had been allotted a minimum of 50 and up to 300 kilograms per month, and up to 2,500 kilograms annually, of active phyto-cannabinoid (CBD) rich ingredients for resale, and offered tinctures, edibles, capsules, topical solutions and animal health products manufactured, directly or indirectly, under this arrangement. C2M was also responsible for overseeing our farming and manufacturing activities.
Results of Operations
Year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Net Revenues The Company is principally engaged in the business of selling products made from industrial hemp. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated total revenues of $2.1 million from the sale of CBD products, including revenues of $0.3 million from a related party, C2M, for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cost of Sales The primary components of cost of sales include the cost of the CBD product. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company’s cost of sales amounted to $2.7 million which includes cost of sales with a related party of $.4 million. Cost of sales primarily increased related to increase in volume.
Operating Expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred $10.0 in operating expenses as compared to $9.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $1.0 million. The increase in operating expenses mainly was related to a $4.5 million increase in impairment charges, offset by a 2.9 million decrease in professional and consulting fees related to a reduction in costs related to our farming activities and $0.3 million decrease in selling and marketing expenses as more of our revenue was generated from product distribution requiring less sales and marketing efforts, and $0.4 million decrease in general and administrative costs mainly related to a reduction in head count costs .
Other Expenses, net
Derivative gain increased by $2.4 million from $1.9 million loss for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $0.5 million gain for the year ended December 31, 2020, due to the change in value of the underlying derivative liability and conversion of notes in 2020.
Gain on stock settlement of debt decreased by $3.1 million from $3.0 million loss for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $0.1 million gain for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the conversion of notes and interest into common and preferred shares during the year ended December 31, 2019. We did not have comparable gains or losses during the year ended December 31, 2020 as there was less conversion activity in 2020 by the note holders.
Interest expense increased by $0.5 million from $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in interest expense is primarily related to increase in principle balance outstanding, amortization of debt discount and debt issuance cost related to our convertible note payable issued during 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception in 2008, we have generated losses from operations. As of December 31, 2020, our accumulated deficit was $30.4 million. As of December 31, 2020, we had $25,139 of cash and working capital deficit of $5.0 million. Accordingly, we will need to obtain further funding through public or private equity offerings, debt financing, collaboration arrangements or other sources. The issuance of any additional shares of common stock, preferred stock or convertible securities could be substantially dilutive to our shareholders. In addition, adequate additional funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. If we are unable to raise capital, we will be forced to reduce our operations and may not be able to continue as a going concern.
The Company has various principal balances outstanding as of December 31, 2020, under debt agreements with the Small Business Administration (SBA) of the federal government, related parties and convertible notes with a third party. A total of $335,510 is due under a Secured Disaster Loan and Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) with the SBA, $115,517 is due to various related party shareholders of the Company and $696,286 was due under convertible notes (which subsequent to year end was converted into newly-issued shares of our Series A Preferred Stock). The convertible notes bear interest at a rate ranging from 5% to 8% per annum and prior to conversion had maturity dates mature of November 26, 2020 and February 1, 2023.
On February 16, 2021, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with 3i, LP (“3i”) and an institutional investor (“Investor”) under which the Investor agreed to purchase and 3i agreed to sell that certain 8% senior secured convertible note dated November 27, 2019 (the “Note”) and all of our warrants previously issued to 3i and 3i agreed settle and release all claims asserted against us. As a result, 3i agreed to dismissal of all pending litigation against the Company. As a result, the Subsidiary Guaranty, IP Security Agreement and Registration Rights Agreement with 3i were also terminated. In addition, the Company entered into an Exchange Agreement with the Investor and filed with the Secretary of State of the State of Nevada a Certificate of Designation of Preferences, Rights and Limitations for Series A Preferred Stock under which the Note in the original principal amount of $750,000 would be exchanged for $500,000 of a new series of preferred stock designated 0% Series A Convertible Preferred Stock (the “Series A Preferred”) with a stated value of $1,000 per share (the “Stated Value”).
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0.7 million due to our net loss of $10.9 million, non-cash charges related to convertible loan notes derivative gain of $0.5 million and $0.1 million gain on extinguishment of debt, offset by $0.1 million of depreciation, $1.3 million of stock based compensation, $0.1 million of bad debt, $4.6 million of impairment charges, $0.7 million of inventory reserves, $0.6 million of prepaid stock based compensation amortization, $0.8 million of amortization of debt discounts and debt issuance cost related to convertible notes, $.7 million of intangible amortization, $0.1 million of non-cash interest expense, and $0.1 million of right of use lease asset amortization. Net changes in operating assets and liabilities totaled of $1.6 million, which is primarily attributable to increases in total accounts receivable of $0.1 million, decrease of $0.6 million of inventory, decrease in prepaid assets of $0.2 million, and $1.0 million increase in accounts payable and accruals.
Net cash used in investing activity for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0.7 million mainly from the sale of $0.4 million of common stock and $0.4 million from the issuance of notes offset by $0.2 million of payments on notes.
Going Concern
The audit report prepared by our independent registered public accounting firm relating to our financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 includes an explanatory paragraph expressing substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. We have concluded that the circumstances described above continue to raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern as of December 31, 2020. As of the date of the filing of this Form 10-K, the Company had nearly no cash.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we had no material off-balance sheet arrangements.
In the normal course of business, we may be confronted with issues or events that may result in a contingent liability. These generally relate to lawsuits, claims or the actions of various regulatory agencies. We consult with counsel and other appropriate experts to assess the claim. If, in our opinion, we have incurred a probable loss as set forth by accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, an estimate is made of the loss and the appropriate accounting entries are reflected in our financial statements. After consultation with legal counsel, we do not anticipate that liabilities arising out of currently pending or threatened lawsuits and claims will have a material adverse effect on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Critical Accounting Estimates and New Accounting Pronouncements
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect reported amounts and related disclosures in the financial statements. Management considers an accounting estimate to be critical if it requires assumptions to be made that were uncertain at the time the estimate was made, and changes in the estimate or different estimates that could have been selected could have a material impact on our results of operations or financial condition.
Application of Significant Accounting Policies
Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. In other words, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to take advantage of the benefits of this extended transition period. Our financial statements may, therefore, not be comparable to those of companies that comply with such new or revised accounting standards.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In January 2017, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update 2017-04, “Intangibles-Goodwill and Other: Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment” (ASU 2017-04). The standard simplifies the subsequent measurement of goodwill by eliminating Step 2 from the goodwill impairment test. Under the amendments of ASU 2017-04, an entity should perform its goodwill impairment test by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount. An entity will recognize an impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value, but the loss cannot exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit. ASU 2017-04 is effective for the calendar year ending December 31, 2020. The amendments require a prospective approach to adoption and early adoption is permitted for interim or annual goodwill impairment tests. The Company doen not believe the adoption of the standard will have an impact to our consolidated financial statements.
We have reviewed the FASB issued ASU accounting pronouncements and interpretations thereof that have effectiveness dates during the periods reported and in future periods. We have carefully considered the new pronouncements that alter previous generally accepted accounting principles and do not believe that any new or modified principles will have a material impact on the Company’s reported financial position or operations in the near term. The applicability of any standard is subject to the formal review of the Company’s financial management.