Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A) is intended to help the reader understand our results of operations and financial condition. The MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis, particularly with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should read “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company focused on the development and commercialization of recombinant therapeutic proteins primarily based on our proprietary ProCellEx® protein expression system. We developed our first commercial drug product, Elelyso®, using our ProCellEx system and we are now focused on utilizing the system to develop a pipeline of proprietary, clinically superior versions of complex recombinant therapeutic proteins that primarily target large, established pharmaceutical markets and that in most cases rely upon known biological mechanisms of action. With our experience to date, we believe ProCellEx will enable us to develop additional proprietary recombinant proteins that are therapeutically superior to existing recombinant proteins currently marketed for the same indications, including applying the unique properties of our ProCellEx system for the oral delivery of therapeutic proteins.
On February 17, 2021, we closed a public offering of our common stock raising gross proceeds of approximately $40.2 million at a price equal to $4.60 per share, before deducting the underwriting discount and estimated expenses of the offering. BofA Securities acted as book-running manager for the offering with Oppenheimer & Co. acting as co-manager.
Pegunigalsidase alfa (PRX-102), our proprietary plant cell culture expressed enzyme in development for the treatment of Fabry disease, is our most advanced product candidate. Our PRX-102 phase III clinical program of PRX-102 for the treatment of Fabry disease includes three separate studies: the BALANCE, BRIDGE and BRIGHT studies. The studies are designed to evaluate the potential superiority of PRX-102 over current therapies, demonstrate the potential for improved efficacy and better quality of life for patients with Fabry disease and demonstrate the safety of our drug/therapy. We are also evaluating the potential of a once-monthly treatment regimen with a higher dose of PRX-102. Enrollment has been completed in each of the BALANCE, BRIDGE and BRIGHT clinical studies. In December 2020, we, together with Chiesi, announced positive final results from the BRIDGE phase III open-label, single-arm, switchover study to assess the efficacy and safety of PRX-102 in Fabry patients previously treated with Replagal® (Takeda Shire), and in February 2021, we, together with Chiesi, announced positive topline results from the BRIGHT phase III 12-month, open-label, switch-over study designed to evaluate the safety, efficacy and pharmacokinetics of PRX-102 treatment, 2 mg/kg every four weeks, in up to 30 patients with Fabry disease previously treated with a commercially available ERT (agalsidase alfa - Replagal or agalsidase beta - Fabrazyme®). We anticipate announcing interim results from our BALANCE trial in the first half of 2021.
On August 11, 2020, we, together with Chiesi, announced that the FDA had accepted the BLA for PRX-102, which was filed under the Accelerated Approval Pathway, and granted Priority Review designation for PRX-102, for the proposed treatment of adult patients with Fabry disease. The FDA noted in its BLA filing communication letter that it is not currently planning to hold an advisory committee meeting to discuss the application. The FDA initially set an action date of January 27, 2021 under the PDUFA. However, as we previously announced in November 2020, the FDA subsequently extended the PDUFA action date to April 27, 2021. As we disclosed last year, the FDA advised us that it will have to inspect our manufacturing facility and the facility of a third party in Europe that performs fill and finish processes for PRX-102 as part of its review of the BLA to ensure cGMP compliance. Due to the FDA’s COVID-19-related FDA travel restrictions, the FDA has advised that it may be unable to conduct the inspections prior to the PDUFA action date. We, together with Chiesi, are addressing this issue.
Our partnership with Chiesi is based on two agreements. On October 19, 2017, Protalix Ltd. and Chiesi entered into Chiesi Ex-US Agreement and on July 23, 2018, Protalix Ltd. and Chiesi entered into the Chiesi US Agreement. Under
each of the Chiesi Agreements, Chiesi made an upfront payment to Protalix Ltd. of $25.0 million in connection with the execution of each agreement. In addition, the Chiesi Ex-US Agreement provided for additional payments to Protalix Ltd. of up to $25.0 million in pegunigalsidase alfa development costs, capped at $10.0 million per year, and up to $320.0 million, in the aggregate, in regulatory and commercial milestone payments. The Chiesi US Agreement provided for additional payments to Protalix Ltd. of up to a maximum of $20.0 million to cover development costs for pegunigalsidase alfa, subject to a maximum of $7.5 million per year, and to receive additional payments of up to a maximum of $760.0 million, in the aggregate, in regulatory and commercial milestone payments. To date, Protalix Ltd. has received the complete amount of development costs to which it is entitled under the Chiesi Agreements.
Under the terms of both of the Chiesi Agreements, Protalix Ltd. is required to manufacture all of the pegunigalsidase alfa needed under the agreements, subject to certain exceptions, and Chiesi is required to purchase pegunigalsidase alfa from Protalix, subject to certain terms and conditions. Under the Chiesi Ex-US Agreement, Chiesi is required to make tiered payments of 15% to 35% of its net sales, depending on the amount of annual sales outside of the United States, as consideration for product supply. Under the Chiesi US Agreement, Chiesi is required to make tiered payments of 15% to 40% of its net sales, depending on the amount of annual sales in the United States, as consideration for product supply.
On May 1, 2012, the FDA approved for sale our first commercial product, taliglucerase alfa for injection, an ERT for the long-term treatment of adult patients with a confirmed diagnosis of type 1 Gaucher disease. Subsequently, taliglucerase alfa was approved for marketing by the regulatory authorities of other countries. Taliglucerase alfa is marketed under the name BioManguinhos alfataliglicerase in Brazil and certain other Latin American countries, and under the name Elelyso in other territories.
Since its approval by the FDA, taliglucerase alfa has been marketed by Pfizer, as provided in the Pfizer Agreement. In October 2015, we entered into the Amended Pfizer Agreement which amends and restates the Pfizer Agreement in its entirety. Pursuant to the Amended Pfizer Agreement, we sold to Pfizer our share in the collaboration created under the initial Pfizer Agreement for the commercialization of Elelyso in exchange for a cash payment equal to $36.0 million. Under the Amended Pfizer Agreement, Pfizer has an exclusive license to commercialize Elelyso worldwide other than Brazil; we maintain full rights to BioManguinhos alfataliglicerase in Brazil. We will continue to manufacture drug substance for Pfizer, subject to certain terms and conditions. Under the Amended Pfizer Agreement, Pfizer is responsible for 100% of expenses, and entitled to all revenues globally for Elelyso, excluding Brazil, where we are responsible for all expenses and retain all revenues.
On June 18, 2013, we entered into the Brazil Agreement with Fiocruz, an arm of the Brazilian MoH, for BioManguinhos alfataliglicerase. As Fiocruz has not satisfied certain purchase commitments under the agreement, we and Fiocruz are currently discussing potential steps to maximize sales of BioManguinhos alfataliglicerase sales to the Brazilian MoH. We are continuing to supply BioManguinhos alfataliglicerase to Fiocruz, and patients continue to be treated with BioManguinhos alfataliglicerase in Brazil. We are discussing with Fiocruz potential actions that Fiocruz may take to comply with its purchase obligations and, based on such discussions, we will determine what we believe to be the course of action that is in our best interest.
In addition to PRX-102, our product pipeline currently includes, among other candidates:
1)alidornase alfa, or PRX-110, a proprietary plant cell recombinant human Deoxyribonuclease 1, or DNase, which is subject to an exclusive worldwide license agreement with SarcoMed for use in the treatment of any human respiratory disease or condition including, but not limited to, sarcoidosis, pulmonary fibrosis, and other related diseases via inhaled delivery;
2)PRX-115, our plant cell-expressed recombinant PEGylated uricase (urate Oxidase) - a chemically modified enzyme to treat refractory gout; and
3)PRX-119, our plant cell-expressed PEGylated recombinant human DNase I product candidate being designed to elongate half-life in the circulation for NETs-related diseases.
We have licensed the rights to commercialize taliglucerase alfa worldwide (other than Brazil) to Pfizer, and the rights to commercialize pegunigalsidase alfa worldwide to Chiesi. Otherwise, we hold the worldwide commercialization rights to
our other proprietary development candidates. In addition, we continuously evaluate potential strategic marketing partnerships as well as collaboration programs with biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies and academic research institutes.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in note 1 to our consolidated financial statements appearing at the end of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We believe that the accounting policies below are critical for one to fully understand and evaluate our financial condition and results of operations.
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which we prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate such estimates and judgments, including those described in greater detail below. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our financial condition, liquidity, or results of operations will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain, including as a result of new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19 and the actions taken to contain or treat COVID-19, as well as the economic impact on local, regional, national and international customers and markets.
Functional Currency
The currency of the primary economic environment in which our operations are conducted is the U.S. dollar. All of our revenues are derived in dollars. In addition, most of our expenses and capital expenditures are incurred in dollars, and the major source of our financing has been provided in dollars.
Revenues
Our primary sources of revenues include our sales of BioManguinhos alfataliglicerase in Brazil, of drug substance to Pfizer under our Amended Pfizer Agreement and of drug product to Chiesi under the Chiesi Agreements. We recognize revenue from the Amended Pfizer Agreement at a point in time when control over the product is transferred to customers (upon delivery).
We also generate revenues from the Chiesi agreements. According to Accounting Standards Codification 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, and all the related amendments, or ASC 606, a performance obligation is a promise to provide a distinct good or service or a series of distinct goods or services. Goods and services that are not distinct are bundled with other goods or services in the contract until a bundle of goods or services that is distinct is created. A good or service promised to a customer is distinct if the customer can benefit from the good or service either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available to the customer and the entity’s promise to transfer the good or service to the customer is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract.
We have identified two performance obligations in the Chiesi agreements as follows: (1) the license and research and development services and (2) contingent performance obligation regarding future manufacturing.
We determined that the license together with the research and development services should be combined into single performance obligation since Chiesi cannot benefit from the license without the research and development services. The research and development services are highly specialized and are dependent on the supply of the drug.
The future manufacturing is contingent on regulatory approvals of the drug and we deem these services to be separately identifiable from other performance obligations in the contract. Manufacturing services post-regulatory approval are not interdependent or interrelated with the license and research and development services.
The transaction price was comprised of fixed consideration and variable consideration (capped research and development reimbursements). Under ASC 606, the consideration to which we would be entitled upon the achievement of contractual milestones, which are contingent upon the occurrence of future events, are a form of variable consideration. We estimate variable consideration using the most likely method. Amounts included in the transaction price are recognized only when it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenues will not occur. Prior to recognizing revenue from variable consideration, we use significant judgment to determine the probability of a significant reversal of such revenue.
Since the customer benefits from the research and development services as the entity performs the service, revenue from granting the license and the research and development services is recognized over time using the cost-to-cost method. We used significant judgment when we determined the costs expected to be incurred upon satisfying the identified performance obligation.
Revenue from additional research and development services ordered by Chiesi is recognized over time using the cost-to-cost method.
We accounted for the Chiesi US agreement as a modification of the Chiesi Ex-US agreement. As such, we recorded revenue through a cumulative catch-up adjustment.
Our revenue recognition accounting policy prior to January 1, 2019, was materially the same.
Research and Development Expense
We expect our research and development expense to remain our primary expense in the near future as we continue to develop our product candidates. Research and development expense consists of:
● internal costs associated with research and development activities;
● payments made to third party contract research organizations, investigative/clinical sites and consultants;
● manufacturing development costs;
● personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, travel, and related costs for the personnel involved in research and development;
● activities relating to the advancement of product candidates through preclinical studies and clinical trials; and
● facilities and other allocated expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, as well as laboratory and other supplies.
The following table identifies our current major research and development projects:
Project
Status
Expected Near Term Milestones
PRX-102 - pegunigalsidase alfa
BRIDGE and BRIGHT studies complete; BALANCE study fully-enrolled and ongoing
PDUFA date of PRX-102 BLA submission is April 27, 2021; interim results from BALANCE study in the first half of 2021
PRX-110 - alidornase alfa
Out-licensed human respiratory indications for inhalation-based delivery to SarcoMed
PRX-115 - Uricase
Preclinical
PRX-119 - Long Acting DNase I
Preclinical
We anticipate incurring increasing costs in connection with the continued development of all of the product candidates in our pipeline. Our internal resources, employees and infrastructure are not tied to any individual research project and are typically deployed across all of our projects. We currently do not record and maintain research and development costs per project.
The costs and expenses of our projects are partially funded by grants we have received from NATI. Each grant is deducted from the related research and development expenses as the costs are incurred. For additional information regarding the grant process, see “Business-Israeli Government Programs- Encouragement of Industrial Research, Development and Technology Innovation, 1984” in Item 1 of this Annual Report. There can be no assurance that we will continue to receive grants from NATI in amounts sufficient for our operations, if at all. In addition, under the two Chiesi Agreements, Protalix Ltd. was entitled to payments of up to $45.0 million in the aggregate to cover development costs for pegunigalsidase alfa, capped at $17.5 million per year. To date, Protalix Ltd. has received the complete amount of development costs to which it is entitled under the Chiesi Agreements.
At this time, due to the inherently unpredictable nature of preclinical and clinical development processes and given the early stage of our preclinical product development programs, we are unable to estimate with any certainty the costs we will incur in the continued development of the product candidates in our pipeline for potential commercialization. Clinical development timelines, the probability of success and development costs can differ materially from expectations. The current focus of our product development efforts are on pegunigalsidase alfa. Our future research and development expenses for pegunigalsidase alfa and the other product candidates will depend on the clinical success of each product candidate, as well as ongoing assessments of each product candidate’s commercial potential. In addition, we cannot forecast with any degree of certainty which product candidates may be subject to future collaborations, when such arrangements will be secured, if at all, and to what degree such arrangements would affect our development plans and capital requirements. See “Risk Factors-If we are unable to develop and commercialize our product candidates, our business will be adversely affected” and “-We may not obtain the necessary U.S., EMA or other worldwide regulatory approvals to commercialize our drug candidates in a timely manner, if at all, which would have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition.”
We expect our research and development expenses to continue to be our primary expense in the future as we continue the advancement of our clinical trials and preclinical product development programs for our product candidates, particularly with respect to the development of pegunigalsidase alfa. The lengthy process of completing clinical trials and seeking regulatory approvals for our product candidates requires expenditure of substantial resources. Any failure or delay in completing clinical trials, or in obtaining regulatory approvals, could cause a delay in generating product revenue and cause our research and development expense to increase and, in turn, have a material adverse effect on our operations. Due to the factors set forth above, we are not able to estimate with any certainty when we would recognize any net cash inflows from our projects. See “Risk Factors-Clinical trials are very expensive, time-consuming and difficult to design and implement and may result in unforeseen costs which may have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition.”
Share-Based Compensation
We measure share-based compensation cost for all share-based awards at the fair value on the grant date and recognition of share-based compensation over the related service period. The fair value of stock options is determined based on the number of shares granted and the price of our ordinary shares, and calculated based on the Black-Scholes valuation model. For grants made to employees we recognize the fair value of the grant as expense over the service period using the accelerated method while for grants made to consultants and other non-employees we recognize the expenses using the straight-line accounting method.
The guidance requires companies to estimate the expected term of the option rather than simply using the contractual term of an option. Because of lack of sufficient data on past option exercises by employees, the expected term of the options could not be based on historic exercise patterns. Accordingly, we adopted the simplified method, according to which companies may calculate the expected term as the average between the vesting date and the expiration date, assuming the option was granted as a “plain vanilla” option.
In performing the valuation, we assumed an expected 0% dividend yield in the previous years and in the next years. We do not have a dividend policy and given the lack of profitability, dividends are not expected in the foreseeable future, if at all. The guidance stipulates a number of factors that should be considered when estimating the expected volatility, including the implied volatility of traded options, historical volatility and the period that the shares of the company are being publicly traded.
The risk-free interest rate used in the valuation of the options is based on the implied yield of U.S. federal reserve zero-coupon government bonds. The remaining term of the bonds used for each valuation was equal to the expected term of the grant. This methodology has been applied to all grants valued by us. The guidance requires the use of a risk-free interest rate based on the implied yield currently available on zero-coupon government issues of the country in whose currency the exercise price is expressed, with a remaining term equal to the expected life of the option being valued. This requirement has been applied for all grants valued as part of this report.
Convertible Notes
All outstanding convertible notes are accounted for using the guidance set forth in the Financial Accounting Standards Board, or FASB, Accounting Standards Codification 815 requiring that we determine whether the embedded conversion option must be separated and accounted for separately. ASC 470-20 regarding debt with conversion and other options requires the issuer of a convertible debt instrument that may be settled in cash upon conversion to separately account for the liability (debt) and equity (conversion option) components of the instrument in a manner that reflects the issuer’s nonconvertible debt borrowing rate. We accounted for the 4.5% convertible notes, which we refer to as the 2018 Notes, as liability, on an aggregated basis, in their entirety.
Our 2021 Notes were accounted for partially as liability and equity components of the instrument and partially as a debt host contract with an embedded derivative resulting from the conversion feature. During the year ended December 31, 2017, the embedded derivative was reclassified to additional paid in capital.
Issuance costs regarding the issuance of the 2021 Notes are amortized using the effective interest rate.
During the year ended December 31, 2018, note holders converted $1.15 million aggregate principal amount of the 2021 Notes into a total of 153,742 shares of Common Stock and cash payments of approximately $15,887, in the aggregate. In addition, in June 2018, we exchanged $3.42 million aggregate principal amount of our outstanding 4.50% convertible promissory notes due 2018, which we refer to as the 2018 Notes, for 261,363 shares of common stock and approximately $2.23 million in cash and delivered the necessary funds under the indenture governing the 2018 Notes, which was $2.53 million. On September 15, 2018, the 2018 Notes matured and have been paid in full. There were no note conversions during the year ended December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, a total of $57.9 million aggregate principal amount of the 2021 Notes were outstanding. In addition, as of December 31, 2020, none of the 2018 Notes were outstanding.
Results of Operations
Year ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenues from Selling Goods
We recorded revenues of $16.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $0.3 million, or 2%, compared to revenues of $15.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Revenues from License and R&D services
We recorded revenues from license and R&D services of $46.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $7.9 million, or 20%, compared to revenues of $38.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Revenues from license agreements represent the revenues we recognized in connection with the Chiesi Agreements. The increase is primarily due to revenues recognized in connection with an updated costs estimation throughout the trials until completion in the amount of $12.8 million which were partially offset due to lower costs incurred in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold was $10.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and the year ended December 31, 2019.
Research and Development Expenses, Net
Research and development expenses, net were $38.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $6.4 million, or 14% from $44.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is primarily due to the completion of two out of the three phase III clinical trials of PRX-102 and reduced costs related to the BALANCE Study as well as a decrease in costs related to manufacturing of our drug in development as some of the manufactured drug product and related costs have been recorded as inventory.
We expect research and development expenses to continue to be our primary expense as we enter into a more advanced stage of preclinical and clinical trials for certain of our product candidates.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses were $11.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $1.2 million, or 12%, from $9.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase resulted primarily from a $1.2 million increase in share-based compensation costs related to employees, an increase of $0.4 million in costs related to our compensation to members of our Board of Directors which was partially offset by a $0.2 million decrease in travel expenses and a $0.1 million decrease in rent and utilities.
Financial Expenses and Income, Net
Financial expense, net was $9.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $1.6 million, or 21%, compared to financial expenses of $7.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Financial expenses are comprised primarily of interest expense on our outstanding convertible notes equal to $4.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The increase resulted primarily from expenses related to our outstanding convertible notes equal to $1.3 million and an increase of $0.5 million in amortization of debt discount.
Year ended December 31, 2019 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2018
For a discussion of the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, see Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our sources of liquidity include our cash balances. At December 31, 2020, we had $38.5 million in cash and cash equivalents and short-term bank deposits. We have primarily financed our operations through equity and debt financings, business collaborations, and grant funding. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received total proceeds of approximately $21.1 million from expense reimbursements in relation to our collaboration with Chiesi and, during the same period, we received or were entitled to receive total proceeds of approximately $18.2 million from sales of BioManguinhos alfataliglicerase to Fiocruz and sales of drug substance to Pfizer. In addition, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we raised gross proceeds equal to $43.7 million in a private placement and gross proceeds equal to $5.0 million from sales of common stock under our ATM program. Subsequently, from January through February 2021, we raised gross proceeds equal to approximately $8.8 million from sales of common stock under our ATM program and in February 2021 we raised gross proceeds of approximately $40.2 million from a public offering of our common stock.
Cash Flows
Net cash used in operations was $26.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $6.5 million was further increased by a $26.2 million decrease in contracts liability and a $4.9 million increase in inventories, which was partially offset by an increase of $2.3 million in accounts payable and accruals, by $3.5 million amortization of debt issuance costs and debt discount, by a $3.1 million in share-based compensation and by a $2.1 million decrease in accounts receivable and other assets. Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $20.0 million and consisted primarily of an increase in bank deposits. On February 17, 2021, we closed a public offering of our common stock raising gross proceeds of approximately $40.2 million before deducting the underwriting discount and estimated expenses of the offering. In addition, to date, we have sold shares of our common stock under our ATM program for aggregate gross proceeds equal to $13.8 million.
Future Funding Requirements
We expect to continue to incur significant expenditures in the near future as we increase our research and developments efforts with respect to our product candidates. Our material cash needs for the next 24 months will include, among other expenses, (i) costs of preclinical and clinical trials, (ii) employee salaries, (iii) payments for rent and operation of our manufacturing facilities, (iv) fees to our consultants and legal advisors, patents and fees for service providers in connection with our research and development efforts and (v) payment of principal and interest on our outstanding convertible promissory notes and other debt. We believe that the funds currently available to us are sufficient to satisfy our capital needs for at least 12 months.
We may be required to raise additional capital in the future in order to develop and commercialize our product candidates and continue research and development activities. Our ability to raise capital, and the amounts of necessary capital, will depend on many other factors, including:
● our efforts, combined with those of Chiesi, to commercialize PRX-102;
● the progress and results of our clinical trials, particularly the PRX-102 BALANCE study;
● our progress in commercializing BioManguinhos alfataliglicerase in Brazil;
● the duration and cost of discovery and preclinical development and laboratory testing and clinical trials for our product candidates;
● the timing and outcome of regulatory review of our product candidates; and
● the costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, defending and enforcing patent claims and other intellectual property rights.
We expect to finance our future cash needs through corporate collaborations, licensing or similar arrangements, public or private equity offerings and/or debt financings. We currently do not have any commitments for future external funding,
except with respect to the development-related payments and milestone payments that may become payable under the Chiesi Agreements and under our agreement with SarcoMed. In addition, our ATM program provides us with a quick and efficient manner to raise capital through the sale of shares of our common stock. To date, we have the right to raise an additional $16.2 million of capital through sales of our common stock through the ATM program.
Effects of Currency Fluctuations
Currency fluctuations could affect us through increased or decreased acquisition costs for certain goods and services. We do not believe currency fluctuations have had a material effect on our results of operations during the years ended December 31, 2018, 2019 or 2020.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2019 and 2020.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Certain recently issued accounting pronouncements are discussed in note 1r of the financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our significant contractual obligations at December 31, 2020:
(1) Represents open purchase orders issued to certain suppliers and other vendors mainly in connection with our research and development activities that were outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
The foregoing table does not include (i) annual license fees, which are immaterial, (ii) payments we may be required to make to certain of our licensors in the time periods set forth above upon the achievement of agreed-upon milestones and (iii) royalty payments payable by us to certain of our licensors in connection with the commercial sale of our product candidates, if any. If all of the contingencies with respect to milestone payments under our research and license agreements are met, the aggregate milestone payments payable would be approximately $4.9 million, and would be payable, if at all, as our projects progress over the course of a number of years. The royalty payments payable by our company in connection with sales of each of our product candidates, if any, shall not exceed low, single-digit percentages of net sales of the product.