Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K generally discusses 2019 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2020. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
Overview
Playa is a leading owner, operator and developer of all-inclusive resorts in prime beachfront locations in popular vacation destinations in Mexico and the Caribbean. As of December 31, 2020, Playa owned and/or managed a total portfolio consisting of 21 resorts (8,172 rooms) located in Mexico, Jamaica, and the Dominican Republic. In Mexico, Playa owns and manages Hyatt Zilara Cancún, Hyatt Ziva Cancún, Panama Jack Resorts Cancún, Panama Jack Resorts Playa del Carmen, Hilton Playa del Carmen All-Inclusive Resort, Hyatt Ziva Puerto Vallarta, Hyatt Ziva Los Cabos and Capri Resort. In Jamaica, Playa owns and manages Hyatt Zilara Rose Hall, Hyatt Ziva Rose Hall, Hilton Rose Hall Resort & Spa, Jewel Grande Montego Bay Resort & Spa and Jewel Paradise Cove Beach Resort & Spa. In the Dominican Republic, Playa owns and manages the Hilton La Romana All-Inclusive Family Resort, the Hilton La Romana All-Inclusive Adult Resort, Hyatt Zilara Cap Cana and Hyatt Ziva Cap Cana. Playa also owns three resorts in Mexico and the Dominican Republic that are managed by a third-party and Playa manages the Sanctuary Cap Cana in the Dominican Republic. We believe that the resorts we own and manage are among the finest all-inclusive resorts in the markets they serve. All of our resorts offer guests luxury accommodations, noteworthy architecture, extensive on-site activities and multiple food and beverage options. Our guests also have the opportunity to purchase upgrades from us such as premium rooms, dining experiences, wines and spirits and spa packages.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, during which time operations at all of our resorts were temporarily suspended for several months in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and for which occupancy levels were at historic lows after reopening, we generated a net loss of $262.4 million, total revenue of $273.2 million, Net Package RevPAR of $76.61 and Adjusted EBITDA of $(21.2) million. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we generated a net loss of $4.4 million, total revenue of $636.5 million, Net Package RevPAR of $198.28 and Adjusted EBITDA of $150.7 million. For a discussion of Adjusted EBITDA and reconciliation to the most comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures, and a discussion of Net Package RevPAR, see “Key Indicators of Financial and Operating Performance” and “Non-U.S. GAAP Financial Measures,” below.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic and the public health measures that have been undertaken in response have had a significant adverse impact on the global economy, the travel and hospitality industries and our business starting in the first quarter of 2020. The effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including related government restrictions, border closings, quarantines, “shelter-in-place” orders and “social distancing,” have significantly disrupted global leisure travel, and has adversely impacted global commercial activity, contributing to worldwide economic contraction and increased unemployment. We expect that the continuing economic fallout will create headwinds for leisure travel even after the current government restrictions are lifted.
Due to the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic and the associated restrictions placed on international travel, we temporarily suspended operations at all of our resorts in late March 2020 and subsequently began reopening our resorts on July 1, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, all of our resorts had reopened with the exception of the Capri Resort.
Our resorts account for all of our revenue. The suspension of operations at our resorts, and the severely reduced occupancy at the resorts that have reopened, has had a significant adverse effect on our liquidity. As of December 31, 2020, we had $146.9 million of
available cash, excluding $25.9 million of restricted cash. We took the following measures during the 2020 fiscal year to mitigate the impact of the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our liquidity position:
•raised $224.0 million of additional capital during the second quarter of 2020 from affiliates of Davidson Kempner Capital Management LP (“DK”) in June 2020 in the form of $204.0 million of additional debt financing and $20.0 million of equity financing at $4.10 per share;
•sold the Jewel Dunn's River Beach Resort & Spa and the Jewel Runaway Bay Beach Resort & Waterpark in May 2020 for a total cash consideration of $60.0 million;
•the temporary suspension of operations of all of our resorts during the second quarter of 2020 significantly reduced the variable cost components of our resort-level operating expenses, including resort franchise and franchise-related fees, management fees and expenses related to our resort employees;
•deferred all of our non-critical capital expenditures planned for 2020;
•adopted temporary voluntary senior executive salary reductions while the majority of our resorts were closed, and our Chief Executive Officer’s voluntary 100% salary reduction remained in place through December 31, 2020; and
•imposed temporary compensation cuts broadly throughout our corporate workforce and canceled all non-essential corporate travel and spending.
We have taken the following actions to improve our liquidity position thus far in 2021:
•raised $138.0 million, net of underwriting discounts, of additional capital in January 2021 through an underwritten public equity offering at $5.00 per share;
•paid down the outstanding balance under our Revolving Credit Facility in February 2021 and also amended and extended our existing facility, further extending the covenant waiver period were we to draw the credit line over 35%; and
•sold the Dreams Puerto Aventuras in February 2021 for a total cash consideration of $34.5 million.
In addition, we reduced the size of our Board of Directors in 2020 to align with the Company’s size and needs, and such reduction has reduced, and will continue to reduce, our expenses.
We cannot predict when the effects of the pandemic will subside, and thus we cannot predict whether our resorts will be permitted to remain open or when our business will return to normalized or even to break-even levels. There also can be no guarantee that when the effects of the pandemic subside that there will not be continuing resurgences of the virus or that the demand for lodging, and consumer confidence in travel generally, will recover as quickly as other industries. The longer and more severe the pandemic, and the actual occurrence or even the possibility of repeat or cyclical outbreaks of the virus beyond the one currently being experienced, the greater the material adverse effect the pandemic will have on our business, results of operations, cash flows, financial condition, access to credit markets and ability to service our indebtedness. See Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors included elsewhere in this report for additional information.
Results of Operations
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations on a consolidated basis for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 ($ in thousands):
The tables below set forth information with respect to our Occupancy, Net Package ADR, Net Package RevPAR, Net Package Revenue, Net Non-package Revenue, Management Fee Revenue, Total Net Revenue, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin. For a description of these operating metrics and non-U.S. GAAP measures, and reconciliations to the most comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures, see “Key Indicators of Financial and Operating Performance” and “Non-U.S. GAAP Financial Measures” below.
Our comparable portfolio for the year ended December 31, 2020 excludes the following resorts:
•Hilton La Romana All-Inclusive Resort and Hilton Playa del Carmen All-Inclusive Resort, which were under renovation in 2019;
•Jewel Runaway Bay Beach Resort & Waterpark and Jewel Dunn’s River Beach Resort & Spa, which were sold in May 2020; and
•Hyatt Ziva and Hyatt Zilara Cap Cana, a ground-up development opened November 2019.
Total Portfolio
Comparable Portfolio
Total Revenue and Total Net Revenue
Our total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $363.3 million, or 57.1%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Our Total Net Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $344.3 million, or 56.7%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. These decreases are due to the closures of and reduced occupancy at all our resorts during the second, third and fourth quarters in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Total Net Revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020 includes a $2.6 million favorable VAT tax adjustment following OECD guidelines for Transfer Pricing for Multinational Enterprises which considers the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. This adjustment results in a favorable impact to Net Package Revenue and Net Package ADR. Excluding this adjustment, Net Package Revenue would be $219.0 million and Net Package ADR would be $281.48, representing a decrease of 57.7% and an increase of 9.7%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020. See “Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic” above for more information regarding the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our results of operations.
The following table shows a reconciliation of comparable Net Package Revenue, Net Non-package Revenue, Management Fee Revenue and Total Net Revenue to total revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 ($ in thousands):
Direct Expenses
The following table shows a reconciliation of our direct expenses to Net Direct Expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 ($ in thousands):
Our direct expenses include resort expenses, such as food and beverage, salaries and wages, utilities and other ongoing operational expenses. Our Net Direct Expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $201.8 million, or 76.7%, of Total Net Revenue. Our Net Direct Expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 were $346.2 million, or 57.0%, of Total Net Revenue.
Net Direct Expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $144.4 million, or 41.7%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Net Direct Expenses at our comparable properties decreased $127.2 million, or 45.3%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decreases in Net Direct Expenses are due to the closures of and reduced occupancy at all of our resorts during the second, third and fourth quarters in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Direct operating expenses fluctuate based on various factors, including changes in occupancy, labor costs, utilities, repair and maintenance costs and license and property taxes. Management fees and franchise fees, which are computed as a percentage of revenue, increase/decrease as a result of changes in revenues.
Net Direct Expenses consists of the following ($ in thousands):
Total Portfolio
Comparable Portfolio
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Our selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $21.6 million, or 17.2%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. These decreases were primarily driven by the closures of and reduced occupancy at all our resorts during the year ended December 31, 2020 and cost cutting measures taken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. These resort closures and cost cutting measures drove a $21.6 million decrease in advertising and sales commissions and a $2.7 million decrease in credit card commissions. We also experienced a $3.7 million decrease in transaction expenses due to the completion of the SAP implementation at all of our properties and our corporate entities during 2019. These decreases were partially offset by an increase of $4.3 million in insurance expense, an additional $1.7 million in bad debt expense due to the negative effects of COVID-19, and a $1.5 million increase due to repair and maintenance expenses at our properties in the Yucatán Peninsula due to Hurricane Delta and Hurricane Zeta during the fourth quarter of 2020.
Depreciation and Amortization Expense
Our depreciation and amortization expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $9.3 million, or 9.2%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was due primarily to $16.1 million of accelerated depreciation incurred in 2019 related to renovation projects at the Hilton Playa del Carmen All-Inclusive Resort and Hilton La Romana All-Inclusive Resort and a $4.2 million decrease due to the sale of the Jewel Dunn’s River Beach Resort & Spa and Jewel Runaway Bay Beach Resort & Waterpark in May 2020. These decreases were partially offset by the opening of Hyatt Ziva and Hyatt Zilara Cap Cana in the fourth quarter of 2019, which accounted for a $9.9 million increase.
Impairment Loss
Our impairment loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $49.5 million, or 801.7%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was driven by $25.3 million of property and equipment impairment recognized upon classification of the Jewel Dunn’s River Beach Resort & Spa and Jewel Runaway Bay Beach Resort & Waterpark as held for sale in May 2020 and $10.6 million of property and equipment impairment recognized upon classification of the Dreams Puerto Aventuras as held for sale in November 2020. For further details on our property and equipment impairment losses, see Note 5 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. The remaining increase was driven by $17.7 million of goodwill impairment resulting from the decrease in forecasted future cash flows during the first quarter of 2020 from the temporary suspension of operations from COVID-19, as we fully impaired the goodwill of our Jewel Runaway Bay Beach Resort & Waterpark, Jewel Dunn’s River Beach Resort & Spa and Jewel Paradise Cove Beach Resort & Spa reporting units and $2.0 million of goodwill impairment losses recognized at the Hilton Rose Hall Resort & Spa during the fourth quarter of 2020. We partially impaired the goodwill of this reporting unit. For further details on our goodwill impairment losses, see Note 18 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. These increases were partially offset by a decrease of $6.2 million as a result of the full impairment of goodwill at the Panama Jack Resorts Playa del Carmen recognized during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Loss on Sale of Assets
Our loss on sale of assets for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $2.0 million, or 100.0%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due to the sale of the Jewel Dunn’s River Beach Resort & Spa and Jewel Runaway Bay Beach Resort & Waterpark in May 2020, which resulted in a $1.8 million loss for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Gain on Insurance Proceeds
Our gain on insurance proceeds for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $3.0 million, or 100.0%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 as a result of insurance proceeds received for the temporary suspension of operations at all of our resorts in late March 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. We had no gain on insurance proceeds during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Interest Expense
Our interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $37.9 million, or 85.9%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in interest expense was driven primarily by $13.0 million capitalized interest recorded in the year ended December 31, 2019 related to our development projects at Hilton Playa del Carmen All-Inclusive Resort, Hilton La Romana All-Inclusive Resort and Hyatt Ziva and Hyatt Zilara Cap Cana. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we did not record any capitalized interest as none of our resorts were under development. The increase in interest expense was also driven by an $8.9 million increase due to the change in fair value of our interest rate swaps. In March 2019, we adopted hedge accounting and designated our interest rate swaps as cash flow hedges, which required changes in fair value to be recorded through other comprehensive (loss) income. Starting in March 2020, as our cash flow hedges were deemed ineffective due to the decline in interest rates, we recognized all changes in fair value of our interest rate swaps through interest expense. Furthermore, our interest expense increased due to the Additional Senior Secured Credit Facility and Property Loan Agreement executed on June 12, 2020 by $4.9 million and $5.4 million, respectively. For further details, see Note 14 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. Finally, our interest expense increased $1.9 million due to $40.0 million in draws on our Revolving Credit Facility during the first quarter of 2020.
Cash interest paid, excluding the effects of capitalized interest, increased to $70.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, representing a $13.9 million, or 24.7%, increase over the period. Cash interest paid increased due to the Additional Senior Secured Credit Facility and Property Loan Agreement executed on June 12, 2020 by $4.5 million and $5.4 million, respectively, and $1.9 million due to draws on our Revolving Credit Facility. As of December 31, 2020, the total amount outstanding under our Revolving Credit Facility was $84.7 million.
Income Tax Benefit
The income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $11.0 million, a decrease of $6.2 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, during which we reported an income tax benefit of $17.2 million. The decrease in tax benefit was driven primarily by a lower tax benefit of $19.4 million from the rate-favorable jurisdictions, an $11.2 million increase of tax expense associated with other book tax differences including nondeductible interest expense and goodwill impairment expense, a $3.0 million increase in tax expense associated with a newly established basis difference in fixed assets, and a $58.8 million increase of tax expense on valuation allowance. The decrease in tax benefit was partially offset by a $62.9 million increase of tax benefit due to decreased book income, a $14.1 million increase of tax benefit related to our Dominican Republic tax paying entities, a $1.8 million increase of tax benefit related to foreign exchange rates change, and a $6.6 million increase of tax benefit from Dutch tax law change.
Key Indicators of Financial and Operating Performance
We use a variety of financial and other information to monitor the financial and operating performance of our business. Some of this is financial information prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP, while other information, though financial in nature, is not prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. For reconciliations of non-U.S. GAAP financial measures to the most comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure, see “Non-U.S. GAAP Financial Measures.” Our management also uses other information that is not financial in nature, including statistical information and comparative data that are commonly used within the lodging industry to evaluate the financial and operating performance of our portfolio. Our management uses this information to measure the performance of our segments and consolidated portfolio. We use this information for planning and monitoring our business, as well as in determining management and employee compensation. These key indicators include:
•Net Package Revenue
•Net Non-package Revenue
•Owned Net Revenue
•Management Fee Revenue
•Total Net Revenue
•Occupancy
•Net Package ADR
•Net Package RevPAR
•Net Direct Expenses
•EBITDA
•Adjusted EBITDA
•Adjusted EBITDA Margin
•Owned Resort EBITDA
•Owned Resort EBITDA Margin
•Comparable Non-U.S. GAAP Measures
Net Package Revenue, Net Non-package Revenue, Owned Net Revenue, Management Fee Revenue, Total Net Revenue and Net Direct Expenses
“Net Package Revenue” is derived from the sale of all-inclusive packages, which include room accommodations, food and beverage services, kids club and entertainment activities, net of compulsory tips paid to employees. Government mandated compulsory tips in the Dominican Republic are not included in this adjustment, as they are already excluded from revenue. Revenue is recognized, net of discounts and rebates, when the rooms are occupied and/or the relevant services have been rendered. Advance deposits received from guests are deferred and included in trade and other payables until the rooms are occupied and/or the relevant services have been rendered, at which point the revenue is recognized.
“Net Non-package Revenue” represents all other revenues earned from the operations of our resorts, other than Net Package Revenue, net of compulsory tips paid to employees. Government mandated compulsory tips in the Dominican Republic are not included in this adjustment, as they are already excluded from revenue. Net Non-package Revenue includes revenue associated with guests' purchases of upgrades, premium services and amenities, such as premium rooms, dining experiences, wines and spirits and spa
packages, which are not included in the all-inclusive package. Revenue not included in a guest’s all-inclusive package is recognized when the goods are consumed.
“Owned Net Revenue” represents Net Package Revenue and Net Non-Package Revenue. Owned Net Revenue represents a key indicator to assess the overall performance of our business and analyze trends, such as consumer demand, brand preference and competition. In analyzing our Owned Net Revenues, our management differentiates between Net Package Revenue and Net Non-package Revenue. Guests at our resorts purchase packages at stated rates, which include room accommodations, food and beverage services and entertainment activities, in contrast to other lodging business models, which typically only include the room accommodations in the stated rate. The amenities at all-inclusive resorts typically include a variety of buffet and á la carte restaurants, bars, activities, and shows and entertainment throughout the day.
“Management Fee Revenue” is derived from fees earned for managing resorts owned by third-parties. The fees earned are typically composed of a base fee, which is computed as a percentage of resort revenue, and an incentive fee, which is computed as a percentage of resort profitability. Management Fee Revenue was immaterial to our operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, but we expect Management Fee Revenue to be a more relevant indicator to assess the overall performance of our business in the future as we enter into more management contracts.
“Total Net Revenue” represents Net Package Revenue, Net Non-package Revenue and Management Fee Revenue. “Cost Reimbursements” is excluded from Total Net Revenue as it is not considered a key indicator of financial and operating performance. Cost reimbursements is derived from the reimbursement of certain costs incurred by Playa on behalf of resorts managed by Playa and owned by third parties. This revenue is fully offset by reimbursable costs and has no net impact on operating income or net income.
“Net Direct Expenses” represents direct expenses, net of compulsory tips paid to employees.
Occupancy
“Occupancy” represents the total number of rooms sold for a period divided by the total number of rooms available during such period. The total number of rooms available excludes any rooms considered “Out of Order” due to renovation or a temporary problem rendering them inadequate for occupancy for an extended period of time. Occupancy is a useful measure of the utilization of a resort’s total available capacity and can be used to gauge demand at a specific resort or group of properties during a given period. Occupancy levels also enable us to optimize Net Package ADR (as defined below) by increasing or decreasing the stated rate for our all-inclusive packages as demand for a resort increases or decreases.
Net Package ADR
“Net Package ADR” represents total Net Package Revenue for a period divided by the total number of rooms sold during such period. Net Package ADR trends and patterns provide useful information concerning the pricing environment and the nature of the guest base of our portfolio or comparable portfolio, as applicable. Net Package ADR is a commonly used performance measure in the all-inclusive segment of the lodging industry, and is commonly used to assess the stated rates that guests are willing to pay through various distribution channels.
Net Package RevPAR
“Net Package RevPAR” is the product of Net Package ADR and the average daily occupancy percentage. Net Package RevPAR does not reflect the impact of non-package revenue. Although Net Package RevPAR does not include this additional revenue, it generally is considered the key performance statistic in the all-inclusive segment of the lodging industry to identify trend information with respect to net room revenue produced by our portfolio or comparable portfolio, as applicable, and to evaluate operating performance on a consolidated basis or a regional basis, as applicable.
EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA Margin, Owned Resort EBITDA, and Owned Resort EBITDA Margin
We define EBITDA, a non-U.S. GAAP financial measure, as net (loss) income, determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP, for the period presented, before interest expense, income tax and depreciation and amortization expense. We define Adjusted EBITDA, a non-U.S. GAAP financial measure, as EBITDA further adjusted to exclude the following items:
•Other income or expense
•Pre-opening expense
•Share-based compensation
•Other tax expense
•Transaction expenses
•Severance expense
•Gain on property damage insurance proceeds
•Loss on extinguishment of debt
•Other items which may include, but are not limited to the following: management contract termination fees; gains or losses from legal settlements; repairs from hurricanes and tropical storms; impairment losses and Jamaica delayed opening accrual reversals.
We include the non-service cost components of net periodic pension cost recorded within other (expense) income in the Consolidated Statements of Operations in calculating Adjusted EBITDA as they are considered part of our ongoing resort operations.
“Adjusted EBITDA Margin” represents Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of Total Net Revenue.
“Owned Resort EBITDA” represents Adjusted EBITDA before corporate expenses and Management Fee Revenue.
“Owned Resort EBITDA Margin” represents Owned Resort EBITDA as a percentage of Owned Net Revenue.
Non-U.S. GAAP Measures
Net Package Revenue, Net Non-package Revenue, Owned Net Revenue, Total Net Revenue, Net Package ADR, Net Package RevPAR and Net Direct Expenses are all useful to investors as they more accurately reflect our operating results by excluding compulsory tips. These tips have a margin of zero and do not represent our operating results.
We also believe that Adjusted EBITDA is useful to investors for two principal reasons. First, we believe Adjusted EBITDA assists investors in comparing our performance over various reporting periods on a consistent basis by removing from our operating results the impact of items that do not reflect our core operating performance. For example, changes in foreign exchange rates (which are the principal driver of changes in other expense), and expenses related to capital raising, strategic initiatives and other corporate initiatives, such as expansion into new markets (which are the principal drivers of changes in transaction expenses), are not indicative of the operating performance of our resorts. The other adjustments included in our definition of Adjusted EBITDA relate to items that occur infrequently and therefore would obstruct the comparability of our operating results over reporting periods. For example, revenue from insurance policies, other than business interruption insurance policies, is infrequent in nature, and we believe excluding these expense and revenue items permits investors to better evaluate the core operating performance of our resorts over time. We believe Adjusted EBITDA Margin provides our investors a useful measurement of operating profitability for the same reasons we find Adjusted EBITDA useful.
The second principal reason that we believe Adjusted EBITDA is useful to investors is that it is considered a key performance indicator by our board of directors (our “Board”) and management. In addition, the compensation committee of our Board determines the annual variable compensation for certain members of our management based, in part, on consolidated Adjusted EBITDA. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA is useful to investors because it provides investors with information utilized by our Board and management to assess our performance and may (subject to the limitations described below) enable investors to compare the performance of our portfolio to our competitors.
Our non-U.S. GAAP financial measures are not substitutes for revenue, net income or any other measure determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP. There are limitations to the utility of non-U.S. GAAP financial measures, such as Adjusted EBITDA. For example, other companies in our industry may define Adjusted EBITDA differently than we do. As a result, it may be difficult to use Adjusted EBITDA or similarly named non-U.S. GAAP financial measures that other companies publish to compare the performance of those companies to our performance. Because of these limitations, our non-U.S. GAAP financial measures should not be considered as a measure of the income or loss generated by our business or discretionary cash available for investment in our business, and investors should carefully consider our U.S. GAAP results presented.
For a reconciliation of EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Owned Resort EBITDA to net (loss) income as computed under U.S. GAAP, see “Non-U.S. GAAP Financial Measures.”
Comparable Non-U.S. GAAP Measures
We believe that presenting Adjusted EBITDA, Total Net Revenue, Net Package Revenue, Net Non-package Revenue and Net Direct Expenses on a comparable basis is useful to investors because these measures include only the results of resorts owned and in operation for the entirety of the periods presented and thereby eliminate disparities in results due to the acquisition or disposition of resorts or the impact of resort closures or re-openings in connection with redevelopment or renovation projects. As a result, we believe these measures provide more consistent metrics for comparing the performance of our operating resorts. We calculate Comparable Adjusted EBITDA, Comparable Total Net Revenue, Comparable Net Package Revenue and Comparable Net Non-package Revenue as the total amount of each respective measure less amounts attributable to non-comparable resorts, by which we mean resorts that were not owned or in operation during some or all of the relevant reporting period.
Our comparable portfolio for the year ended December 31, 2020 excludes the following resorts: Hilton La Romana All-Inclusive Resort and Hilton Playa del Carmen All-Inclusive Resort, which were under renovation in 2019, Jewel Runaway Bay Beach Resort & Waterpark and Jewel Dunn’s River Beach Resort & Spa, which were sold in May 2020, Capri Resort, which was closed in November 2020 and Hyatt Ziva and Hyatt Zilara Cap Cana, a ground-up development opened November 2019.
A reconciliation of net income as computed under U.S. GAAP to comparable Adjusted EBITDA is presented in “Non-U.S. GAAP Financial Measures,” below. For a reconciliation of Comparable Net Package Revenue, Comparable Net Non-package Revenue, Comparable Management Fee Revenue and Comparable Total Net Revenue to total revenue as computed under U.S. GAAP, see “Results of Operations.”
Segment Results
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
We evaluate our business segment operating performance using segment Owned Net Revenue and segment Owned Resort EBITDA. The following tables summarize segment Owned Net Revenue and segment Owned Resort EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 ($ in thousands):
For a reconciliation of segment Owned Net Revenue and segment Owned Resort EBITDA to total revenue and net income or loss, respectively, each as computed under U.S. GAAP, see Note 19 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Yucatán Peninsula
The following tables set forth information with respect to our Occupancy, Net Package ADR, Net Package RevPAR, Net Package Revenue, Net Non-package Revenue, Owned Net Revenue, Owned Resort EBITDA and Owned Resort EBITDA Margin for our Yucatán Peninsula segment for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 for the total segment portfolio and comparable segment portfolio:
Total Portfolio
Comparable Portfolio
Segment Comparable Owned Net Revenue. Our Comparable Owned Net Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $113.0 million, or 56.2%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease is a result of the closures of and reduced occupancy at all of our resorts during the second, third and fourth quarters in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Comparable Owned Net Revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020 includes a $1.1 million favorable VAT tax adjustment following OECD guidelines for Transfer Pricing for Multinational Enterprises which considers the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. This adjustment resulted in a favorable impact to Comparable Net Package Revenue and Comparable Net Package ADR. Excluding this adjustment, Comparable Net Package Revenue would be $74.6 million, representing a decrease of 57.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Comparable Net Package ADR would be $279.53 and Comparable Net Package RevPar would be $92.68, representing an increase of 8.8% and a decrease of 57.8%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Total segment Owned Net Revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020 includes a $1.8 million favorable VAT tax adjustment. Excluding this adjustment, Net Package Revenue would be $91.8 million, representing a decrease of 55.4% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net Package ADR would be $277.77 and Net Package RevPAR would be $92.15, representing an increase of 8.2% and a decrease of 57.8%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Segment Comparable Owned Resort EBITDA. Our Comparable Owned Resort EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $58.7 million, or 80.5%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease is a result of the closures of and reduced occupancy at all of our resorts during the second, third and fourth quarters in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Pacific Coast
The following tables set forth information with respect to our Occupancy, Net Package ADR, Net Package RevPAR, Net Package Revenue, Net Non-package Revenue, Owned Net Revenue, Owned Resort EBITDA and Owned Resort EBITDA Margin for our Pacific Coast segment for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 for the total segment portfolio:
Segment Owned Net Revenue. Our Owned Net Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $52.2 million, or 61.2%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease is a result of the closures of and reduced occupancy at all of our resorts during the second, third and fourth quarters in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Owned Net Revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020 includes a $0.3 million favorable VAT tax adjustment following OECD guidelines for Transfer Pricing for Multinational Enterprises which considers the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. This adjustment resulted in a favorable impact to Owned Net Revenue and Net Package ADR. Excluding this adjustment, Owned Net Revenue would be $27.2 million, representing a decrease of 63.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net Package ADR would be $311.44 and Net Package RevPAR would be $80.40, representing an increase of 9.3% and a decrease of 63.1%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Segment Owned Resort EBITDA. Our Owned Resort EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $27.3 million, or 86.5%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease is a result of the closures of and reduced occupancy at all of our resorts during the second, third and fourth quarters in response to the COVID-19 pandemic
Dominican Republic
The following tables set forth information with respect to our Occupancy, Net Package ADR, Net Package RevPAR, Net Package Revenue, Net Non-package Revenue, Owned Net Revenue, Owned Resort EBITDA and Owned Resort EBITDA Margin for our Dominican Republic segment for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 for the total segment portfolio and comparable segment portfolio:
Total Portfolio
Comparable Portfolio
Segment Comparable Owned Net Revenue. Our Comparable Owned Net Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $48.5 million, or 72.9%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease is a result of the closures of and reduced occupancy at all of our resorts during the second, third and fourth quarters in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Segment Comparable Owned Resort EBITDA. Our Comparable Owned Resort EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $18.7 million, or 105.0%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease is a result of the closures of and reduced occupancy at all of our resorts during the second, third and fourth quarters in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Jamaica
The following tables set forth information with respect to our Occupancy, Net Package ADR, Net Package RevPAR, Net Package Revenue, Net Non-package Revenue, Owned Net Revenue, Owned Resort EBITDA and Owned Resort EBITDA Margin for our Jamaica segment for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 for the total segment portfolio and comparable segment portfolio and comparable segment portfolio:
Total Portfolio
Comparable Portfolio
Segment Comparable Owned Net Revenue. Our Comparable Owned Net Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $94.9 million, or 62.0%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease is a result of the closures of and reduced occupancy at all of our resorts during the second, third and fourth quarters in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Comparable Owned Net Revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020 includes a $0.5 million favorable VAT tax adjustment following OECD guidelines for Transfer Pricing for Multinational Enterprises which considers the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. This adjustment results in a favorable impact to Comparable Net Package Revenue and Comparable Net Package ADR. Excluding this adjustment, Comparable Net Package Revenue would be $48.1 million, representing a decrease of 62.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Comparable Net Package ADR would be $326.17 and Comparable Net Package RevPar would be $92.02, representing an increase of 3.0% and a decrease of 62.9%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Segment Comparable Owned Resort EBITDA. Our Comparable Owned Resort EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $47.7 million, or 106.1%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease is a result of the closures of and reduced occupancy at all of our resorts during the second, third and fourth quarters in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Non-U.S. GAAP Financial Measures
Reconciliation of Net Income to Adjusted EBITDA (Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization)
The following is a reconciliation of our U.S. GAAP net (loss) income to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 ($ in thousands):
________
(a) Represents changes in foreign exchange and other miscellaneous expenses or income.
(b) Represents expenses incurred in connection with corporate initiatives, such as: debt refinancing costs; other capital raising efforts; the redesign and build-out of our internal controls for the periods in 2019, and strategic initiatives, such as the launch of a new resort or possible expansion into new markets.
(c) Represents expenses incurred for employee terminations.
(d) Relates primarily to a Dominican Republic asset/revenue tax, which is an alternative tax to income tax in the Dominican Republic. We eliminate this expense from Adjusted EBITDA because it is similar to the income tax provision we eliminate from our calculation of EBITDA.
(e) Represents a reversal on an expense accrual recorded in 2014 related to our future stay obligations provided to guests affected by the delayed opening of Hyatt Ziva and Hyatt Zilara Rose Hall. This reversal concluded in the first quarter of 2018.
(f) Represents the property and equipment impairment loss related to the sale of Jewel Dunn’s River Beach Resort & Spa, Jewel Runaway Bay Beach Resort & Waterpark and Dreams Puerto Aventuras, and the goodwill impairment loss on our Jewel Paradise Cove Beach Resort & Spa, Jewel Dunn's River Beach Resort, Jewel Runaway Bay Beach Resort & Waterpark and Hilton Rose Hall Resort & Spa reporting units.
(g) Represents repair and maintenance expenses at our properties in the Yucatán Peninsula due to Hurricane Delta and Hurricane Zeta during the fourth quarter of 2020. These are expenses incurred that are not covered by insurance claims nor offset by insurance proceeds.
(h) Represents the non-service cost components of net periodic pension benefit (cost) recorded within other expense (income) in the Consolidated Statement of Operations. We include these benefits (costs) for the purposes of calculating Adjusted EBITDA as they are considered part of our ongoing resort operations.
(i) Comparable resorts for the year ended December 31, 2020 exclude the following: Hilton La Romana All-Inclusive Resort and Hilton Playa del Carmen All-Inclusive Resort, which were under renovation in 2019, Hyatt Ziva and Hyatt Zilara Cap Cana, a ground-up development opened November 2019, Jewel Dunn’s River Beach Resort & Spa and Jewel Runaway Bay Beach Resort & Waterpark which were sold in May 2020.
Seasonality
The seasonality of the lodging industry and the location of our resorts in Mexico and the Caribbean have historically resulted in the greatest demand for our resorts between mid-December and April of each year, yielding higher occupancy levels and package rates during this period. This seasonality in demand has resulted in predictable fluctuations in revenue, results of operations and liquidity, which are consistently higher during the first quarter of each year than in successive quarters.
The COVID-19 pandemic altered this seasonal trend in 2020. See “Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic” for more information regarding the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our results of operations.
Inflation
Operators of lodging properties, in general, possess the ability to adjust room rates to reflect the effects of inflation. However, competitive pressures, in addition to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, may limit our ability to raise room rates to fully offset inflationary cost increases. See “Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic” above for more information regarding the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our results of operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The suspension of operations of all of our resorts, which account for all of our revenue, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic from late March until July 2020, and the phased re-opening thereafter with historically low occupancy rates, has had a significant adverse effect on our liquidity. Our net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $99.9 million and we expect that our cash flows from operations will be adversely affected for the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and for a transitional period thereafter. As of January 31, 2021, we had approximately $272.0 million of available cash, excluding $24.8 million of restricted cash. See “Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic” above for information regarding the measures we have taken to preserve our available cash and improve our liquidity position.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $146.9 million of available cash, excluding restricted cash, down from $195.5 million as of September 30, 2020. The reduction in available cash was attributable to cash used in operations in October, November and December 2020 of $16.8 million, $14.3 million and $11.0 million, respectively, development capital expenditures of $4.5 million and maintenance capital expenditures of $2.0 million.
Our primary short-term cash needs are paying operating expenses, maintaining our resorts, and servicing our outstanding indebtedness. As of December 31, 2020, we had $175.1 million of scheduled contractual obligations in 2021; however, we fully repaid the $84.7 million outstanding balance under our Revolving Credit Facility in February 2021. We have deferred substantially all development, expansion, renovation, repositioning and rebranding projects until at least 2021, with timing subject to the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and the pace at which our business returns to more normalized levels.
We expect to meet our short-term liquidity requirements generally through existing cash balances, the sale of non-core assets and, if necessary, equity issuances. We sold the Jewel Dunn’s River Beach Resort & Spa and Jewel Runaway Bay Beach Resort & Waterpark for gross consideration of $60.0 million in cash during the second quarter of 2020, and sold the Dreams Puerto Aventuras for gross consideration of $34.5 million in cash in February 2021. On June 12, 2020, we announced that we had raised $224.0 million of additional capital from affiliates of Davidson Kempner Capital Management LP in the form of $204.0 million of additional debt financing and $20.0 million of equity financing at a price of $4.10 per share. Additionally, on January 11, 2021, we issued 28,750,000 ordinary shares with a par value of €0.10 per share in connection with a public equity offering at a price of $5.00 per share. We received $138.0 million in cash consideration, net of underwriting discounts.
Long-term liquidity needs may include property developments, expansions, renovations, repositioning and rebranding projects, potential acquisitions and the repayment of indebtedness. As of December 31, 2020, our total debt obligations were $1,267.3 million (which represents the principal amounts outstanding under our Revolving Credit Facility, Term Loans, Property Loan and financing lease obligations, excluding $5.6 million in issuance discounts and $10.4 million of unamortized debt issuance costs). We expect to meet our long-term liquidity requirements generally through the sources available for short-term needs, net cash provided by operations, as well as equity or debt issuances or proceeds from the potential disposal of assets.
We are continuing to monitor our liquidity and we may pursue additional sources of liquidity as needed. The availability of additional liquidity options will depend on the economic and financial environment, our credit, our historical and projected financial and operating performance and continued compliance with financial covenants. If operating conditions do not improve, whether as a result of the current pandemic or a resurgence thereof or for other reasons, we may not be able to maintain our current liquidity position or access additional sources of liquidity at acceptable terms or at all.
Financing Strategy
We intend to use other financing sources that may be available to us from time to time, including financing from banks, institutional investors or other lenders, such as bridge loans, letters of credit, joint ventures and other arrangements. Future financings may be unsecured or may be secured by mortgages or other interests in our assets. In addition, we may issue publicly or privately placed debt or equity securities. When possible and desirable, we will seek to replace short-term financing with long-term financing.
We may use the proceeds from any financings to refinance existing indebtedness, to finance resort projects or acquisitions or for general working capital or other purposes.
Our indebtedness may be recourse, non-recourse or cross-collateralized and may be fixed rate or variable rate. If the indebtedness is non-recourse, the obligation to repay such indebtedness will generally be limited to the particular resort or resorts pledged to secure such indebtedness. In addition, we may invest in resorts subject to existing loans secured by mortgages or similar liens on the resorts or may refinance resorts acquired on a leveraged basis.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our net cash provided by or used in operating activities, investing activities and financing activities for the periods indicated and should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows and accompanying notes thereto included in the Consolidated Financial Statements ($ in thousands):
Net Cash (Used in) Provided by Operating Activities
Our net cash from operating activities is generated primarily from operating income from our resorts. Our net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $99.9 million, compared to $72.2 million provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019.
•Net loss of $262.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 included significant non-cash income and expenses, including $92.6 million of depreciation and amortization, $55.6 million of impairment losses, $10.2 million of share-based compensation and a $8.2 million loss on the fair value of our interest rate swaps, offset by changes in our assets and liabilities through the normal course of operations.
•Net loss of $4.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 included significant non-cash income and expenses, including $101.9 million of depreciation and amortization, $8.8 million of share-based compensation and a $0.7 million gain on the fair value of our interest rate swaps, offset by changes in our assets and liabilities through the normal course of operations.
Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Investing Activities
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, our net cash provided by investing activities was $29.4 million and used in investing activities was $203.8 million, respectively.
Activity for the year ended December 31, 2020:
•Net proceeds from the sale of assets of $58.3 million;
•Purchases of property and equipment of $36.4 million
◦Includes $18.7 million in payments for prior year non-cash purchases of property and equipment;
•Purchases of intangibles of $1.0 million; and
•Receipt of key money of $8.5 million.
Activity for the year ended December 31, 2019:
•Purchases of property and equipment of $209.0 million which includes $112.1 million in cash used for the development of Hyatt Ziva and Hyatt Zilara Cap Cana and $78.9 million for other development and maintenance capital expenditures;
•Purchases of intangibles of $3.6 million; and
•Receipt of key money of $6.5 million.
Capital Expenditures
We maintain each of our properties in good repair and condition and in conformity with applicable laws and regulations, franchise and license agreements and management agreements. Capital expenditures made to extend the service life or increase the capacity of our assets, including expenditures for the replacement, improvement or expansion of existing capital assets (i.e., maintenance capital expenditures), differ from ongoing repair and maintenance expense items, which do not in our judgment extend the service life or increase the capacity of assets and are charged to expense as incurred. We have approval rights over capital expenditures made by our third-party manager as part of the annual budget process for each property they manage. From time to time, certain of our resorts may be undergoing renovations as a result of our decision to upgrade portions of the resorts, such as guestrooms, public space, meeting space, gyms, spas and/or restaurants, in order to better compete with other resorts in our markets. Due to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our liquidity, we deferred all non-critical capital expenditures in 2020 and anticipate further deferring them until we have further visibility into the longer-term impact of COVID-19 and economic conditions improve.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Our net cash provided by financing activities was $222.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $36.2 million provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Activity for the year ended December 31, 2020:
•Net proceeds from debt issuance of $199.6 million;
•Proceeds from borrowings on our Revolving Credit Facility of $40.0 million;
•Net proceeds from equity issuance of $19.6 million;
•Principal payments on our Term Loan of $10.1 million;
•Issuance costs of debt of $8.7 million;
•Repayments on our Revolving Credit Facility of $15.3 million; and
•Repurchases of ordinary shares of $2.5 million.
Activity for the year ended December 31, 2019:
•Purchases of ordinary shares of $13.7 million;
•Principal payments on our Term Loan of $10.1 million; and
•Proceeds from draws on our Revolving Credit Facility of $60.0 million.
Dividends
We do not plan on paying cash dividends on our ordinary shares in the foreseeable future. No cash dividends were paid for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Share Repurchases
On December 14, 2018, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to $100.0 million of our outstanding ordinary shares as means of returning capital to our shareholders. Repurchases may be made from time to time in the open market, in privately negotiated transactions or by other means (including Rule 10b5-1 trading plans). Depending on market conditions and other factors, these repurchases may be commenced or suspended from time to time without prior notice. During the first quarter of 2020, we purchased 340,109 ordinary shares at an average price of $7.35 per share. We did not repurchase any shares after the first quarter in 2020. We have purchased a total of 2,178,837 shares and there was approximately $83.5 million remaining under our share repurchase authorization as of December 31, 2020. As part of our cash preservation efforts given our liquidity position as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have suspended repurchases of our ordinary shares under our share repurchase program until we have more visibility into the longer-term impact of COVID-19 and economic conditions improve.
Senior Secured Credit Facility, Additional Credit Facility and Property Loan
As of December 31, 2020, our total debt obligations were $1,267.3 million which represents the principal amounts outstanding under our term loan (the “Term Loan”) and revolving credit facility (the “Revolving Credit Facility,” and, collectively with the Term
Loan, the “Senior Secured Credit Facility”), our additional senior secured credit facility (the “Additional Credit Facility”), our property loan agreement (the “Property Loan”) and finance lease obligations, excluding $5.6 million of issuance discounts and $10.4 million of unamortized debt issuance costs.
For discussion of our debt obligations, including recent amendments affecting the maturity dates, interest rates and financial covenants, refer to Note 14 and Note 21 to the Consolidated Financial Statement included within Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
Contractual Obligations
The following table sets forth our obligations and commitments to make future payments under contracts and contingent commitments as of December 31, 2020 ($ in thousands):
________
(1)The commitment fee, which may range from 0.5% to 0.25% depending on certain leverage ratios, was 0.5% on the $0.3 million undrawn balance of our Revolving Credit Facility as of December 31, 2020.
(2)Draws under the Revolving Credit Facility bear interest at one-month LIBOR plus 3.0%. The weighted-average interest rate was 3.15% on the $84.7 million outstanding balance of our Revolving Credit Facility as of December 31, 2020.
(3)Under the Fifth Amendment to our Senior Secured Credit Facility entered into in February 2021, we are obligated to repay $17.0 million of our outstanding balance on our Revolving Credit Facility in April 2022 and the remaining outstanding balance in January 2024; however, we fully repaid the outstanding balance as of December 31, 2020 on February 5, 2021. See Note 21, “Subsequent Events,” to our Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
(4)The interest commitment on our Term Loan is calculated based on LIBOR plus 275 basis points with a 1% LIBOR floor and the estimated net settlement of the related interest rate swaps. Projected interest rates range from 2.87% to 3.75%. Payments were calculated using the average forecasted one-month forward-looking LIBOR curve.
(5)In connection with the terms of the Existing Credit Agreement, we are required to use the net proceeds from the sale of assets to prepay the proportionate balance on our Senior Secured Credit Facility if our net leverage ratio is above 4.00x. We anticipate that we will prepay the net proceeds from the sale of the Jewel Dunn’s River Beach Resort & Spa and Jewel Runaway Bay Beach Resort & Waterpark, less incremental transaction costs and capital expenditures incurred across our portfolio leading up to the prepayment date, in May 2022.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We had no off balance sheet arrangements for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Our financial instruments consist of cash and cash equivalents, restricted cash, trade and other receivables, accounts receivable from related parties, certain prepayments and other assets, trade and other payables, payables to related parties, derivative financial instruments, other liabilities including our pension obligation and debt. See Note 16, “Fair value of financial instruments,” to our Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
Related Party Transactions
See Note 7, “Related party transactions,” to our Consolidated Financial Statements for information on these transactions.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our Consolidated Financial Statements included herein have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts and related disclosures. A number of our significant accounting policies are critical due to the fact that they require us to exercise a higher degree of judgment and estimation based on assumptions that are inherently uncertain. While we believe our estimates, assumptions and judgments are reasonable, they are based upon information presently available. Actual results may differ significantly from these estimates under different assumptions, judgments or conditions, which could have a material effect on our financial position, results of operations and related disclosures.
Business combinations
Assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination are recorded at fair value as of the acquisition date. We use judgment to determine the fair value of the property or business acquired and to determine the amount of value to allocate to each identifiable asset or liability. Changes to the significant assumptions or estimates used to determine the fair value of the acquired assets or liabilities could materially affect the measurement and allocation of fair value as well as the amount, if any, of goodwill recognized in the business combination.
Property and equipment, net
Useful lives of property and equipment, net
Property and equipment are recorded at cost and depreciated using the straight-line method over an estimated useful life of five to 50 years for buildings, seven to 18 years for fixtures and machinery and four to 12 years for furniture and other fixed assets.
We are required to apply judgment in determining the estimated useful lives of our property and equipment for purposes of calculating the amount of depreciation expense to record each year with respect to the assets. Changes to the significant assumptions or estimates of useful lives could materially affect our results of operations.
Impairment of property and equipment, net
We are required to apply judgment in determining whether indicators of impairment are present at one or more of our asset groups, or resorts. The determination as to whether a triggering event exists is based on our knowledge of the industry, historical experience, market and economic conditions, the business climate, our operations and other relevant facts and circumstances as of the assessment date.
Judgment is also required in estimating the fair value of our resorts when quantitatively assessing an asset group for impairment. When determining fair value, we generally rely on discounted cash flow models. Under the discounted cash flow approach, we utilize various assumptions and estimates including projections of revenues and expenses based on estimated long-term growth rates and discount rates based on the weighted-average cost of capital. Our estimates of long-term growth and costs are based on historical data as well as various internal projections and external sources. The weighted-average cost of capital is estimated based on each resort's cost of debt and equity and a selected capital structure.
Changes in the judgments, estimates or assumptions utilized in our qualitative or quantitative property and equipment impairment testing could result in future impairment losses, which could be material to our results of operations.
Income taxes
We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities based on the differences between the financial statement bases and tax bases of our assets and liabilities using currently enacted tax rates for the period in which the deferred tax items are expected to reverse. Significant judgment is required in the calculation of our tax provision and the resulting tax liabilities as well as our ability to realize our deferred tax assets. Our estimates of future taxable income can significantly affect our tax provision in a given period. Significant judgment is required in determining our ability to realize our deferred tax assets related to federal, state and foreign tax attributes within their carryforward periods, as we estimate the amount and timing of the future reversal of deferred tax items in our projections of future taxable income. We establish a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amounts we expect to realize in the future.
We recognize tax liabilities related to uncertain tax positions only when we estimate that it is “more likely than not” that the position will be sustainable based on its technical merits. Assumptions, judgment and the use of estimates are required in determining if the “more likely than not” standard has been met when developing our provision for income taxes. Changes to the assessment of the “more likely than not” standard could materially impact our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Goodwill
Goodwill is reviewed for impairment annually, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate a potential impairment.
We are required to apply judgment in determining whether indicators of impairment are present at one or more of our reporting units. The determination as to whether a triggering event exists is based on our knowledge of the industry, historical experience, market and economic conditions, the business climate and other relevant facts and circumstances as of the assessment date.
Judgment is also required in estimating the fair value of our reporting units. Under the discounted cash flow approach, we utilize various assumptions and estimates including projections of revenues and expenses based on estimated growth rates and discount rates based on the weighted-average cost of capital. Our estimates of growth and costs are based on historical data as well as various internal projections and external sources. The weighted-average cost of capital is estimated based on each reporting unit's cost of debt and equity and a selected capital structure. Under the market multiple or market transaction approach, we rely on assumptions and estimates including comparable asset sales and EBITDA multiples.
Changes in the estimates and assumptions used in our qualitative or quantitative goodwill impairment testing could result in future impairment losses, which could be material to our results of operations.
Derivative financial instruments
We use derivative financial instruments, primarily interest rate swap contracts, to hedge our exposure to interest rate risk. Such derivative financial instruments are initially recorded at fair value on the date on which a derivative contract is entered into and are subsequently remeasured to fair value at period end. Changes in the fair value of a derivative contract that is qualified, designated and highly effective as a cash flow hedge are recorded in total other comprehensive loss and reclassified into interest expense in the same period or periods during which the hedged transaction affects earnings. If a derivative contract does not meet this criteria, then the change in fair value is recognized in earnings. The fair value of our interest rate swaps is the present value of estimated future cash flows, calculated as the difference between the fixed rate paid by us and the variable rate received from our counterparty, multiplied by the notional principal amount.
The fair value of our interest rate swaps at period end is most significantly affected by our estimate of future one-month London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) interest rates through the contractual period to maturity. It is also affected by changes in our own and our counterparty's specific credit risk, which are incorporated into the credit valuation adjustment, as well as the discount rate applied to our estimated future cash flows of the interest rate swaps.
Changes to these significant inputs or estimates could materially affect our recorded interest expense and our results of operations.
Share-based compensation
We have an equity incentive plan that provides for the grant of share options, share appreciation rights, restricted shares, share units, unrestricted shares, dividend equivalent rights, performance shares and other performance-based awards, other equity-based awards, and cash bonus awards. Share-based compensation is measured at the fair value of the award on the date of grant and recognized as an expense on a straight-line basis over the vesting period.
For awards with market conditions, the conditions are incorporated into the fair value measurement and the compensation expense is not adjusted if the conditions are not met. The determination of fair value of the market based awards on the date of grant is subjective and involves significant estimates and assumptions including expected volatility of our shares, expected dividend yield, expected term and assumptions of whether the awards will achieve performance thresholds. Changes to these estimates and assumptions could have a material effect on our results of operations in future periods.
For awards with performance conditions, the related compensation expense is based on the probability of achievement. We recognize expense based on anticipated achievement percentages, which are based on internally-developed projections of future Adjusted EBITDA. Any changes to our projections will affect the amount of share-based compensation expense we recognize in future periods.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See the recent accounting pronouncements in the “Accounting standards” section of Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.