Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read together with the more detailed business information and financial statements and related notes that appear elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. This annual report may contain certain “forward-looking” information within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. This information involves risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause such a difference include, but are not limited to, those discussed in Item 1A - Risk Factors.
Overview
Psychemedics Corporation is the world’s largest provider of hair testing for drugs of abuse, utilizing a patented hair analysis method involving digestion of hair, enzyme immunoassay technology and confirmation by mass spectrometry to analyze human hair to detect abused substances. The Company’s customers include Fortune 500 companies, as well as small to mid-size corporations, schools and governmental entities, located in the United States and internationally. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company generated $21.4 million in revenue, while realizing a gross profit of 23% and incurring a net loss of $3.9 million and diluted net loss per share of $0.70 for the year ended December 31, 2020, versus diluted net income per share of $0.28 for fiscal year 2019, primarily due to the significant contraction in the overall economy as a result of COVID-19 resulting in a significant slow-down in job creation which substantially lowered our sales volume.
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, the selected statements of operations data as a percentage of total revenue:
Revenue by Geographic Region
Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2019 (in thousands)
Revenue: The revenue decline of 43% was primarily due to a 56% decrease in volume, offset by a 13% increase in average revenue per sample. International revenue was down 82% from 2019 to 2020, due to decline in volume from unfavorable market forces in Brazil and the COVID-19 pandemic and domestic revenue was down 29% from 2019 to 2020, also due primarily to the COVID-19 pandemic. See geographic breakdown of revenue above. The Company does not expect any change in the decline it has experienced in its Brazil driver license business as this market continues to be considerably uncertain.
Gross profit: The 70% decrease in gross profit was primarily due to lower sales volume. This lower volume was the primary factor in the gross profit percentage reduction from 44% in 2019 to 23% in 2020. In addition, gross profit was also adversely impacted by a requirement that we retain certain levels of personnel to qualify for PPP Loan forgiveness with no offsetting proportional revenue. The staffing levels we maintained did not support the volume sales noted above.
General and administrative (“G&A”) expenses: G&A expenses decreased 16% from 2019 to 2020, primarily driven by reductions in personnel after the PPP Loan covered period expired, cost-savings initiatives, including salary reductions, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and lower international tax expense. These decreases were partially offset by higher legal expenses related to the exploration of possible strategic alternatives in an effort to enhance shareholder value.
Marketing and selling expenses: Marketing and selling expenses decreased 23% from 2019 to 2020, primarily driven by cost reduction initiatives; specifically, lower personnel related costs (including less travel and meals). In addition, lower recruiting fees and commissions from volume decline contributed to the comparative decrease.
Income Taxes: During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a tax benefit of $2.3 million representing a tax rate of 38% compared to a tax rate of 50% in 2019. For information regarding additional matters related to our taxes, please see Note 5 - "Income Taxes" to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report.
Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2018 (in thousands)
Revenue: Total revenue decline of 12% was primarily due to an 11% decrease in volume and a 1% decrease in average revenue per sample. International revenue was down 23% (due to decline in volume from unfavorable market forces in Brazil) and domestic revenue was down 6% from 2018 to 2019. See geographic breakdown of revenue above.
Gross profit: The decrease in gross profit was primarily due to lower sales volume. This lower volume was the primary factor in the gross margin reduction from 48% in 2018 to 44% in 2019. Gross profit was also adversely impacted by higher foreign taxes on Brazil revenue and additional costs related to the Company’s new leased facility in California.
General and administrative (“G&A”) expenses: G&A expenses included a one-time charge of $0.8 million of taxes related to the repatriation of cash from Brazil to the United States. Without this transaction, G&A expenses would have been down 1%.
Marketing and selling expenses: The decrease in marketing and selling expenses was primarily a result of lower personnel related costs in 2019, specifically lower recruiting fees and commissions.
Income Taxes: During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded a tax provision of $1.5 million representing a tax rate of 50% compared to a tax rate of 40% in 2018. Approximately 10% of the tax provision in 2019 was attributed to domestic taxes, with the other 90% attributed to Brazil. Brazil income taxes are based on sales, not pre-tax income which can cause significant changes to the effective tax rate. For information regarding additional matters related to our taxes, please see Note 5 - "Income Taxes" to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company had $2.8 million and $7.3 million of cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Company’s operating activities used net cash of $4.1 million in 2020, and generated net cash of $4.3 million in 2019 and $7.9 million in 2018. Investing activities used net cash of $0.9 million in 2020, generated net cash of $2.1 million in 2019 and used net cash of $5.4 million in 2018. Financing activities provided net cash of $0.5 million in 2020 and used $3.0 million in 2019 and $5.6 million in 2018.
Operating cash used in operations of $4.1 million in 2020 primarily reflected the net loss of $3.9 million adjusted for depreciation and amortization of $2.7 million, stock compensation expense of $0.6 million, and a decrease in net deferred tax liabilities of $0.3 million. Cash used in operations was also affected by the following changes in assets and liabilities: a decrease in accounts receivable of $0.4 million, a decrease in accrued expenses of $1.8 million, and a decrease in prepaid expenses (and other current assets) of $1.6 million. The $8.4 million change in operating cash from a positive $4.3 million in 2019 to a negative $4.1 million in 2020 was primarily driven by lower net income in 2020.
Operating cash flow of $4.3 million in 2019 primarily reflected net income of $1.5 million adjusted for depreciation and amortization of $2.9 million, stock compensation expense of $0.8 million, and a decrease in net deferred tax liabilities of $0.4 million. Operating cash flow was affected by the following changes in assets and liabilities: a decrease in accounts receivable of $1.0 million, an increase in accounts payable of $0.5 million, an increase in accrued expenses of $0.7 million, and an increase in prepaid expenses (and other current assets) of $0.4 million. The operating cash flow in 2019 was $3.6 million less than in 2018 primarily due to lower net income.
Operating cash flow of $7.9 million in 2018 primarily reflected net income of $4.6 million adjusted for depreciation and amortization of $3.1 million, stock compensation expense of $0.6 million, and a decrease in net deferred tax liabilities of $0.3 million. Operating cash flow was affected by the following changes in assets and liabilities: an increase in accounts receivable of $0.4 million, an increase in accounts payable of $0.1 million, an increase in accrued expenses of $0.1 million, and a decrease in prepaid expenses (and other current assets) of $0.1 million. The operating cash flow in 2018 was $1.2 million less than in 2018.
Cash used in investing activities principally reflected the purchase of capital expenditures. Capital expenditures were $1.0 million, $1.7 million and $1.2 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. In 2020, the expenditures related principally to leasehold improvements, laboratory equipment and computer software. Marketable securities transactions consisted of the sale of one certificate of deposit (“CD”) for $3.8 million in 2019 and the purchase of the same CD for $4.0 million in 2018.
Financing cash flow in 2020 principally reflected the proceeds from our PPP Loan (described further below) of approximately $2.2 million, partially offset by repayments under the Equipment Loan Arrangement. During 2020, 2019 and 2018, the Company did not repurchase any shares of common stock for treasury. The Company has authorized 750,000 shares for repurchase since June of 1998, of which 250,000 shares of common stock were authorized in March of 2008 for repurchase. Since 1998, a total of 550,684 shares have been repurchased. The Company also distributed cash dividends to its shareholders of $1.0 million in 2020, $4.0 million in 2019 and $3.8 million in 2018.
As of March 31, 2020, the Company had paid dividends over the prior ninety-four quarters. Following the first quarter of 2020, our Board of Directors suspended our quarterly dividend payment as we prioritized our liquidity and balance sheet. The Company’s intention is to reinstate the payment of dividends to the extent funds are available and not required for operating purposes or capital requirements. There can be no assurance that in the future the Company will reinstate payment of a quarterly dividend payment, or the amount of any such dividend.
At December 31, 2020, the Company’s principal sources of liquidity included approximately $2.8 million of cash on hand. Management currently believes that such funds, together with future operating profits, should be adequate to fund anticipated working capital requirements, including debt obligations, and capital expenditures for at least the next 12 months. Depending upon the Company’s results of operations, its future capital needs and available marketing opportunities, the Company may use various financing sources to raise additional funds. Such sources could include but are not limited to, issuance of common stock or debt financing, lines of credit, or equipment leasing, although there is no assurance that such financings will be available to the Company on terms it deems acceptable, if at all.
On May 4, 2020, the Company borrowed approximately $2.2 million from Bank of America, N.A., pursuant to the PPP, established under the CARES Act. The PPP Loan is subject to forgiveness under the PPP upon the Company’s request to the extent that the proceeds are used to pay expenses permitted by the PPP.
On November 6, 2020, the Company applied for forgiveness of the entire amount due on the loan. The application and recommendation from Bank of America, N.A., has been provided to the SBA. Notwithstanding our application for loan forgiveness, we are unable to predict the actual amount of loan forgiveness the SBA will approve. As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $2.2 million outstanding under the PPP Loan and we were in full compliance with all requirements with respect to the PPP Loan. See Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Purchase Commitment
Operating leases consist of rent obligations for the company’s facilities and corporate office. The Company has no significant contractual obligation for supply agreements as of December 31, 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies
The Company’s significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report. Management believes the most critical accounting policies are as follows:
Revenue Recognition
The Company is in the business of performing drug testing services and reporting the results thereof. The Company’s services are primarily drug and alcohol testing for its customers for an agreed-upon fee per unit tested. The revenues are recognized when the drug test is performed and reported to the customer.
The Company records revenue for the shipping of samples from the customer or independent hair collection facility to the laboratory for customers that choose to use the Company’s shipping account. The Company also records revenue for the collection of the hair sample for customers that choose to have the Company manage this process at the same time the sample test is completed and results reported to the customer. The associated costs incurred in connection with these services is recorded as costs of revenue. The Company records revenue for these services on a gross basis as it has determined it is the principal under these arrangements.
The Company also provides expert testimony, when and if necessary, to support the results of the tests, which is generally billed separately and recognized as the services are provided.
Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates, including bad debts, long-lived asset lives, income tax valuation, stock based compensation and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Capitalized Development Costs
We capitalize costs related to significant software projects developed or obtained for internal use in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting standards. Costs incurred during the preliminary project work stage or conceptual stage, such as determining the performance requirements, system requirements and data conversion, are expensed as incurred. Costs incurred in the application development phase, such as coding, testing for new software and upgrades that result in additional functionality, are capitalized and are amortized using the straight-line method over the useful life of the software for 5 years. Costs incurred during the post-implementation/operation stage, including training costs and maintenance costs, are expensed as incurred. We capitalized internally developed software costs of approximately $213 thousand, $234 thousand and $299 thousand during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The software development is for primarily for two projects. Determining whether particular costs incurred are more properly attributable to the preliminary or conceptual stage, and thus expensed, or to the application development phase, and thus capitalized and amortized, depends on subjective judgments about the nature of the development work, and our judgments in this regard may differ from those made by other companies. General and administrative costs related to developing or obtaining such software are expensed as incurred.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
The allowance for doubtful accounts is based on management’s assessment of the ability to collect amounts owed to it by its customers. Management reviews its accounts receivable aging for doubtful accounts and uses a methodology based on calculating the allowance using a combination of factors including the age of the receivable along with management’s judgment to identify accounts that may not be collectible. The Company routinely assesses the financial strength of its customers and, as a consequence, believes that its accounts receivable credit risk exposure is limited. The Company maintains an allowance for potential credit losses but historically has not experienced any significant losses related to individual customers or groups of customers in any particular industry or geographic area. Bad debt expense has been within management’s expectations.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes using the liability method, which requires the Company to recognize a current tax liability or asset for current taxes payable or refundable and a net deferred tax liability for the estimated future tax effects of temporary differences between the financial statement and tax reporting bases of assets and liabilities to the extent that they are realizable. Deferred tax expense (benefit) results from the net change in deferred tax assets and liabilities during the year. A deferred tax valuation allowance is required if it is more likely than not that all or a portion of the recorded deferred tax assets will not be realized.
The Company operates within multiple taxing jurisdictions and could be subject to audit in these jurisdictions. These audits may involve complex issues, which may require an extended period of time to resolve. The Company has provided for its estimated taxes payable in the accompanying financial statements. The Company did not have any interest or penalties accrued as of December 31, 2020 or 2019. The Company does not expect the unrecognized tax benefits to change significantly over the next twelve months.
The Company’s distribution of services in Brazil subjects the Company to Brazil income taxes. These taxes are included in the total provision for income taxes reflected in the financial statements. For information regarding additional matters related to our taxes, please see Note 5 - "Income Taxes" to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report.
The above listing is not intended to be a comprehensive list of all of the Company’s accounting policies. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, with no need for management’s judgment in their application. There are also areas in which management’s judgment in selecting any available alternative would not produce a materially different result.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report for further detail on recent accounting pronouncements.