Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on November 17, 2020 as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We have not selected any specific business combination target and we have not, nor has anyone on our behalf, engaged in any substantive discussions directly or indirectly, with any business combination target with respect to an initial business combination with us. We may pursue an initial business combination target in any industry or geographic region. We intend to focus our search for an initial business combination on companies within the medical technology sector. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering and the private placement of the private placement warrants, the proceeds of the sale of our shares in connection with our initial business combination (pursuant to forward purchase agreements or backstop agreements we may enter into following the consummation of our initial public offering or otherwise), shares issued to the owners of the target, debt issued to bank or other lenders or the owners of the target, or a combination of the foregoing.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities since inception have been organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for our initial public offering. Following our initial public offering, we will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial business combination. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents after our initial public offering. There has been no significant change in our financial or trading position and no material adverse change has occurred since the date of our audited financial statements. After our initial public offering, we expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses. We expect our expenses to increase substantially after the closing of our initial public offering.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $3,588 which consists of formation costs.
Going Concern, Liquidity and Capital Resources
On February 11, 2021, we consummated the IPO of 27,600,000 Units, at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $276,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the sale of 5,213,333 private placement warrants to our sponsor at a price of $1.50 per warrant, generating gross proceeds of $7,820,000.
Following the IPO and the sale of the private placement warrants, a total of $276,000,000 was placed in the trust account. We incurred $15,589,762 in transaction costs, including $5,520,000 of underwriting fees, $9,660,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $409,762 of other offering costs.
On February 15, 2021, we issued an unsecured convertible promissory note to our sponsor, pursuant to which we may borrow up to $1,500,000 from our sponsor for ongoing expenses reasonably related to our business and the consummation of our initial business combination. As of March 19, 2021, we had incurred $100,000 of indebtedness pursuant to this unsecured convertible promissory note. All unpaid principal under the convertible note will be due and payable in full on the earlier of (i) February 11, 2023 and (ii) the effective date of our initial business combination. Our sponsor will have the option, at any time on or prior to such maturity date, to convert any amounts outstanding under the convertible note into warrants to purchase shares of our Class A common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, at a conversion price of $1.50 per warrant, with each warrant entitling the holder to purchase one share of our Class A common stock at a price of $11.50 per share, subject to the same adjustments applicable to the private placement warrants sold concurrently with our initial public offering.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less taxes payable) to complete our initial Business Combination. We may withdraw interest from the trust account to pay franchise and income taxes. To the extent that our equity or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
We have engaged underwriters as advisors in connection with our business combination to assist us in holding meetings with our stockholders to discuss the potential business combination and the target business’s attributes, introduce us to potential investors that are interested in purchasing our securities in connection with the potential business combination, assist us in obtaining stockholder approval for the business combination and assist us with our press releases and public filings in connection with the business combination. We will pay the Marketing Fee for such services upon the consummation of our initial business combination in an amount equal to, in the aggregate, 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the IPO, including any proceeds from the full or partial exercise of the over-allotment option.
We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business prior to our initial Business Combination. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay our sponsor a monthly fee of $25,000 for office space, and administrative and support services, provided to the Company. We began incurring these fees on November 17, 2020 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of a Business Combination and the Company’s liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per unit, or $9,660,000 in the aggregate, which will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Shares of Class A Common Stock Subject to Redemption
We account for shares of our Class A common stock subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable shares of common stock (including shares of common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, shares of common stock are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our shares of Class A common stock feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, shares of our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our consolidated balance sheets.
Net Income (Loss) per Common Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Net income per common share, basic and diluted for shares of our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the Trust Account, net of applicable taxes, if any, by the weighted average number of shares of our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption outstanding for the period. Net loss per common share, basic and diluted for non-redeemable shares of Class B common stock is calculated by dividing net income less income attributable to shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption, by the weighted average number of shares of non-redeemable Class B common stock outstanding for the period presented.
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.