Item 7: Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Certain information in this report may include “forward-looking statements” as defined by federal securities law. Words such as “may,” “could,” “should,” “would,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “plan,” “project,” “is confident that,” and similar expressions are intended to identify these forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements involve risk and uncertainty and a variety of factors could cause our actual results and experience to differ materially from the anticipated results or other expectations expressed in these forward-looking statements. We do not have a policy of updating or revising forward-looking statements except as otherwise required by law, and silence by management over time should not be construed to mean that actual events are occurring as estimated in such forward-looking statements.
Our ability to predict results or the actual effect of future plans or strategies is inherently uncertain. Factors that could have a material adverse effect on our operations and the operations of our subsidiary, Prime Meridian Bank, include, but are not limited to, changes in the following:
●
local, regional, and national economic and business conditions;
● banking laws, compliance, and the regulatory environment;
● unanticipated changes in the U.S. and global securities markets, public debt markets, and other capital markets;
● monetary and fiscal policies of the U.S. Government;
● litigation, tax, and other regulatory matters;
● demand for banking services, both loan and deposit products in our market area;
● quality and composition of our loan or investment portfolios;
● risks inherent in making loans such as repayment risk and fluctuating collateral values;
● competition;
● attraction and retention of key personnel, including our management team and directors;
● technology, product delivery channels, and end user demands and acceptance of new products;
● fraud committed by our clients or persons doing business with our clients;
● consumer spending, borrowing and savings habits;
● any failure or breach of our operational systems, information systems or infrastructure, or those of our third-party vendors and other service providers, including cyber-attacks;
● application and interpretation of accounting principles and guidelines;
● natural disasters, public unrest, adverse weather, public health and other conditions impacting our or our clients’ operations;
● and other economic, competitive, governmental, regulatory, or technological factors affecting us.
General
The following discussion and analysis present our financial condition and results of operations on a consolidated basis. However, because we conduct all of our material business operations through the Bank, the discussion and analysis relate to activities primarily conducted at the subsidiary level. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
As a one-bank holding company, we generate most of our revenue from interest on loans and investments. Our primary source of funding for our loans is deposits. Our largest expenses are interest on those deposits, salaries plus related employee benefits, and occupancy and equipment. We measure our performance through our net interest margin, return on average assets, return on average equity, and ratio of nonperforming assets to total assets, while maintaining appropriate regulatory leverage and risk-based capital ratios.
Application of Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”) and with prevailing practices within the banking industry. Application of these principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes; therefore, our financial condition and results of operations are sensitive to accounting measurements and estimates of matters that are inherently uncertain. When applying accounting policies in areas that are subjective in nature, the Bank must use its best judgment to arrive at the carrying value of certain assets. The most critical accounting policy applied is the valuation of our subsidiary bank's loan portfolio. A variety of estimates impact the carrying value of the loan portfolio including the calculation of the allowance for loan losses, the valuation of underlying collateral, the timing of loan charge-offs, and the amount and amortization of loan fees and deferred origination costs.
We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under current circumstances. These assumptions form the basis for our judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily available from independent, objective sources. We evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis. Use of alternative assumptions may have resulted in significantly different estimates and actual results may differ from these estimates.
We have identified the following accounting policy and estimate as critical. In order to understand our financial condition and results of operations, it is important to comprehend how these assumptions apply to our consolidated financial statements.
Allowance for Loan Losses. Our allowance for loan losses (“ALLL”) is established through a provision for loan losses charged to earnings as specific loan losses are identified by management and as inherent loan losses are determined to exist. Loan losses are charged against the ALLL when management believes the uncollectability of a loan balance is confirmed. Subsequent recoveries, if any, are credited to the ALLL.
Our ALLL is evaluated for adequacy by management on a monthly basis and is based upon management’s periodic review of the collectability of the loan portfolio in light of historical experience in the industry, the nature and volume of the loan portfolio, adverse situations that may affect the borrower’s ability to repay, estimated value of any underlying collateral, prevailing economic conditions and industry standards. This evaluation is inherently subjective as it requires estimates that are susceptible to significant revision as more information becomes available.
Specific loan losses are identified and evaluated in accordance with ASC 310-10 - “Receivables.” A loan is considered impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that we will be unable to collect the scheduled payments of principal or interest when due according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement. Factors considered by management in determining impairment status include payment status and the probability of collecting scheduled principal and interest payments when due. Loans that experience insignificant payment delays and payment shortfalls generally are not considered as impaired. We look at the significance of payment delays and payment shortfalls on a case-by-case basis, taking into consideration all of the circumstances surrounding the loan and the borrower, including the length of the delay, the reasons for the delay, the borrower’s prior payment record, and the amount of the shortfall in relation to the principal and interest owed.
When a loan is considered impaired, the amount of the impairment is measured on a loan-by-loan basis by comparing the recorded investment in the loan to any of the following measurements: the present value of expected future cash flows discounted at the loan’s effective interest rate, the loan’s obtainable market price, or the fair value of the collateral if the loan is collateral dependent. If the recorded investment in the loan is higher than the calculated impairment basis, the difference is maintained as a specific loan loss allocation, or it is charged off if the amount is determined to be uncollectible. As the Bank grows, management may elect to collectively evaluate large groups of smaller balance homogeneous loans for impairment, instead of on a loan-by-loan basis.
Inherent loan losses are evaluated in accordance with ASC 450-20 - “Contingencies.” Management currently uses three years of historical loan loss data; however, because of limited loss experience we also take into account the following qualitative factors: (i) changes in lending policies and procedures, risk selection and underwriting standards; (ii) changes in national, regional and local economic conditions that affect the collectability of the loan portfolio; (iii) changes in the experience, ability, and depth of lending management and other relevant staff; (iv) changes in the volume and severity of past due loans, nonaccrual loans or loans classified “Special Mention,” “Substandard,” “Doubtful” or “Loss;” (v) the quality of loan review and Board of Directors oversight; (vi) changes in the nature and volume of the loan portfolio and terms of loans; (vii) the existence and effect of any concentrations of credit and changes in the level of such concentrations; and (viii) the effect of other external factors, trends or uncertainties that could affect management’s estimate of probable losses, such as competition and industry conditions. As evidence of inherent loan loss increases, the appropriate qualitative risk factors may be increased to support any additional risk in the portfolio.
Recent Interest-Rate Trends
Like many other financial institutions, our results of operations are dependent on net interest income, which is the difference between interest received on interest-earning assets, such as loans and securities, and interest paid on interest-bearing liabilities, namely deposits and borrowings. We are unable to predict changes in market interest rates, which are affected by many factors beyond our control including inflation, economic conditions, unemployment, money supply, domestic and international events, and changes in the United States and other financial markets. Our net interest income may be reduced if (i) more interest-earning assets than interest-earning liabilities reprice or mature during a time when interest rates are declining, or (ii) more interest-bearing liabilities than interest-earning assets reprice or mature during a time when interest rates are rising. We measure the potential adverse impacts of changing interest rates by shocking average interest rates up or down 100 to 400 basis points and calculating the potential impacts on our net interest income, liquidity, and economic value of equity. We utilize the results of these simulations to determine whether to increase or decrease our fixed rate loan portfolio, to adjust our investment in assets such as bonds, or to take other action in order to maintain or improve our net interest margin given the trending or expected interest rate changes.
As of December 31, 2020, 62.9% of our loan portfolio consisted of adjustable-rate loans, meaning these loans will adjust with changes in interest rates and pose less interest rate risk in a rising interest rate environment. Of these loans, $68.1 million, or 14.1% have interest rate ceilings in place which protects the borrower from rising interest rates. The majority of our loans with ceilings in place are residential mortgage loans. Also, as of December 31, 2020, 42.7% of the total loan portfolio was scheduled to mature in five years or less, which helps mitigate the risks of a fixed-rate loan portfolio in a rising interest rate environment. If interest rates increase, however, borrowers may be less inclined to seek new loans. In addition, higher interest rates could adversely affect an adjustable rate borrower’s ability to continue servicing debt. On the other hand, loans totaling $262.9 million, or approximately 54.3% of our total loan portfolio, have interest rate floors which will help protect our net interest margin in a decreasing rate environment.
Our ability to originate new loans may be further impeded by increased competition for high quality borrowers which leads to downward pricing pressure on loans, a general consumer and business bias towards reducing debt levels, and the lingering effects of the economic recession on the financial condition of both consumers and businesses, making the underwriting of new loans more challenging.
Interest Rate Sensitivity
A principal objective of the Bank’s asset liability management strategy is to manage its exposure to changes in interest rates within Board approved policy limits by matching the maturity and re-pricing characteristics of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. This strategy is overseen through the direction of the Bank’s Asset and Liability Committee (“ALCO”), which establishes policies and monitors results to control interest rate sensitivity.
We model our current interest rate exposure in various rate scenarios, review our model assumptions, and then stress test those assumptions. Based on the results, we then formulate strategies regarding asset generation, funding sources and their pricing parameters, as well as evaluate off-balance sheet commitments in order to maintain interest rate risk within Board approved target limits. We utilize industry recognized Asset Liability models driven by third-party providers to analyze the Bank’s interest rate sensitivity. From these externally generated reports, ALCO can estimate both the effect on Net Interest Income and the effect on Economic Value of Equity (“EVE”) in various interest rate scenarios.
As a part of the Bank’s Interest Rate Risk Management Policy, our ALCO examines the extent to which the Bank’s assets and liabilities are “interest rate sensitive” and monitors its interest rate sensitivity. An asset or liability is considered to be interest rate sensitive, for income purposes, if its projected income/expense amount will change if interest rates change. Likewise, it is considered interest rate sensitive for EVE if its economic value will change if interest rates change.
In an asset sensitive portfolio, the Bank’s net income and EVE will increase in a rising rate environment as assets will re-price faster than liabilities. Conversely, if the Bank is liability sensitive and the liabilities re-price faster than the assets, net income and EVE will fall in a rising rate environment.
In modeling the Bank’s interest rate exposure, the Bank makes a number of important assumptions about the behavior of assets and liabilities. The critical assumptions fall into three main categories, Nonmaturity Deposit Assumptions, Loan Prepayment Assumptions, and Options. Currently, the most significant assumptions which affect the Bank’s interest rate sensitivity are the Nonmaturity Deposit Assumptions, followed by the Loan Prepayment Assumptions.
Nonmaturity Deposit Assumptions
Nonmaturity Deposit Betas - The Beta of a nonmaturity deposit is a measure of the repricing behavior of the deposit. Based on the Bank’s own historical experience, the Bank determines how much the price of a deposit will change as a percentage of the change in the market rates. For example, a 50% Beta means that the deposit price will change by 50% of the market rate change.
Nonmaturity Decay - We determine how “sticky” deposits are by assigning a “maturity” to the deposits, e.g., 120 months. These assumptions are based on our own experience by looking at both the age of the current deposit base and the historic monthly account closings experience. The lower the Beta (more fixed rate nature) and the higher the Decay (longer duration), the less interest rate sensitive a bank becomes.
Loan Prepayment Assumptions
We also determine how likely each asset or liability is to prepay or be withdrawn prior to its contracted maturity date. As refinancing rates become increasingly attractive, prepayment speeds increase as clients are able to prepay loans and refinance at lower rates. Conversely, prepayments decrease in a rising rate environment; however, time deposits will display the opposite behavior if clients are able to withdraw their CDs without significant penalty and reinvest at a higher rate. In a decreasing rate environment, clients generally hold their time deposits to maturity.
Loan prepayment speed changes are not linear; they will continue to increase as rates fall but will plateau as rates rise. Therefore, the Bank’s asset prices will not change linearly with market rate changes. The higher the prepayment speed of assets or withdrawal speed of term liabilities, the more liability sensitive the Bank becomes. The Bank monitors its prepayments and withdrawals and updates the assumptions used in the risk models on a monthly basis.
In addition, certain balance sheet instruments such as interest-rate floors or caps on loans, be they periodic or lifetime, and other optionality on investments, limit or increase income and create value changes of the instrument as interest rates change.
Option Risk
We monitor our exposure to option-type effects and manage our option risk. The amount of option risk, aside from prepayment risk, is minimal.
We monitor our exposure on a monthly basis under thirteen different rate scenarios, including rates rising or declining by up to 4% and the current yield curve flattening or steepening. We compare these results to the Board’s established limits to determine if a limit has been compromised. If a limit is exceeded, we have policies and strategies in place to reduce the exposure back to acceptable levels. In addition, we also stress test all of our assumptions under these rate scenarios to determine at what point the Board approved target limits would be compromised, even if they are not currently compromised using the historically determined assumptions. If the limits are in danger of being compromised with relatively small assumption changes, we would adjust our strategy to reduce exposure. All of these assumptions, reports, stress tests, and strategies are reviewed by ALCO at least quarterly and all limit exceptions are reported to the Board.
Our exposure to credit loss in the event of nonperformance by the other party to the financial instrument for commitments to extend credit, unused lines of credit, guaranteed accounts, and standby letters of credit is represented by the contractual amount of those instruments.
Our strategy is to maintain an interest rate risk position within the tolerance limits set by the Board of Directors in order to protect our net interest margin under extreme market fluctuations. Principal among our asset liability management strategies has been the emphasis on reducing exposure during periods of fluctuating interest rates. We believe that the type and amount of our interest rate sensitive liabilities should reduce the potential impact that a rise in interest rates might have on our net interest income.
We look to maintain a core deposit base by providing quality services to our clients, without significantly increasing our cost of funds or operating expenses. We anticipate that these accounts will continue to comprise a significant portion of the Bank’s total deposit base. We also maintain a portfolio of liquid assets in order to reduce overall exposure to changes in market interest rates. Likewise, we maintain a “floor,” or minimum rate, on certain of our floating or published base rate loans. These floors allow us to continue to earn a higher rate when the floating rate falls below the established floor rate. All interest rate ceilings and floors are clearly and closely related to the loan agreement; therefore, they are not bifurcated and valued separately.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Net interest income constitutes the principal source of income for the Bank and results from the excess of interest income on interest-earning assets over interest expense on interest-bearing liabilities. The principal interest-earning assets are investment securities and loans. Interest-bearing liabilities primarily consist of time deposits, interest-bearing checking accounts, savings deposits, money-market accounts, and other borrowings. Funds attracted by these interest-bearing liabilities are invested in interest-earning assets. Accordingly, net interest income depends upon the volume of average interest-earning assets and average interest-bearing liabilities and the interest rates earned or paid on these assets and liabilities.
The table below sets forth information regarding: (i) the total dollar amount of interest and dividend income of the Bank from interest-earning assets and the resultant average yields; (ii) the total dollar amount of interest expense on interest-bearing liabilities and the resultant average costs; (iii) net interest income; (iv) interest rate spread; (v) net interest margin; and (vi) weighted-average yields and rates. Yields and costs were derived by dividing annualized income or expense by the average balance of assets or liabilities. The yields and costs depicted in the table include the amortization of fees, which are considered to constitute adjustments to yields (dollars in thousands). As shown in the table below, year over year, the yield on the average balance of interest-earning assets decreased 60 basis points, while the average balance of interest-earning assets increased $139.5 million, or 32.2% and the average balance of total interest-bearing liabilities increased 27.7%, or $85.3 million. Despite a lower cost of funds, this resulted in a 30-basis point decrease in the Company's net interest margin.
(1) Includes nonaccrual loans
(2) Other interest-earning assets include federal funds sold, interest-bearing deposits and FHLB stock.
(3) Net interest margin is net interest income divided by total average interest-earning assets.
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Compared to 2019, the $916,000, or 25.9%, increase in earnings in 2020 is primarily attributed to over 20% growth in both net interest income and noninterest income, partially offset by increases in the provision for loan losses, noninterest expense and income tax expense. The $1.7 million increase in the provision for loan losses is due primarily to $1.2 million in net charge-off activity and $559,000 in cumulative unallocated reserves to provide for potential credit deterioration associated with the COVID-19 global pandemic. Year-over-year loan growth (excluding PPP loans) is approximately $27 million higher in 2020 than 2019, also contributing to the higher provision. A lower effective state income tax rate in 2020 also benefited net earnings for that period. In response to federal tax reform, Florida's corporate income tax rate was reduced to 4.5% for the years 2019-2021 and currently is set to revert back to 5.5% on January 1, 2022.
Net Interest Income
Our operating results depend primarily on our net interest income, which is the difference between interest and dividend income on interest-earning assets such as loans and investments, and interest expense on interest-bearing liabilities such as deposits and borrowings. Net interest income was $18.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $15.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Interest Income.
Despite lower loan yields, total interest income was favorably impacted year-over-year by strong growth in non-PPP loan originations and $1.7 million in total interest income and fees related to PPP loans. The $1.1 million decrease in other interest income mostly reflects lower yields.
Interest Expense.
The 15.8% decrease in the Company’s interest expense year over year was driven by strategic rate reductions, beginning in the fourth quarter of 2019 following three interest rate cuts by the Federal Reserve in the second half of 2019. This effort continued in the first half of 2020 and was accelerated after the Federal Reserve cut its benchmark interest rate twice in the month of March, both in emergency meetings scheduled in response to the growing global COVID-19 pandemic. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the average balance of interest-bearing deposits increased $77.4 million, or 25.2%, while the average rates paid on deposits decreased 39 basis points.
Provision for Loan Losses. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the provision for loan losses increased $1.7 million, or 152.0% in comparison to the year ended December 31, 2019. The Company recognized $1.2 million in net charge-offs in 2020 (unrelated to the COVID-19 pandemic) and annual loan growth (excluding PPP loans) is approximately $27 million higher in 2020 than 2019. The charge-offs, in conjunction with an increase in general and specific reserves and a $559,000 addition to unallocated reserves in anticipation of possible COVID-19 related credit deterioration, resulted in higher provision expense in 2020.
Noninterest Income
Year-over-year growth in debit card/ATM revenue, mortgage banking revenue, and other income more than offset the $75,000 decline in services charges and fees on deposit accounts. The decrease in service charges and fees is primarily explained by lower overdraft activity in 2020.
Net mortgage banking revenue increased $188,000, or 28.2%, as a result of favorable market rates leading to an influx of property sales and refinancing activity. Net revenue from debit card/ATM increased 39.7% in 2020 and now accounts for roughly 18.7% of total noninterest income. The increase in net debit card/ATM revenue reflects higher transaction volume and is expected to be a steady source of income in the coming year. In addition, the $136,000 increase in other income resulted from the Company's addition of an interest rate hedging program in 2020 which allows commercial loan clients to swap from variable to fixed interest rates.
Noninterest Expense
The $691,000 increase in salaries and employee benefits expense resulted from budgeted salary increases and higher incentive pay related to a higher dollar payout in 2020 and a PPP related bonus paid to employees who participated in the process of originating and funding PPP loans.
Marketing expenses decreased 27.2% year-over-year due to restrictions on group gatherings and business travel during the global pandemic crisis. FDIC assessment expense increased year over year due mostly to the $36,000 credit that was received in 2019 and a larger assessment base in 2020. The $133,000 increase in software maintenance, amortization and other reflects a growing company and its expanded information technology needs.
The Company's operating efficiency ratio was improved by the combined 21.3%, or $3.6 million, increase in both net interest and noninterest incomes, decreasing our efficiency ratio from 66.0% for the year ended December 31, 2019 to 58.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes increased $203,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, attributed to higher earnings before taxes in 2020. The Company's effective income tax rate in 2020 was 22.5%, compared to 23.6% in 2019. The decrease is due to the reduction of Florida's corporate income tax rate from 5.5% to 4.5% for the years 2019-2021. Currently, it is set to revert back to 5.5% on January 1, 2022.
Rate/Volume Analysis
The following table sets forth certain information regarding changes in interest income and interest expense for the periods indicated. For each category of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, information is provided on changes attributable to: (i) changes in rate (change in rate multiplied by prior volume); (ii) changes in volume (changes in volume multiplied by prior rate); and (iii) changes in rate-volume (change in rate multiplied by change in volume). As disclosed in the table below, the higher volume of loans was the primary driver of the increase in net interest income in 2020.
COVID-19 RESPONSE
The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted the global economy, disrupted global supply chains, lowered equity market valuations, created significant volatility and disruption in financial markets and significantly increased unemployment levels. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic impacts our business, results of operations, and financial condition, as well as our regulatory capital and liquidity ratios, will depend on future developments, the duration of the pandemic, and actions taken by governmental authorities to slow the spread of the disease or to mitigate its effects.
The Company took action to prepare its employees, support its clients, and help its communities. The Company has supported small business owners by making PPP loans. As of December 31, 2020, the Bank had originated 911 PPP loans for a total dollar amount of $82.8 million. These loans are 100% guaranteed by the SBA. During the fourth quarter, 129 PPP loans, totaling $15.6 million, were forgiven by the SBA.
Management expects that credit quality deterioration directly related to the pandemic could materialize in the future. Through December 31, 2020, the Company had received and granted 70 requests for payment deferrals or modifications on loans totaling $42.4 million. Approximately 91% of the forbearance requests were for loans secured by real estate. As of December 31, 2020, 64 of the 70 original loan modification requests, totaling $39.0 million, had reverted back to original pre-modification terms and are being paid as agreed. The tables below give more detail on loan modification activity and PPP loan origination through December 31, 2020.
Active Loan Deferral Requests
December 31, 2020
(dollars in thousands)
PPP Loans by Industry
December 31, 2020
FINANCIAL CONDITION
Average interest-earning assets increased $139.5 million from $432.0 million at December 31, 2019 to $571.5 million at December 31, 2020, primarily reflecting growth in our loan portfolio. Year over year, the average balance of portfolio loans grew 38.9% to $429.8 million at December 31, 2020, due to organic growth coupled with loans issued as part of the PPP program. The latter accounts for 39.8% of the increase in the average balance of portfolio loans.
Investment Securities
Our investment securities portfolio is a significant part of our operations and a key component of our asset/liability management. Our primary objective in managing our investment portfolio is to maintain a portfolio of high quality, highly liquid investments yielding competitive returns. We use the investment securities portfolio for several purposes. It serves as a vehicle to manage interest rate and prepayment risk, to generate interest and dividend income, to provide liquidity to meet funding requirements, and to provide collateral for pledging of public funds. We manage our investment portfolio according to a written investment policy approved by our Board of Directors in order to accomplish these goals. Currently, two types of classifications are approved for investment securities in our portfolio - Available-for-Sale and Held-to-Maturity. Adjustments are sometimes necessary in the portfolio to provide liquidity for funding loan demand and deposit fluctuations and to control interest rate risk. Therefore, from time to time, management may sell certain securities prior to their maturity.
At December 31, 2020, our available-for-sale investment portfolio included U.S. Treasury notes, municipal securities, mortgage-backed securities, and asset-backed securities and had a fair market value of $61.9 million. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, our investment securities portfolio represented approximately 9.6% and 12.2% of our total assets, respectively. The average balance of investment securities increased 23.4%, or $12.1 million year over year, while the average yield on investment securities decreased from 2.52% for the year ended December 31, 2019 to 2.18% for the year ended December 31, 2020. At December 31, 2020, we had no securities classified as held-to-maturity.
The following table sets forth the carrying amount of the investment portfolio as of the dates indicated:
The carrying amount and weighted average yields for investments as of December 31, 2020 are shown below:
* All securities are listed at actual yield and not on a tax-equivalent basis.
Cash Surrender Value of Bank-Owned Life Insurance
We recorded investments of $10.7 million and $6.5 million in bank-owned life insurance policies at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, due to attractive risk-adjusted returns and for protection against the loss of key executives, including our Chief Executive Officer Sammie D. Dixon and Senior Lender and Executive Vice President Chris L. Jensen, Jr. The Company increased its investment in bank-owned life insurance in 2020 in order to expand coverage to additional key personnel.
Loans
Our primary earning asset is our loan portfolio and our primary source of income is the interest earned on the loan portfolio. Our loan portfolio is divided into three portfolio segments - real estate mortgage loans, commercial loans and consumer and other loans - and five portfolio classes - commercial real estate loans, residential and home equity loans, construction loans, commercial loans, and consumer and other loans.
We work diligently to attract new lending clients through direct solicitation by our loan officers, utilizing relationship networks from existing clients and community involvement, competitive pricing, and innovative structure. Evidence of this effort is seen in the organic growth in our loan portfolio where we saw growth across the majority of the Bank's portfolio classes in 2020 In addition to this relationship-driven growth strategy, the Bank benefited from the issuance of SBA-guaranteed PPP loans, which accounts for 93.0% of the increase in commercial class loans and 46.9% of total loan growth. As of December 31, 2020, the Bank’s net loans were $476.7 million, representing 73.6% of total assets, compared to net loans of $337.8 million as of December 31, 2019, representing 67.4% of total assets. These loans were priced based upon the degree of risk, collateral, loan amount, and maturity.
The composition of our loan portfolio as of the dates indicated was as follows:
Maturities of Loans
The following tables show the contractual maturities of the Bank’s loan portfolio at December 31, 2020. Loans with scheduled maturities are reported in the maturity category in which the payment is due. Demand loans with no stated maturity and overdrafts are reported in the “due one year or less” category. Loans that have adjustable rates are shown as amortizing to final maturity rather than when the interest rates are next subject to change. The tables do not include prepayment or scheduled principal repayments.
Sensitivity. For loans due after one year or more, the following table presents the sensitivities to changes in interest rates at December 31, 2020:
Nonperforming Assets
Nonperforming assets consist of nonperforming loans and other real estate owned, (“OREO”). Nonperforming loans include loans that are on nonaccrual status which includes nonperforming loans restructured as troubled debt restructurings ("TDRs"), where we have granted a concession on the interest rate or original repayment terms due to financial difficulties of the borrower, and loans past due greater than 90 days and still accruing interest. OREO consists of real property acquired through foreclosure. We account for troubled debt restructurings in accordance with ASC 310, “Receivables.” During the period of national emergency related to the COVID-19 pandemic, the banking regulatory agencies have confirmed with FASB that certain shorter-term loan modifications made in response to the pandemic's effects on borrowers should not be considered to be TDRs.
We generally place loans on nonaccrual status when they become 90 days or more past due, unless they are well secured and in the process of collection. We also place loans on nonaccrual status if they are less than 90 days past due if the collection of principal or interest is in doubt. When a loan is placed on nonaccrual status, any interest previously accrued, but not collected, is reversed from income.
Accounting standards require the Bank to identify loans as impaired loans when, based on current information and events, it is probable that the Bank will be unable to collect the scheduled payments of principal or interest when due according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement. These standards require that impaired loans be valued at the present value of expected future cash flows, discounted at the loan’s effective interest rate, using one of the following methods: the observable market price of the loan or the fair value of the underlying collateral if the loan is collateral dependent. We implement these standards in our monthly review of the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses and identify and value impaired loans in accordance with guidance on these standards. Five loans totaling $1.3 million were deemed to be impaired under the Bank’s policy at December 31, 2020, while twelve loans totaling $2.6 million and fourteen loans and one overdraft account totaling $3.2 million were deemed to be impaired under the Bank’s policy at December 31, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
Our goal is to maintain a high quality of loans through sound underwriting and lending practices. As of December 31, 2020, 2019, and, 2018, approximately 69.5%, 77.3%, and 80.3%, respectively, of the total loan portfolio were collateralized by commercial and residential real estate mortgages. The level of nonperforming loans and OREO also is relevant to the credit quality of a loan portfolio. As of December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, there were $1.3 million, $2.6 million, and $342,000, respectively, in nonperforming loans. We had no OREO at December 31, 2020, 2019, or 2018.
The goal of the loan review process is to identify and address classified and nonperforming loans as early as possible. The following table sets forth certain information on nonaccrual loans and OREO, the ratio of such loans and foreclosed assets to total assets as of the dates indicated, and certain other related information.
Allowance for Loan Losses
As of December 31, 2020, our ALLL was allocated mostly to inherent loan losses using historical loss experience and qualitative risk factors, as well as a $179,000 allocation for specific anticipated loan losses. In addition, the Bank included $559,000 of unallocated reserves to account for potential losses related to the COVID-19 pandemic. No such losses have been recorded to date. Our ALLL was allocated as follows, as of the indicated dates.
The following table sets forth certain information with respect to activity in our ALLL during the years indicated:
We believe that our ALLL at December 31, 2020, appropriately reflected the risk inherent in the portfolio as of that date. The methodologies used in the calculation are in compliance with regulatory policy and GAAP.
Deposits
The major source of the Bank’s funds for lending and other investment purposes are deposits, in particular core deposits and non-maturity deposits. Substantially all of our depositors are residents in our primary market areas. Total deposits were $580.6 million at December 31, 2020, compared to $438.3 million at December 31, 2019, a $142.3 million, or 32.5%, increase. Noninterest-bearing deposits increased by $65.2 million, while interest-bearing deposits increased by $77.1 million.
The following table sets forth the distribution by type of our deposit accounts at the dates indicated:
The following table presents the maturities of our time deposits of $250,000 or more as of December 31, 2020:
Borrowings
Deposits are the primary source of funds for our lending and investment activities and general business purposes. However, as an alternate source of liquidity, the Bank may obtain advances from the Federal Home Loan Bank of Atlanta, (“FHLB”) sell investment securities subject to our obligation to repurchase them, purchase federal funds from designated correspondent banks, and engage in overnight borrowings from the Federal Reserve, correspondent banks, or client repurchase agreements. The level of short-term borrowings can fluctuate on a daily basis depending on funding needs and the source of the funds to satisfy the needs.
The Bank has an agreement with the FHLB and pledges its qualified loans as collateral which would allow the Bank, as of December 31, 2020, to borrow up to $60.7 million. There were no advances outstanding at December 31, 2020 or 2019.
During the third quarter of 2020, the Company entered into a Promissory Note (the "Note") and a Security Agreement with Thomasville National Bank ("TNB") which is headquartered in Thomasville, Georgia. Pursuant to the Note, the Company obtained a $15 million revolving line of credit with a 5-year term. The initial interest rate on the line of credit is 3.25%. The interest rate will adjust daily to the then-current Wall Street Journal Prime Rate. Pursuant to the Security Agreement, the Company has pledged to TNB all of the outstanding shares of common stock of the Company's wholly-owned subsidiary, the Bank. There were no outstanding borrowings under this line of credit at December 31, 2020.
Capital Adequacy
Stockholders’ equity was $60.3 million as of December 31, 2020, compared to $55.9 million as of December 31, 2019. The Company announced in January 2021, an annual dividend of $0.14 per share of common stock payable on March 2, 2021, to shareholders of record on February 11, 2021.
As of December 31, 2020, the Bank was considered to be “well capitalized” with a 9.09% Tier 1 Leverage ratio; a 13.29% Common Equity Tier 1 Risk-based Capital ratio and Tier 1 Risk-based Capital ratio, and a 14.54% Total Risk-based Capital ratio.
The Federal banking regulatory agencies adopted a rule to simplify the methodology for measuring capital adequacy for smaller, uncomplicated banks. The CBLR is calculated as the ratio of tangible equity capital divided by average total consolidated assets. CBLR tangible equity is defined as total equity capital, prior to including minority interests, and excluding accumulated other comprehensive income, deferred tax assets arising from net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards, goodwill, and other intangible assets (other than mortgage servicing assets. Beginning in 2020, a qualifying organization may elect to use the CBLR framework if its CBLR is greater than 9%. The Bank has not elected to use the CBLR framework because it would not receive any material benefit with respect to compliance or reporting.
Liquidity
Liquidity describes our ability to meet financial obligations, including lending commitments and contingencies, which arise during the normal course of business. Liquidity is primarily needed to meet the borrowing and deposit withdrawal requirements of the Company’s clients, as well as meet the Company’s current and planned expenditures. Management monitors the liquidity position daily.
PMHG has a $15,000,000 revolving line of credit, with a five-year term, with TNB. At December 31, 2020, PMHG had no outstanding draws on the line of credit.
The Bank’s liquidity is derived primarily from our deposit base, scheduled amortization and prepayments of loans and investment securities, funds provided by operations, and capital. Additionally, as a commercial bank, we are expected to maintain an adequate liquidity reserve. The liquidity reserve may consist of cash on hand, cash on demand deposit with correspondent banks, federal funds sold, and marketable securities such as United States government agency securities, municipal securities, and mortgage-backed securities. Our primary liquid assets, excluding pledged securities, accounted for 18.1% and 25.0% of total assets at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The Bank also has external sources of funds through the FHLB, unsecured lines of credit with correspondent banks, and the State of Florida’s Qualified Public Deposit Program (“QPD”). At December 31, 2020, the Bank had access to approximately $60.7 million of available lines of credit secured by qualifying collateral with the FHLB, in addition to $28.0 million in unsecured federal funds lines of credit maintained with correspondent banks. As of December 31, 2020, we had no borrowings under any of these lines. Some of our securities are pledged to collateralize certain deposits through our participation in the State of Florida’s QPD program. The market value of securities pledged to the QPD program was $13.9 million at December 31, 2020.
Our core deposits consist of noninterest-bearing accounts, NOW accounts, money-market accounts, time deposits and savings accounts. We closely monitor our level of certificates of deposit $250,000 and greater and other large deposits. At December 31, 2020, total deposits were $580.6 million, of which $25.6 million was in certificates of deposits greater than $250,000. We maintain a Contingency Funding Plan (“CFP”) that identifies liquidity needs and weighs alternate courses of action designed to address those needs in emergency situations. We perform a monthly cash flow analysis and stress test the CFP to evaluate the expected funding needs and funding capacity during various liquidity stress scenarios. We believe that the sources of available liquidity are adequate to meet all reasonably immediate short-term and intermediate-term demands and do not know of any trends, events, or uncertainties that may result in a significant adverse effect on our liquidity position.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In the normal course of business, we enter into various transactions that are not included in our consolidated balance sheets in accordance with GAAP. These transactions include commitments to extend credit in the ordinary course of business to approved clients, construction loans in process, unused lines of credit, guaranteed accounts, and standby performance and financial letters of credit. These instruments may involve, to varying degrees, elements of credit and interest rate risk in excess of the amount recognized in the consolidated balance sheets.
Generally, loan commitments have been granted on a temporary basis for working capital or commercial real estate financing requirements or may be reflective of loans in various stages of funding. These commitments are recorded on our financial statements as they are funded. Commitments typically have fixed expiration dates or other termination clauses and may require payment of a fee. Loan commitments include unused commitments for open-end lines secured by one-to-four family residential properties and commercial properties, commitments to fund loans secured by commercial real estate, construction loans, business lines of credit and other unused commitments.
Guaranteed accounts are irrevocable standby letters of credit issued by us to guarantee a client’s credit line with our third-party credit card company, First Arkansas Bank & Trust. As a part of this agreement, we are responsible for the established credit limit on the particular account plus 10%. The maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make is represented by the dollar amount disclosed in the table below.
Standby letters of credit are written conditional commitments issued by us to guarantee the client will fulfill his or her contractual financial obligations to a third party. In the event the client does not perform in accordance with the terms of the agreement with the third party, we would be required to fund the commitment. The maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make is represented by the contractual amount of the commitment. If the commitment is funded, we would be entitled to seek repayment from the client.
We minimize our exposure to loss under loan commitments, guaranteed accounts, and standby letters of credit by subjecting them to credit approval and monitoring procedures. The effect on our revenues, expenses, cash flows, and liquidity of the unused portions of these commitments cannot be reasonably predicted because there is no guarantee that the lines of credit will be used.
The following is a summary of the total contractual amount of commitments outstanding at December 31, 2020 and 2019.