Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the notes to those statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, some of which are not within our control. See "Risk Factors" and “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Company Overview
We are a payment technology company and leading provider of comprehensive Financial Payment Card solutions in the United States. We define “Financial Payment Cards” as credit, debit and Prepaid Debit Cards issued on the networks of the “Payment Card Brands” (Visa, Mastercard, American Express and Discover in the United States and Interac in Canada). We define “Prepaid Debit Cards” as debit cards issued on the networks of the Payment Card Brands, but not linked to a traditional bank account. We also offer an instant card issuance solution, which provides card issuing bank customers the ability to issue a personalized debit or credit card within the bank branch to individual cardholders. We have established a leading position in the Financial Payment Card market through more than 20 years of experience. We serve a diverse set of approximately 2,000 direct customers and several thousand indirect customers, including some of the largest issuers of debit and credit cards in the United States, and the largest Prepaid Debit Card program managers, as well as thousands of independent community banks, credit unions, “Group Service Providers” (organizations that assist small card issuers, such as credit unions, with managing their credit and debit card programs, including managing the Financial Payment Card issuance process, core banking operations and other financial services) and card processors.
We serve our customers through a network of high-security production and card services facilities in the United States, each of which is audited for compliance with the standards of the Payment Card Industry Security Standards Council (the “PCI Security Standards Council”) by one or more of the Payment Card Brands. Many of our customers require us to comply with PCI Security Standards Council requirements that relate to the provision of our products and services. Our leading network of high-security production facilities allows us to optimize our solutions offerings and to serve the needs of our diverse customer base.
Driven by a combination of our strong relationships, quality, technology, and innovation, we believe we have strong positions in the following markets:
● the U.S. prepaid debit market, serving several of the top U.S. Prepaid Debit Card program managers;
● the U.S. small to mid-sized issuer market, which includes independent community banks and credit unions; and
● the U.S. large issuer market, serving some of the largest U.S. debit and credit card issuers.
2020 Summary of Financial Performance
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net sales increased 12.3% from the prior year, to $312.2 million, and we recorded income from operations of $38.4 million, compared to net sales of $278.1 million and income from operations of $24.7 million during 2019. Our operating income margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased to 12.3% compared to 8.9% in the prior year. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we received $6.0 million cash related to a litigation settlement, which was recorded as a reduction to net operating expenses in the Other segment. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded net income from continuing operations of $16.2 million, compared to net loss from continuing operations of $5.0 million in 2019, an improvement of $21.2 million.
Cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $22.1 million, representing an increase of $19.1 million compared to $3.0 million in the prior year.
Segment Overview
Our business consists of the following reportable segments:
● Debit and Credit,
● Prepaid Debit, and
● Other.
Debit and Credit Segment
Our Debit and Credit segment primarily produces Financial Payment Cards and provides integrated card services to card-issuing banks primarily in the United States. Products manufactured by this segment primarily include EMV and non-EMV Financial Payment Cards, including contact and contactless dual-interface cards and plastic and encased metal cards, and Second Wave payment cards featuring a core made with ROBP. We also sell Card@Once, our proprietary and patented instant card issuance system and software-as-a-service, and other private label credit cards that are not issued on the networks of the Payment Cards Brands. We provide CPI On-Demand services, where we produce images, personalized payment cards, and related collateral on a one-by-one, on demand basis for our customers. This segment also provides a variety of integrated card services, including card personalization and fulfillment services. The Debit and Credit segment operations are each audited for compliance by one or more of the Payment Card Brands. Many of our customers require us to comply with the standards of the PCI Security Standards Council.
Prepaid Debit Segment
Our Prepaid Debit segment primarily provides integrated card services to Prepaid Debit Card providers in the United States, including tamper-evident security packaging. This segment also produces Financial Payment Cards issued on the networks of the Payment Card Brands that are included in the tamper-evident security packages. The Prepaid Debit segment operation is audited for compliance by one or more of the Payment Card Brands. Many of our customers require us to comply with the standards of the PCI Security Standards Council.
Other
Our Other segment includes corporate general and administrative expenses and a less significant operation that generated sales from the production of Financial Payment Cards and retail gift cards, and card personalization and fulfillment services in Canada, prior to its sale. In the fourth quarter of 2018, we entered into a definitive agreement to sell our Canadian subsidiary. The sale agreement did not include the portions of the business relating to Financial Payment Cards, as that business migrated to our operations in the U.S. or to other service providers in 2019. The transaction closed on April 1, 2019, and we received cash proceeds of $1.5 million. After the payment of liabilities and transaction costs, including employee termination costs, the majority of which were expensed in 2018, the sale did not have a significant impact on cash, and there was no significant loss on sale.
On August 3, 2018, we completed the sale of the U.K. Limited segment.
Key Components of Results of Operations
Set forth below is a brief description of key line items of our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income.
Net Sales
Net sales reflect our revenue generated from the sale of products and services. Product net sales include the design and production of Financial Payment Cards, including contact and contactless dual-interface cards, and Second Wave ROBP cards. Dual-interface EMV cards have additional technology to process contactless transactions and generally have a higher selling price than contact-only EMV cards. We do not anticipate the conversion from contact EMV cards to dual interface EMV cards to have a negative impact to our gross profit and gross margin, as this conversion occurs over time. We also generate product revenue from the sale of our Card@Once instant issuance system and consumables, private label credit cards and retail gift cards. Services net sales include revenue from the personalization and fulfillment of Financial Payment Cards, including CPI On-Demand services, tamper-evident security packaging, fulfillment services and software as a service personalization of instant issuance Financial Payment cards. See Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 2 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” and Part II, Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates-Revenue Recognition” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information and timing of revenue recognition for net sales. We include gross shipping and handling revenue in net sales.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales includes the direct and indirect costs of the products we sell and the services that we provide. Product costs include the cost of raw materials, including the EMV/ dual-interface microchips and antennas, labor costs, equipment and facilities costs, operation overhead, depreciation and amortization, leases and rental charges and transport costs. Product costs also include Card@Once instant issuance printer costs. Services costs include the cost of labor, raw materials in the case of tamper-evident security packaging, equipment and facilities costs, operation overhead, depreciation and amortization, leases and rental charges and transport costs. Cost of sales can be impacted by many factors, including volume, operational efficiencies, procurement costs, promotional activity and employee relations. We include the costs of shipping and handling in cost of sales.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit consists of our net sales less our cost of sales. Gross margin is gross profit as a percentage of net sales.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses are primarily comprised of selling, general and administrative expenses (“SG&A”) which generally consist of expenses for executive, finance, sales, marketing, legal, information technology, customer service, human resources, research and development, and administrative personnel, including payroll, benefits and stock-based compensation expense, bad debt expense and outside legal and other advisory fees, including consulting, accounting, and software related fees. Operating expense also includes depreciation and amortization expense and may include impairment charges on tangible and intangible assets or cash from litigation settlements, when necessary.
Income from Operations and Operating Margin
Income from operations consists of our gross profit less our net operating expenses. Operating margin is income from operations as a percentage of net sales.
Other Expense, net
Other expense, net consists primarily of interest expense and foreign currency gains or losses.
Income tax benefit (expense)
Income tax benefit (expense) consists of our U.S. federal and state income taxes at statutory rates, including the impact of other items such as valuation allowances, tax credits, permanent items, and foreign taxes.
Net Income (Loss) from Continuing Operations
Net income (loss) from continuing operations consists of our income from operations, less other expense, net, and income taxes.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared With Year Ended December 31, 2019
The table below presents our results of operations, on a continuing operations basis, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Net Sales
Net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020, increased $34.1 million, or 12.3%, to $312.2 million compared to $278.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Debit and Credit:
Net sales for Debit and Credit for the year ended December 31, 2020, increased $37.3 million, or 17.5%, to $250.4 million compared to $213.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The net sales increase was primarily due to higher volumes of contactless dual-interface EMV cards, including our Second Wave cards featuring a core made with recovered ocean bound plastics. In addition, net sales increased from CPI On-Demand card personalization due to higher volumes from our existing customers, new customers in the current year, and COVID-19 related government disbursement work. Dual-interface EMV cards have additional technology to process contactless transactions and generally have a higher selling price than contact-only EMV cards, which benefitted the current year sales increases compared to the prior year. Partially offsetting these increases were reductions in volumes of Card@Once instant issuance product sales and card personalization sales in 2020. The decline in volumes was primarily as a result of ongoing impacts from COVID-19 including reduced hours of operation and lack of access or closure of certain bank branches, and fewer new accounts and requests for replacement cards.
Prepaid Debit:
Net sales for Prepaid Debit for the year ended December 31, 2020, decreased $0.7 million, or 1.1%, to $63.6 million, compared to $64.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was the result of lower sales volumes primarily associated with COVID-19 impacts, including lower retail store traffic.
Other:
There were no Other net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. In April 2019, we sold our Canadian subsidiary, which was the only operation contributing to Other segment net sales.
Eliminations:
This includes the elimination of intercompany sales between segments in the consolidation of our financial statements. The increase in eliminations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, is due to higher sales between segments.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
* Not meaningful
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $19.2 million, or 21.1%, to $110.3 million compared to $91.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Debit and Credit
Gross profit for Debit and Credit for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $19.5 million, or 29.4%, to $85.8 million compared to $66.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in gross profit was driven primarily by higher sales volumes and pricing of contactless dual-interface EMV cards, including Second Wave cards. In addition, higher sales from CPI On-Demand card personalization and COVID-19 related government disbursement work contributed to an improvement in gross profit compared to the prior year. Gross profit margin increased to 34.3% during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 31.1% in the prior year, due primarily to operating leverage from higher contactless dual-interface card sales including Second Wave cards and CPI On-Demand net sales.
Prepaid Debit
Gross profit for Prepaid Debit during the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased 1.4% to $24.5 million compared to $24.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Gross profit margin for Prepaid Debit for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased to 38.5% compared to 38.6% for the prior year. The decrease in gross profit and margin was attributed to lower sales primarily from COVID-19 impacts which resulted in unfavorable cost absorption.
Other
There was no gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to gross loss of $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. In April 2019, we sold our Canadian subsidiary, which was the only operation contributing to Other segment gross profit.
Operating Expenses, net
* Not meaningful
Operating expenses, net, for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $5.6 million, or 8.4%, to $71.9 million compared to $66.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to the cash litigation settlement gain of $6.0 million recorded in the second quarter of 2019, which was a reduction to net operating expenses.
Debit and Credit
Debit and Credit operating expenses decreased $0.2 million to $31.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $31.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to cost reductions.
Prepaid Debit
Prepaid Debit operating expenses were $4.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of 2.3% compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Other
Other operating expenses were down $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The reduction in operating expenses was primarily due to certain cost reductions and expense savings from the sale of our Canadian subsidiary. During the second quarter of 2019, we received $6.0 million cash, which was recorded as a reduction to net operating expenses, related to a litigation settlement.
Income from Operations and Operating Margin
During the year ended December 31, 2020 we had income from operations of $38.4 million compared to income from operations of $24.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our operating profit margin for the year ended December 31, 2020, increased to 12.3% compared to 8.9% for the year ended December 31, 2019. In the prior year, we reached a litigation settlement and received $6.0 million cash which was recorded through income from operations within the Other segment.
Debit and Credit
Income from operations for Debit and Credit for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $19.7 million to $54.8 million compared to $35.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in income from operations was driven primarily by higher sales volumes and pricing of contactless dual-interface EMV cards including Second Wave cards, and CPI On-Demand card personalization and COVID-19 related government disbursement work. Operating margins for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased to 21.9% compared to 16.5% for the prior year.
Prepaid Debit
Income from operations for Prepaid Debit for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $0.4 million, or 2.2%, to $19.9 million compared to $20.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in income from operations was due to reduced sales volumes primarily due to COVID-19 impacts from lower retail store traffic. Operating income margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased to 31.4% from 31.7% in 2019, primarily as a result of unfavorable cost absorption from lower sales, which impacted gross profit.
Other
The loss from operations in Other was $36.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a loss from operations of $30.8 million for 2019. The 2019 loss benefited from the $6.0 million cash litigation settlement gain, and was partially offset by lower net current year operating expenses.
Interest, net
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, increased $0.5 million to $25.4 million compared to $24.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Interest expense was higher in 2020 primarily as a result of interest incurred on the Senior Credit Facility entered into on March 6, 2020. This additional expense was partially offset by a decline in the interest incurred on our First Lien Term Loan due to lower average interest rates for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019.
Income tax expense/ benefit
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded an income tax benefit of $3.3 million on pre-tax income of $12.9 million, representing an effective income tax rate of (25.6)%. The effective tax rate differs from the federal U.S. statutory rate in 2020 primarily due to the impact of the CARES Act which was signed into law in March 2020. The CARES Act allows companies with net operating losses (“NOLs”) originating in 2018, 2019, or 2020 to carry back those losses for five years and temporarily eliminates the tax law provision that limits the use of NOLs to 80% of
taxable income. The CARES Act increases the Internal Revenue Code Section 163(j) interest deduction limit for 2019 and 2020, and allows for the acceleration of refunds of alternative minimum tax credits. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a tax benefit for certain provisions in the CARES Act including the carryback of losses and the increase to the interest deduction limitation, resulting in a tax rate benefit of 20.9%. In addition, we applied the 2018 proposed regulations relating to the Section 163(j) interest deduction limitation which contributed to a valuation allowance change and tax rate benefit of 41.1%. Other items impacting the effective tax rate in 2020 include unrecognized tax benefits, permanent non-deductible items and tax credits. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded an income tax expense of $3.5 million on pre-tax loss of $1.5 million, representing an effective tax rate of (228.7)%. Given the amount of pre-tax loss and the partial valuation allowance on certain U.S. deferred tax assets, the effective tax rate can be subject to significant variance from the federal U.S. statutory rate of 21%. For 2019, the effective tax rate differs from the federal U.S. statutory rate primarily due to the impact of tax expense recorded related to a partial valuation allowance on certain U.S. deferred tax assets at an effective income tax rate impact of (213.8)%. The partial valuation allowance was due to the limitation on the deductibility of interest expense.
Net income/ loss from continuing operations
Net income from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $16.2 million, compared to net loss of $5.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The change was primarily due to higher net sales and gross profit, and the income tax benefit recorded in 2020, partially offset by the cash litigation settlement gain recorded in the prior year.
Fourth Quarter
Our net sales increased 15.9% in the fourth quarter of 2020 to $84.1 million, compared to $72.6 million in the fourth quarter of 2019. Net sales for Debit and Credit increased by $7.9 million to $69.6 million, or 12.9% in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the fourth quarter of 2019. The increase in net sales was primarily due to higher net sales volumes from contactless dual-interface EMV cards, including Second Wave cards, and CPI On-Demand card personalization.
Net sales for our Prepaid Debit segment increased $3.7 million, or 33.6%, to $14.9 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to $11.2 million in the fourth quarter of 2019. This increase in sales is related to higher demand of customer orders in the fourth quarter of 2020 as compared to the prior year.
Selling, general and administrative (exclusive of depreciation and amortization) expenses increased $0.1 million to $16.9 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to $16.8 million in the fourth quarter 2019. The increase was due to an additional estimated sales tax expense, partially offset by certain corporate cost reductions, and restructuring severance charges incurred in the prior year.
During the fourth quarter of 2020 we earned income from operations of $12.4 million compared to $3.7 million in the fourth quarter of 2019. The increase in income from operations was primarily due to higher net sales volumes and gross profit.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had $57.6 million of cash and cash equivalents. Of this amount, $0.5 million was held in accounts outside of the United States.
Our ability to make investments in and grow our business, service our debt and improve our debt leverage ratios, while maintaining strong liquidity, will depend upon our ability to generate excess operating cash flows through our operating subsidiaries. Although we can provide no assurances, we believe that our cash flows from operations, combined with our current cash levels, will be adequate to fund debt service requirements and provide cash, as required, to support our ongoing operations, capital expenditures, lease obligations and working capital needs.
The Company is party to a First Lien Credit Facility, dated as of August 17, 2015, that includes a $312.5 million First Lien Term Loan that matures on August 17, 2022. On March 6, 2020, the Company entered into a new $30 million Senior Credit Facility which matures on May 17, 2022. The Senior Credit Facility ranks senior in priority to the
Company’s First Lien Term Loan, which had $312.5 million outstanding as of December 31, 2020. The Company’s Revolving Credit Facility was terminated concurrently with the entry into the new Senior Credit Facility on March 6, 2020. The Revolving Credit Facility had no borrowings outstanding as of the termination date.
The Senior Credit Facility and the First Lien Term Loan contain customary representations, covenants and events of default, including certain covenants that limit or restrict the Company’s and certain of its subsidiaries’ ability to incur indebtedness, grant certain types of security interests, incur certain types of liens, sell or transfer assets or enter into a merger or consolidate with another company, enter into sale and leaseback transactions, make certain types of investments, declare or make dividends or distributions, engage in certain affiliate transactions, or modify organizational documents, among other restrictions and subject to certain exceptions. In accordance with the terms of the Senior Credit Facility, the Company is also required to have adjusted EBITDA, as defined in the agreement, of $25 million for the previous four consecutive fiscal quarters in total at the end of each quarterly period ending on or after March 31, 2020.
The Senior Credit Facility and the First Lien Term Loan also require prepayment or offers to prepay certain amounts, in advance of the maturity date upon the occurrence of certain customary events, including based on an annual excess cash flow calculation, pursuant to the terms of the respective agreement, with any required payments to be made after the issuance of the Company’s annual financial statements. As of December 31, 2020, we have classified $8.0 million of debt principal as a current liability as a result of an excess free cash flow calculation for 2020, pursuant to the terms of the debt agreements, which amount the Company will offer to prepay pursuant to the terms of the Senior Credit Facility and the First Lien Term Loan, as applicable. The Company was not required to make any prepayments of the First Lien Term Loan in 2020, with respect to our 2019 annual financial statements.
Interest rates under the Senior Credit Facility are based, at the Company's election, on a Eurodollar rate subject to an interest rate floor of 1.0%, plus a margin of 8.5% or a base rate plus a margin of 7.5%. As of December 31, 2020, the interest rate on our Senior Credit Facility was 9.5%. Interest rates under the First Lien Term Loan, at the Company’s election, are based on either a Eurodollar rate, subject to an interest rate floor of 1.0%, plus a margin of 4.5%, or a base rate plus a margin of 3.5%. As of December 31, 2020, the interest rate on our First Lien Term Loan was 5.5%.
Operating Activities - Continuing Operations
Cash provided by operating activities - continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $22.1 million compared to $3.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The year over year increase was primarily due to net income of $16.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a net loss of $5.1 million for 2019. In addition, during 2020 we had working capital cash benefits, including in accrued expenses as we deferred approximately $2.6 million of 2020 employer social security payments in accordance with CARES Act provisions. Comparatively in 2019, we had a cash usage in accrued expenses related primarily to employee performance incentive compensation earned in 2018 and paid in the first quarter of 2019. We had a cash usage of $6.1 million and $10.4 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively, related to our investment in additional inventory to support the growth of our business. Partially offsetting the increases in cash provided by operating activities during 2020 compared to the prior year, was an increase in accounts receivable of $11.7 million, primarily relating to unbilled accounts receivable for work performed but not completed. In addition, we received $6.0 million cash from a litigation settlement during the second quarter of 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash interest paid was $22.8 million, compared to $23.0 million in the prior year, as lower interest rates on our First Lien Term Loan in 2020 were partially offset by additional cash interest due on the new Senior Credit Facility.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $7.1 million, compared to a usage of $2.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. Cash used in investing activities was related primarily to capital expenditures, including investments to support the growth of the business, such as machinery and equipment, and information technology equipment, and was $7.1 million and $4.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Partially offsetting the capital expenditure outflows, we received cash of $1.5 million for the sale of our Canadian subsidiary in the second quarter of 2019. As presented in our supplemental disclosures of non-cash information on the statement of cash flows, finance leases were executed for the acquisition of right-of-use machinery and equipment assets totaling $1.7 million and $6.4 million during the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Financing Activities - Continuing Operations
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $24.0 million compared to cash used in financing activities of $1.9 million. The Senior Credit Facility provided $29.1 million of cash, net of discount, partially offset by $2.5 million of associated debt issuance costs during the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company paid $2.6 million and $1.9 million of principal on finance leases during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. For working capital purposes, we borrowed and repaid $11.5 million on the Revolving Credit Facility for the year ended December 31, 2019, all occurring within the first and second quarter of 2019. The Revolving Credit Facility was terminated concurrently with the new Senior Credit Facility on March 6, 2020.
Working Capital
Our working capital as of December 31, 2020 was $95.6 million, compared to $50.5 million as of December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, our cash balance increased by $38.9 million, accounts receivable increased by $11.8 million, and our inventory balance increased $4.6 million to support the growth of the business. Partially offsetting these increases to working capital was the reclassification of $8.0 million of long term debt principal to a current liability as a result of the excess cash flow calculation, pursuant to the terms of the debt agreements which amount we will offer to prepay pursuant to the terms of the Senior Credit Facility and the First Lien Term Loan, as applicable.
Cyclical and Seasonal Nature of Business
Financial Payment Cards are generally influenced by broader cyclical changes in the economy, with economic downturns resulting in decreases in the demand for our products and services, while economic upturns may increase demand. In particular, prolonged economic downturns typically have resulted in significant reductions in the demand for general purpose credit cards due to tightening credit conditions. Our net sales are also influenced by Financial Payment Card renewal cycles and demand for new products, such as contactless dual-interface cards. Additionally, we historically have generated higher net sales in the third quarter of the year, as our sales of Prepaid Debit Card solutions are more heavily weighted toward the second half of the year when consumers tend to purchase more of these products and services in anticipation of the holiday season in the United States.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We had no off-balance sheet arrangements at December 31, 2020, and 2019.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. In preparing our financial statements, we make estimates, assumptions and judgments that can have a significant impact on our reported net sales, results of operations and net income, as well as on the value of certain assets and liabilities on our balance sheet during and as of the reporting periods. These estimates, assumptions and judgments are necessary because future events and their effects on our results and the value of our assets cannot be determined with certainty, and are made based on our historical experience and on other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates may change as new events occur or additional information is obtained, and we may periodically be faced with uncertainties, the outcomes of which are not within our control and may not be known for a prolonged period of time. Because the use of estimates is inherent in the financial reporting process, actual results could differ from those estimates.
Revenue Recognition
Products Net Sales: “Products” net sales are recognized when obligations under the terms of a contract with a customer are satisfied. In most instances, this occurs over time as cards are manufactured for specific customers and have no alternative use and the Company has an enforceable right to payment for work performed. For work performed but not completed and unbilled, we estimate net sales by taking actual costs incurred and applying historical margins for similar types of contracts. Items included in “Products” net sales are manufactured Financial Payment Cards, including
contact-EMV, Dual-Interface EMV, Second Wave, contactless and magnetic stripe cards, private label credit cards and retail gift cards. Card@Once printers and consumables are also included in “Products” net sales, and their associated revenues are recognized at the time of shipping.
Services Net Sales: Net sales are recognized for “Services” as the services are performed. Items included in “Services” net sales include the personalization and fulfillment of Financial Payment Cards, providing tamper-evident secure packaging and fulfillment services to Prepaid Debit Card program managers, and software-as-a-service personalization of instant issuance debit and credit cards. For work performed but not completed and billed, we estimate revenue by taking actual costs incurred and applying historical margins for similar types of contracts.
Customer Contracts: The Company often enters into Master Services Agreements (“MSAs”) with its customers. Generally, enforceable rights and obligations for goods and services occur only when a customer places a purchase order or statement of work to obtain goods or services under an MSA. Usually our contractual arrangements include neither exclusivity clauses nor commitments from our customers to order any given quantities of products on a medium or long-term basis. The contract term as defined by ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, is the length of time it takes to deliver the goods or services promised under the purchase order or statement of work. As such, the Company's contracts are generally short term in nature.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the United States and certain foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgment is required in evaluating our tax positions and determining our provision for income taxes. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are computed annually for differences between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities that will result in taxable or deductible amounts in the future based on enacted tax laws and rates applicable to the periods in which the differences are expected to affect taxable income.
The Company has deferred tax assets and liabilities and maintains valuation allowances where it is more likely than not that all or a portion of deferred tax assets will not be realized. Significant judgment is required in determining any valuation allowance recorded against deferred tax assets. The determination of the amount of valuation allowance to be provided on recorded deferred tax assets involves consideration of estimates regarding the timing and amount of the reversal of taxable temporary differences, expected future taxable income, and the impact of tax planning strategies. Changes in the relevant facts can significantly impact the judgment or need for valuation allowances. In the event we change our determination as to the amount of deferred tax assets that can be realized, we will adjust our valuation allowance with a corresponding impact to the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made.
During the ordinary course of business, there are transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax determination is uncertain. We establish reserves for tax-related uncertainties based on estimates of whether, and the extent to which, additional taxes will be due. The reserves are established when we believe that certain positions are likely to be challenged and may not be fully sustained on review by tax authorities. We adjust these reserves in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the closing of a tax audit or refinement of an estimate. Although we believe our reserves are reasonable, no assurance can be given that the final outcome of these matters will be consistent with what is reflected in our historical income tax provisions and accruals. To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters is different from the amounts recorded, such differences will impact the current provision for income taxes. We recognize interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits as a component of income tax expense.
Sales Tax
We are in the process of evaluating a state sales tax liability analysis for states in which we have economic nexus, and collecting exemption documentation from our customers. It is probable that we will be subject to sales tax liabilities plus interest and penalties relating to historical activity in certain states. We have estimated a contingent liability for sales tax which is recorded in accrued expenses in the consolidated balance sheet. The liability includes significant judgments and estimates that may change in the future, and the liability may exceed our current estimate. We may be subject to examination by the relevant state tax authorities and we can provide no assurances that outcomes from these examinations will not have a significant effect on our operating results, financial condition, and cash flows.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
In February 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (the “FASB”) issued ASC 842, Leases (“ASC 842”), which provides guidance for accounting for leases. The guidance required companies to recognize the assets and liabilities for the rights and obligations created by leased assets. The Company adopted the guidance on January 1, 2019 and used the adoption date as the date of initial application as allowed under ASC 842. Right-of-use (“ROU”) represents the right to use an underlying asset for the lease term and lease liabilities represent the Company’s obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Operating lease ROU assets and liabilities are recognized at commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. A lease is deemed to exist when the Company has the right to control the use of identified property, plant or equipment, as conveyed through a contract, for a certain period of time and consideration paid. The right to control is deemed to occur when the Company has the right to obtain substantially all of the economic benefits of the identified assets and the right to direct the use of such assets. We recorded lease liabilities and right-to-use assets as the present value of future minimum lease payments using a discount rate that is either implicit in the lease or our incremental borrowing rate. If not implicit in the lease, we estimate our incremental borrowing rate by using market data from companies similar to us, having publicly traded debt instruments and similar credit ratings. Our estimated incremental borrowing rate utilizes judgements, including selection of comparable companies, our credit risk, sensitivity analysis and certain other valuation estimates. We also use judgement in determining whether a contract contains a lease.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
In June 2016, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2016-13, Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments ("ASU 2016-13"). This ASU changes the model for the recognition of credit losses from an incurred loss model, which recognized credit losses only if it was probable that a loss had been incurred, to an expected loss model, which requires the Company to estimate the total credit losses expected on the portfolio of financial instruments. The effective date of ASU 2016-13 was amended by ASU 2019-10, Credit Losses Effective Dates. Since CPI is a smaller reporting company, adoption of this accounting standard is effective for the Company for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022, and interim periods therein, with early adoption permitted. The Company has elected not to early adopt this accounting standard in 2020. The Company is evaluating the impact of adoption of this standard, and does not anticipate the application of ASU 2016-13 will have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial position and results of operations.