Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on April 15, 2020 as a Delaware corporation for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization, or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”). We have not selected any Business Combination target and we have not, nor has anyone on our behalf, initiated any substantive discussions, directly or indirectly, with any Business Combination target. We intend to effectuate our initial Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of our Initial Public Offering and the shares, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, equity, and debt.
The issuance of additional shares in a Business Combination:
• may significantly dilute the equity interest of investors in the initial public offering, which dilution would increase if the anti-dilution provisions in the shares of Class B common stock resulted in the issuance of shares of Class A common stock on a greater than one-to-one basis upon conversion of the shares of Class B common stock;
• may subordinate the rights of holders of shares of Class A common stock if shares of preferred stock are issued with rights senior to those afforded our shares of Class A common stock;
• could cause a change in control if a substantial number of shares of our Class A common stock are issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
• may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the share ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
• may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our shares of Class A common stock.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities or otherwise incur significant debt, it could result in:
• default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial Business Combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
• acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves (in the absence of a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant);
• our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt security is payable on demand;
• our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt security contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt security is outstanding;
• our inability to pay dividends on our shares of Class A common stock;
• using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our shares of Class A common stock if declared, expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions and other general corporate purposes;
• limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
• increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation; and
• limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, execution of our strategy and other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our initial Business Combination. We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to complete our initial Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities since inception have been organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for our Initial Public Offering and identifying a target company for our initial Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as expenses as we conduct due diligence on prospective Business Combination candidates.
For the period from April 15, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $312 thousand, which consists of formation and operating costs of $318 thousand, offset by interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $6 thousand.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $1.1 million held outside of the trust account. Until the consummation of the initial public offering, our only source of liquidity was an initial purchase of Class B Common stock by our sponsor and loans from our sponsor.
Our liquidity needs have been satisfied prior to the completion of our Initial Public Offering through receipt of a $25,000 capital contribution from our Sponsor in exchange for the issuance of the Founder Shares to our Sponsor and a commitment from our Sponsor to loan us up to $300,000 to cover our expenses in connection with our Initial Public Offering. Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Company repaid all amounts borrowed from the Sponsor.
The net proceeds from (i) the sale of the shares of Class A common stock in our Initial Public Offering, after deducting offering expenses of $0.6 million, underwriting commissions of $2.7 million (excluding deferred underwriting commissions of $4.8 million), and (ii) the sale of the Private Placement Shares for a purchase price of $4.7 million generated net proceeds of $137.1 million. $135.7 million was placed within the Trust Account, which includes the deferred underwriting commissions described above. The proceeds held in the Trust Account are invested only in U.S. government treasury obligations with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations.
As of December 31, 2020 we had cash and cash equivalents of $1.1 million outside of the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete our initial Business Combination.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business prior to our initial Business Combination. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial Business Combination. In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1.5 million of such loans may be convertible into private placement shares at a price of $10.00 per share at the option of the lender. The terms of such loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. Prior to the completion of our initial Business Combination, we do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our trust account.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
On April 30, 2020, our Sponsor paid $25,000 in consideration for 2,875,000 shares (the "Founder Shares") of the Company's common stock, par value $0.0001 per share (the "common stock"). In June 2020, our Sponsor transferred 30,000 founder shares to each of Messrs. Grau, Gray and Lubner.
We filed an Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation on June 15, 2020, such that we are authorized to issue shares of Class B common stock. Pursuant to the amendment, the Founder Shares were converted into shares of Class B common stock. On July 8, 2020, we effected a 1:1.18 stock split of our Class B common stock, resulting in our sponsor holding an aggregate of 3,286,300 founder shares and there being an aggregate of 3,392,500 founder shares outstanding.
The Founder Shares will automatically convert into shares of Class A common stock at the time of our initial Business Combination and are subject to certain transfer restrictions, as described in Note 6 of our unaudited financial statements. Our Sponsor has agreed to forfeit up to 442,500 Founder Shares to the extent that the over-allotment option is not exercised in full by the underwriters. On July 10, 2020, the underwriters exercised the over-allotment option in full; thus, these Founder Shares are no longer subject to forfeiture.
Our Sponsor, directors and executive officers have agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of their Founder Shares or Private Placement Shares until the earlier to occur of: (A) one year after the completion of the initial Business Combination or (B) subsequent to the initial Business Combination, (x) if the last sale price of the shares of Class A common stock equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for share splits, share dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after the initial Business Combination, or (y) the date on which we complete a liquidation, merger, capital stock exchange or other similar transaction that results in all of our stockholders having the right to exchange their common stock for cash, securities or other property.
Private Placement Shares
Concurrently with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, our Sponsor purchased 471,400 Private Placement Shares, at a price of $10.00 per share in a private placement for an aggregate purchase price of $4.7 million. The Private Placement Shares are identical to the shares of Class A common stock sold in the Initial Public Offering, subject to certain limited exceptions as described in Note 1 of our unaudited financial statements.
The Sponsor and our officers and directors have agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of their Private Placement Shares until 30 days after the completion of the initial Business Combination.
Related Party Loans
On April 30, 2020, the Sponsor agreed to loan us an aggregate of up to $300,000 to cover expenses related to the Initial Public Offering pursuant to a promissory note (the "Note"). In May 2020, we borrowed $275,000 under the Note. The loan was non-interest bearing and the borrowings outstanding under the Note of $275,000 were repaid in full in July 2020.
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required ("Working Capital Loans"). If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account. In the event that a Business Combination is not completed, we may use a portion of the proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination, without interest, or, at the lender's discretion, up to $1.5 million of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into Private Placement Shares at a price of $10.00 per share.
Private Placement of Common Stock
The Sponsor has indicated an interest to purchase $25,000,000 of our common stock in a private placement that would occur concurrently with the consummation of the initial Business Combination. The funds from such private placement would be used as part of the consideration to the sellers in the initial Business Combination, and any excess funds from such private placement would be used for working capital in the post-transaction company. However, because indications of interest are not binding agreements or commitments to purchase, the Sponsor may determine not to purchase any such shares, or to purchase fewer shares than it indicated an interest in purchasing. Furthermore, we are not under any obligation to sell any such shares.
Commitments and Contingencies
Registration Rights
Holders of the Founder Shares will be entitled to registration rights with respect to the Founder Shares and Private Placement Shares (in the case of the Founder Shares, only after conversion of such shares into shares of Class A common stock) pursuant to a registration and stockholder rights agreement entered into in connection with the consummation of the Initial Public Offering. Holders of the Founder Shares and Private Placement Shares are entitled to certain demand and "piggyback" registration and stockholder rights. However, the registration and stockholder rights agreement provides that we will not permit any registration statement filed under the Securities Act to become effective until the termination of the applicable lock-up period for the securities to be registered. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the date of the final prospectus relating to the Initial Public Offering to purchase up to 1,770,000 additional shares of Class A common stock to cover over-allotments, if any, at $10.00 per share, less underwriting discounts and commissions. The underwriters exercised this option in full on July 10, 2020.
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per share, or approximately $2.7 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. An additional fee of $0.35 per share, or approximately $4.8 million in the aggregate, will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred underwriting commissions will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Risks and Uncertainties
Management is continuing to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the industry and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on our financial position, results of our operations and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of these financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than the underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $4.8 million in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, the common stock subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheets.
Net Loss Per Common Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Net income (loss) per common share, basic and diluted for Class A redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the Trust Account, net of applicable taxes, by the weighted average number of shares of Class A redeemable common stock outstanding for the periods. Net loss per common share, basic and diluted for Class B non-redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing net loss less income attributable to Class A redeemable common stock, by the weighted average number of shares of Class B non-redeemable common stock outstanding for the periods presented.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an "emerging growth company" and under the JOBS Act will be allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an "emerging growth company," we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor's attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor's report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO's compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our initial public offering or until we are no longer an "emerging growth company," whichever is earlier.