Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated and combined financial statements and accompanying notes, which appear elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report. See Item 1A., Risk Factors and Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.
Overview
We are a leading provider of high-quality healthcare services to patients and residents of all ages, including the growing senior population, in the United States. We strive to be the provider of choice in the communities we serve through our innovative operating model. We operate in multiple lines of businesses including home health, hospice and senior living services across Arizona, California, Colorado, Idaho, Iowa, Montana, Nevada, Oklahoma, Oregon, Texas, Utah, Washington, Wisconsin and Wyoming. As of December 31, 2020, our home health and hospice business provided home health, hospice and home care services from 76 agencies operating across 14 states, and our senior living business operated 54 senior living communities throughout seven states.
The following table summarizes our affiliated home health and hospice agencies and senior living communities as of:
COVID-19
Since its discovery in late 2019, a new strain of coronavirus, which causes the viral disease COVID-19, has spread around the globe. The outbreak has been declared to be a pandemic by the World Health Organization, and the United States Health and Human Services Secretary has declared a public health emergency in the United States in response to the outbreak. Additionally, the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (“CDC”) has stated that older adults are at a higher risk for serious illness from COVID-19. As a result of the COVID-19 outbreak, we have taken necessary precautions to prevent and/or minimize spread of the virus to our patients and our residents.
We have been, and we expect to continue to be, impacted by several factors that may cause actual results to differ from our historical results or current expectations. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the results presented in this report are not necessarily indicative of future operating results. The situation surrounding COVID-19 remains fluid. We are actively managing our response in collaboration with government officials, staff and business partners and assessing potential impacts to our financial position and operating results, as well as adverse developments in our business.
Operational Response
During the second half of March 2020, we began experiencing a decrease in census at our home health agencies and a slight decrease in occupancy at our senior living communities, while our hospice census remained relatively flat through the month. Beginning in April 2020, we experienced a more significant decrease in census at our home health agencies, which was driven in large part by the suspension or postponement of elective medical procedures that require in-home care after the procedure. In May we began to see those businesses stabilize and improve, which trend continued throughout June. During the third and fourth quarters we experienced increases in all metrics related to our home health and hospice businesses as compared to the prior year period (see Key Performance Indicators below). In our senior living communities, we have experienced a
continued decline in occupancy since the outset of the pandemic due to a greater number of move outs net of move ins. While we experienced declines in our senior living occupancy, we did not experience material disruptions during the year ended December 31, 2020. We cannot be sure when the occupancy levels in our senior living communities will stabilize or improve over multiple measurement periods.
COVID-19 continues to impact all aspects of our business and geographies, including impacts on our patients, residents, staff, vendors and business partners. With current COVID-19 outbreaks continuing across the United States, it is difficult to predict the full extent of the impact that COVID-19 will have on our future financial position and operating results due to numerous uncertainties. These uncertainties include the severity of the virus, the duration of the outbreak, effectiveness of vaccination efforts, mutation of the virus, and governmental, business or other actions to contain the virus or treat its impact (which could include limitations on our operations or mandates to provide services to our patients and communities). Further, the impacts of a potential worsening of global economic conditions and disruptions to, and volatility in, the credit and financial markets, as well as other unanticipated consequences remain unknown.
We have experienced and expect to continue to see increased labor costs due to increased overtime and premium pay and the increased need for temporary labor to supplement our existing staffing. Furthermore, we experienced and expect to continue to see increased expenses for medical supplies due to the need for more PPE as part of our strict infection control procedures, along with additional COVID-19 testing expenses. To counteract the aforementioned increased costs, beginning in the second quarter we reduced spending, non-essential supplies, travel costs and all other discretionary items, and we delayed non-essential capital expenditure projects. We are monitoring the ongoing impact of these actions to our revenue and expenses. However, the extent to which COVID-19 will continue to impact our operations will depend on future developments, which remain uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, including the duration of the outbreak, new information that may emerge concerning the severity of the coronavirus and the actions taken to contain the coronavirus or treat its impact, among others.
As a result of COVID-19, we have enhanced our infection control procedures in accordance with guidance from Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (“CMS”) along with other state and federal agencies to protect our patients, residents, and staff. The infection control guidance from CMS and other agencies continues to evolve. We frequently update our infection control procedures and share best practices across our organization. Our operating subsidiaries have followed guidelines from CMS, the CDC and other federal or state agencies regarding infection control, including recommended screening and isolation protocols, increased PPE usage and systems for addressing local needs related to supplies, staffing and communication with families, patients and residents and local health agencies.
Financial Response
In light of the uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19, we implemented several precautionary measures to limit the financial impact to our operations and provide additional financial flexibility. In connection with the receipt of the Medicare advance payments of $28.0 million, and the deferral of employer-paid FICA of $8.4 million, and strengthening of our operations, we paid down the balance of our Revolving Credit Facility, allowing us to continue with a reduced debt load, a lighter interest burden, and significant availability on our line of credit. During the year we received approximately $9.9 million in Provider Relief Funds (“PRF”). As of December 31, 2020, we have returned all such funds we received related to this distribution. The CARES Act temporarily suspended the automatic 2% reduction of Medicare claim reimbursements for the period of May 1, 2020 through March 31, 2021. The suspension of the Medicare sequestration increased our revenue by approximately $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. We also implemented cost control measures such as reduced spending on non-essential supplies, travel costs and all other discretionary items, and we have delayed non-essential capital expenditure projects. For further discussion on our financial response, please see Liquidity and Capital Resources below. We believe we have adequately adjusted our operations to maintain the financial health of our business based on current revenue and expenses.
The Spin-Off Transactions
On October 1, 2019, Ensign completed the Spin-Off, which was effected through a tax free distribution to Ensign’s stockholders of substantially all of the outstanding shares of Pennant common stock. Each Ensign stockholder received a distribution of one share of Pennant common stock for every two shares of Ensign's common stock, plus cash in lieu of fractional shares. As a result of the Spin-Off on October 1, 2019, Pennant began trading as an independent publicly traded company on the NASDAQ under the symbol “PNTG.”
We expect to benefit from a continuing relationship with Ensign, which continues to be a holding company comprised of various healthcare service providers across the post-acute care continuum.
In connection with the Spin-Off, we entered a transition services agreement with Ensign (the “Transition Services Agreement”) with a two-year term, subject to extension upon the mutual agreement of the parties. Pursuant to the Transition Services Agreement, Ensign and Pennant agree to provide certain transition services to each other, including finance, information technology, human resources, employee benefits and other services to ensure an orderly transition following the distribution.
See “Certain Relationships and Related Party Transactions-Agreements with Ensign Related to the Spin-Off,” contained within the Information Statement as well as the Form 8-K filed with the SEC on October 3, 2019 for further discussion of the agreements entered into in connection with the Spin-Off.
Recent Activities
Acquisitions. During 2020, we expanded our operations through the acquisition of two senior living operations, six home health agencies, and six hospice agencies. The addition of these operations added a total of 164 senior living units to be operated by our independent operating subsidiaries. We entered into a separate operations transfer agreement with the prior operator as part of each transaction. The aggregate value for these acquisitions was $39.2 million. For further discussion of our acquisitions, see Note 7, Acquisitions, in the Notes to the consolidated and combined financial statements.
Amended Credit Facility. On February 23, 2021, we amended our existing revolving credit facility to increase our aggregate principal amount available from $75.0 million to $150.0 million.
Trends
As discussed more above under COVID-19, for the year ended December 31, 2020 we experienced an increase in all of our key metrics in our home health and hospice businesses. Since the pandemic began, we have experienced a decline in senior living occupancy as move-ins declined relative to move-outs due to the pandemic. We cannot be sure when the occupancy levels in our senior living communities will stabilize or improve over consecutive measurement periods. As uncertainty regarding the COVID-19 pandemic persists, and if cases continue to rise, we could see a more prolonged recovery. For further discussion of trends related to COVID-19, see COVID-19 above.
When we acquire turnaround or start-up operations, we expect that our combined metrics may be impacted. We expect these metrics to vary from period to period based upon the maturity of the operations within our portfolio. We have generally experienced lower occupancy rates at our senior living communities and lower census at our home health and hospice agencies for recently acquired operations; as a result, we generally anticipate lower consolidated and segment margins during years of acquisition growth. We established two start-up hospice agencies in California and Washington during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Regulation
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, a variety relief bills have been passed to provide cash payments and other resources to help individuals, small businesses, state and local governments, hospitals and other healthcare providers affected by COVID-19. The first such bill was the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) enacted on March 27, 2020. The CARES Act and subsequent legislation, including the Paycheck Protection Program and Health Care Enhancement Act, called for congressional appropriations totaling $178 billion to be used as Provider Relief Funds (“PRF”) for hospitals and other healthcare providers on the front lines of the COVID-19 response. This funding is being used to support healthcare-related expenses or lost revenue attributable to COVID-19 and to ensure uninsured Americans can get testing and treatment for COVID-19. Providers who receive funds from the general distribution have to sign an attestation confirming receipt of funds and agree to the terms and conditions of payment. We did not apply for any relief funding under the CARES Act. During the second quarter of 2020 we received automatic PRF payments in the amount of $9.9 million, and during the second quarter of 2020 the Company returned the full amount of payments received.
The CARES Act also contains provisions for accelerated or advance Medicare payments under the Accelerated and Advanced Payments (“AAP”) Program to provide supporting cash flow to providers and suppliers combating the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. We applied for and received $28.0 million. These funds are subject to automatic recoupment through offsets to new claims beginning one year after payment were issued beginning in April, 2021, at which time Medicare will automatically recoup 25 percent of Medicare payments for 11 months. At the end of the 11 months and assuming full repayment has not occurred, recoupment will increase to 50 percent for another six months. Any balance outstanding after these
two recoupment periods will be subject to repayment at a four percent interest rate. We anticipate completing repayment of the AAP within the allotted recoupment periods.
The CARES Act temporarily suspends the 2% sequestration payment adjustment on Medicare fee-for-service payment beginning May 1, 2020 until March 31, 2021. The CARES Act payroll tax deferral program allows employers to defer the deposit and payment of the employer’s portion of social security taxes that otherwise would be due between March 27, 2020, and December 31, 2020. The CARES Act permits employers to deposit half of these deferred payments by the end of 2021 and the other half by the end of 2022. We recognized $2.8 million in revenue related to the suspension of sequestration for the year ended December 31, 2020. Further, we are deferring employer social security taxes that we would normally pay with each payroll. As of December 31, 2020 we deferred $8.4 million, with $4.2 million in other long-term liabilities.
The Families First Coronavirus Response Act (“FFCRA”) enacted April 1, 2020, provided certain employees with paid sick leave or expanded family and medical leave for specified reasons related to COVID-19. While the sick and family leave provisions of the FFCRA expired on December 31, 2020, the FFCRA tax credit provisions, which reimburses employers for the cost of providing FFCRA leave, was extended through March 31, 2021. Thus, employers are no longer required to provide FFCRA leave, but may benefit from voluntarily doing so. Certain health care workers, including those who provide direct patient care, and those whose services are integrated with and necessary to the provision of patient care, are exempt from the Act.
On July 31, 2020, CMS released the final FY 2021 hospice payment rule. The national hospice payment rates, subject to geographical application, and the hospice CAP will increase by 2.4% over the current payment rates. Hospices that fail to meet quality reporting requirements receive a 2.0% reduction to the annual market basket update for the year. Further, the finalized hospice cap amount for the fiscal year 2021 cap year will be $30,683.93, which is equal to the fiscal year 2020 cap amount of $29,964.78, updated by the proposed fiscal year 2021 hospice payment increase percentage of 2.4%. In addition to payment updates, the rule finalizes the proposal to adopt the most recent Office of Management and Budget (“OMB”) statistical area delineations and apply a 5.0% cap on wage index decreases.
On October 29, 2020, CMS released the final rule updating the Medicare HH PPS rates and wage index for calendar year 2021. The final rule increases payments in the aggregate of 2.0%, reduced by an estimated 0.1% due to the rural add-on percentages mandated by the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018. Home health agencies that fail to meet quality reporting requirements will receive a 2.0% reduction to the home health payment update percentage for the year. The final rule adopts the most recent OMB statistical area delineations and applies a 5.0% cap on wage index decreases to account for the transition. The final rule also implements Medicare enrollment requirements for qualified home infusion therapy suppliers, excluding home infusion therapy services from coverage under the Medicare home health benefit beginning in calendar year 2021. Finally, this rule finalizes the changes to the home health regulations regarding the use of technology in providing services under the Medicare home health benefit as described in the March 30, 2020 Policy and Regulatory Revisions in Response to the COVID-19 Public Health Emergency Interim Final Rule.
Segments
We have two reportable segments: (1) home health and hospice services, which includes our home health, home care and hospice businesses; and (2) senior living services, which includes the operation of assisted living, independent living and memory care communities. Our Chief Executive Officer, who is our Chief Operating Decision Maker (“CODM”), reviews financial information at the operating segment level using segment adjusted EBITDAR from operations. We also report an “all other” category that includes general and administrative expense from our Service Center.
Key Performance Indicators
We manage the fiscal aspects of our business by monitoring key performance indicators that affect our financial performance. These indicators and their definitions include the following:
Home Health and Hospice Services
•Total home health admissions. The total admissions of home health patients, including new acquisitions, new admissions and readmissions.
•Total Medicare home health admissions. Total admissions of home health patients, who are receiving care under Medicare reimbursement programs, including new acquisitions, new admissions and readmissions.
•Average Medicare revenue per completed 60-day home health episode. The average amount of revenue for each completed 60-day home health episode generated from patients who are receiving care under Medicare reimbursement programs.
•Total hospice admissions. Total admissions of hospice patients, including new acquisitions, new admissions and recertifications.
•Average hospice daily census. The average number of patients who are receiving hospice care during any measurement period divided by the number of days during such measurement period.
•Hospice Medicare revenue per day. The average daily Medicare revenue recorded during any measurement period for services provided to hospice patients.
The following table summarizes our overall home health and hospice statistics for the periods indicated:
Senior Living Services
•Occupancy. The ratio of actual number of days our units are occupied during any measurement period to the number of units available for occupancy during such measurement period.
•Average monthly revenue per occupied unit. The revenue for senior living services during any measurement period divided by actual occupied senior living units for such measurement period divided by the number of months for such measurement period.
The following table summarizes our senior living statistics for the periods indicated:
Revenue Sources
Home Health and Hospice Services
Home Health. We derive the majority of our home health revenue from Medicare and managed care. The Medicare payment is adjusted for differences between estimated and actual payment amounts, an inability to obtain appropriate billing documentation or authorizations acceptable to the payor and other reasons unrelated to credit risk. For Medicare episodes that began prior to January 1, 2020, home health agencies were reimbursed under the Medicare HH PPS, while Medicare periods of care that began on or after that date are reimbursed under the PDGM methodology. Under PDGM, Medicare provides agencies with payments for each 30-day period of care provided to beneficiaries. If a beneficiary is still eligible for care after the end of the first 30-day payment period, a second 30-day payment period can begin. There are no limits to the number of periods of care a beneficiary who remains eligible for the home health benefit can receive. While payment for each 30-day period of care is adjusted to reflect the beneficiary’s health condition and needs, a special outlier provision exists to ensure appropriate payment for those beneficiaries that have the most expensive care needs. The payment under the Medicare program is also adjusted for certain variables including, but not limited to: (a) a low utilization payment adjustment if the number of visits is below an established threshold that varies based on the diagnosis of a beneficiary; (b) a partial payment if the patient transferred
to another provider or the Company received a patient from another provider before completing the period of care; (c) adjustment to the admission source of claim if it is determined that the patient had a qualifying stay in a post-acute care setting within 14 days prior to the start of a 30-day payment period; (d) the timing of the 30-day payment period provided to a patient in relation to the admission date, regardless of whether the same home health provider provided care for the entire series of episodes; (e) changes to the acuity of the patient during the previous 30-day period of care; (f) changes in the base payments established by the Medicare program; (g) adjustments to the base payments for case mix and geographic wages; and (h) recoveries of overpayments.
Hospice. We derive the majority of our hospice business revenue from our hospice business from Medicare reimbursement. The estimated payment rates are calculated as daily rates for each of the levels of care we deliver. Rates are set based on specific levels of care, are adjusted by a wage index to reflect healthcare labor costs across the country and are established annually through federal legislation. The following are the four levels of care provided under the hospice benefit:
•Routine Home Care (“RHC”). Care that is not classified under any of the other levels of care, such as the work of nurses, social workers or home health aides.
•General Inpatient Care. Pain control or acute or chronic symptom management that cannot be managed in a setting other than an inpatient Medicare-certified facility, such as a hospital, skilled nursing facility or hospice inpatient facility.
•Continuous Home Care. Care for patients experiencing a medical crisis that requires nursing services to achieve palliation and symptom control, if the agency provides a minimum of eight hours of care within a 24-hour period.
•Inpatient Respite Care. Short-term, inpatient care to give temporary relief to the caregiver who regularly provides care to the patient.
CMS has established a two-tiered payment system for RHC. Hospices are reimbursed at a higher rate for RHC services provided from days of service 1 through 60 and a lower rate for all subsequent days of service. CMS also provided for a Service Intensity Add-On, which increases payments for certain RHC services provided by registered nurses and social workers to hospice patients during the final seven days of life.
Medicare reimbursement is adjusted for an inability to obtain appropriate billing documentation or authorizations acceptable to the payor and other reasons unrelated to credit risk. Additionally, as Medicare hospice revenue is subject to an inpatient cap limit and an overall payment cap, we monitor our provider numbers and based upon empirical experience estimate amounts due back to Medicare to the extent that the cap has been exceeded.
Senior Living Services . As of December 31, 2020, we provided assisted living, independent living and memory care services at 54 communities. Within our senior living operations, we generate revenue primarily from private pay sources, with a portion earned from Medicaid or other state-specific programs.
Primary Components of Expense
Cost of Services (excluding rent, general and administrative expense and depreciation and amortization). Our cost of services represents the costs of operating our independent operating subsidiaries, which primarily consists of payroll and related benefits, supplies, purchased services, and ancillary expenses such as the cost of pharmacy and therapy services provided to patients or residents. Cost of services also includes the cost of general and professional liability insurance and other general cost of services specifically attributable to our operations.
Rent-Cost of Services. Rent-cost of services consists solely of base minimum rent amounts payable under lease agreements to our landlords. Our subsidiaries lease and operate but do not own the underlying real estate at our operations, and these amounts do not include taxes, insurance, impounds, capital reserves or other charges payable under the applicable lease agreements.
General and Administrative Expense. General and administrative expense consists primarily of payroll and related benefits and travel expenses for our Service Center personnel, including training and other operational support. General and administrative expense also includes professional fees (including accounting and legal fees), costs relating to our information systems, share-based compensation and rent for our Service Center offices.
Depreciation and Amortization. Property and equipment are recorded at their original historical cost. Depreciation is computed using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the depreciable assets (ranging from three to 15
years). Leasehold improvements are amortized on a straight-line basis over the shorter of their estimated useful lives or the remaining lease term.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated and combined financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make judgments, estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. On an ongoing basis we review our judgments and estimates, including but not limited to those related to revenue, cost allocations, leases, intangible assets, goodwill, and income taxes. We base our estimates and judgments upon our historical experience, knowledge of current conditions and our belief of what could occur in the future considering available information, including assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. By their nature, these estimates and judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty, and actual results could differ materially from the amounts reported. While we believe that our estimates, assumptions, and judgments are reasonable, they are based on information available when the estimate was made. Refer to Note 2, Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, within the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements for further information on our critical accounting estimates and policies, which are as follows:
•Revenue recognition - The amounts owed by private pay individuals for services and estimate of variable considerations to arrive at the transaction price, including methods and assumptions used to determine settlements with Medicare and Medicaid adjustments due to audits and reviews;
•Cost allocation - The Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements include allocations of costs for certain shared services provided to the Company by Ensign subsidiaries prior to the spin-off on October 1, 2019. These costs were allocated to the Company on a basis of revenue, location, employee count, or other measures;
•Leases - We use our estimated incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at lease commencement date in determining the present value of future lease payments;
•Acquisition accounting - The assumptions used to allocate the purchase price paid for assets acquired and liabilities assumed in connection with our acquisitions;
•Self-insurance reserves - The valuation methods and assumptions used in estimating costs to settle open claims of insureds, as well as an estimate of the cost of insured claims up to retention amounts that have been incurred but not reported; and
•Income taxes - The estimation of valuation allowance or the need for and magnitude of liabilities for uncertain tax position.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Information concerning recently issued accounting pronouncements which are not yet effective is included in Note 2, Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements. As of December 31, 2020, there were no recently issued accounting pronouncements that were expected to have an impact on the Company.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth details of our expenses and earnings as a percentage of total revenue for the periods indicated:
(a) Net loss attributable to noncontrolling interest for the year ended December 31, 2020 was less than .1% and thus not meaningful as a percentage of total revenue.
The following table presents certain financial information regarding our reportable segments. General and administrative expenses are not allocated to the reportable segments and are included in “All Other”:
The table below provides a reconciliation of Segment Adjusted EBITDAR from Operations above to income from operations:
(a) Segment Adjusted EBITDAR from Operations is net income/ (loss) attributable to the Company's reportable segments excluding interest expense, provision for income taxes, depreciation and amortization expense, rent, and, in order to view the operations performance on a comparable basis from period to period, certain adjustments including: (1) costs at start-up operations, (2) share-based compensation, (3) acquisition related costs, (4) Spin-Off transaction costs, (5) redundant and nonrecurring costs associated with the transition services agreement, (6) net income/ (loss) attributable to noncontrolling interest, and (7) net COVID-19 related costs. General and administrative expenses are not allocated to the reportable segments, and are included as “All Other”, accordingly the segment earnings measure reported is before allocation of corporate general and administrative expenses. The Company's segment measures may be different from the calculation methods used by other companies and, therefore, comparability may be limited.
(b) Represents results related to start-up operations. This amount excludes rent and depreciation and amortization expense related to such operations.
(c) Share-based compensation expense incurred which is included in cost of services and general and administrative expense.
(d) Acquisition related costs that are not capitalizable.
(e) Costs incurred related to the Spin-Off are included in general and administrative expense.
(f) A portion of the costs incurred under the Transition Services Agreement (as defined in Note 3, Related Party Transactions and Net Parent Investment) identified as redundant or nonrecurring that are included in general and administrative expense. Transition service costs includes $446 of duplicative software expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, of which $333 pertains to the first three quarters of the fiscal year and were not included as adjustments in previous interim periods. Fees incurred under the Transition Services agreement, net of the Company’s payroll reimbursement, were $5,536, $2,982, and zero for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
(g) Represents incremental costs incurred as part of the Company's response to COVID-19 including direct medical supplies, labor, and other expenses, net of $2,765 in increased revenue related to the 2% payment increase in Medicare reimbursements for sequestration relief for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Performance and Valuation Measures:
(a) General and administrative expenses are not allocated to any segment for purposes of determining segment profit or loss.
The table below reconciles Consolidated and Combined Net Income to Consolidated and Combined EBITDA, Consolidated and Combined Adjusted EBITDA and Consolidated and Combined Adjusted EBITDAR for the periods presented:
(a) Represents results related to start-up operations. This amount excludes rent and depreciation and amortization expense related to such operations.
(b) Share-based compensation expense incurred which is included in cost of services and general and administrative expense.
(c) Acquisition related costs that are not capitalizable.
(d) Costs incurred related to the Spin-Off are included in general and administrative expense.
(e) A portion of the costs incurred under the Transition Services Agreement (as defined in Note 3, Related Party Transactions and Net Parent Investment) identified as redundant or nonrecurring that are included in general and administrative expense. Transition service costs includes $446 of duplicative software expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, of which $333 pertains to the first three quarters of the fiscal year and were not included as adjustments in previous interim periods. Fees incurred under the Transition Services agreement, net of the Company’s payroll reimbursement, were $5,536, $2,982, and zero for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
(f) Represents incremental costs incurred as part of the Company's response to COVID-19 including direct medical supplies, labor, and other expenses, net of $2,765 in increased revenue related to the 2% payment increase in Medicare reimbursements for sequestration relief for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The table below reconciles Segment Adjusted EBITDAR from Operations to Segment Adjusted EBITDA from Operations for the periods presented:
The following discussion includes references to certain performance and valuation measures, which are non-GAAP financial measures, including Consolidated and Combined EBITDA, Consolidated and Combined Adjusted EBITDA, Segment Adjusted EBITDA from Operations, and Consolidated Adjusted EBITDAR (collectively, “Non-GAAP Financial Measures”). Non-GAAP Financial Measures are used in addition to, and in conjunction with, results presented in accordance with GAAP and should not be relied upon to the exclusion of GAAP financial measures. Non-GAAP Financial Measures reflect an additional way of viewing aspects of our operations and company that, when viewed with our GAAP results and the accompanying reconciliations to corresponding GAAP financial measures, we believe can provide a more comprehensive understanding of factors and trends affecting our business.
We believe these Non-GAAP Financial Measures are useful to investors and other external users of our financial statements regarding our results of operations because:
•they are widely used by investors and analysts in our industry as a supplemental measure to evaluate the overall performance of companies in our industry without regard to items such as interest expense, rent expense and depreciation and amortization, which can vary substantially from company to company depending on the book value of assets, the method by which assets were acquired, and differences in capital structures;
•they help investors evaluate and compare the results of our operations from period to period by removing the impact of our asset base and capital structure from our operating results; and
•Consolidated and Combined Adjusted EBITDAR is used by investors and analysts in our industry to value the companies in our industry without regard to capital structures.
We use Non-GAAP Financial Measures:
•as measurements of our operating performance to assist us in comparing our operating performance on a consistent basis from period to period;
•to allocate resources to enhance the financial performance of our business;
•to assess the value of a potential acquisition;
•to assess the value of a transformed operation’s performance;
•to evaluate the effectiveness of our operational strategies; and
•to compare our operating performance to that of our competitors.
We typically use Non-GAAP Financial Measures to compare the operating performance of each operation from period to period. We find that Non-GAAP Financial Measures are useful for this purpose because they do not include such costs as interest expense, income taxes, depreciation and amortization expense, which may vary from period-to-period depending upon various factors, including the method used to finance operations, the date of acquisition of a community or business, and the tax law of the state in which a business unit operates.
We also establish compensation programs and bonuses for our leaders that are partially based upon the achievement of Consolidated and Combined Adjusted EBITDAR targets.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures have no standardized meaning defined by GAAP. Therefore, our Non-GAAP Financial Measures have limitations as analytical tools, and they should not be considered in isolation, or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported in accordance with GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
•they do not reflect our current or future cash requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
•they do not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•they do not reflect the net interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments, on our debt;
•in the case of Consolidated and Combined Adjusted EBITDAR, it does not reflect rent expenses, which are normal and recurring operating expenses that are necessary to operate our leased operations;
•they do not reflect any income tax payments we may be required to make;
•although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced in the future, and these non-cash charges do not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements; and
•other companies in our industry may calculate the same Non-GAAP Financial Measures differently than we do, which may limit their usefulness as comparative measures.
We compensate for these limitations by using Non-GAAP Financial Measures only to supplement net income on a basis prepared in accordance with GAAP in order to provide a more complete understanding of the factors and trends affecting our business.
We strongly encourage investors to review our Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements, included in this report in their entirety and to not rely on any single financial measure. Because these Non-GAAP Financial Measures are not standardized, it may not be possible to compare these financial measures with other companies’ Non-GAAP financial measures having the same or similar names. These Non-GAAP Financial Measures should not be considered a substitute for, nor superior to, financial results and measures determined or calculated in accordance with GAAP. We strongly urge you to review the reconciliation of income from operations to the Non-GAAP Financial Measures in the table presented above, along with our Financial Statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report.
We believe the following Non-GAAP Financial Measures are useful to investors as key operating performance measures and valuation measures:
Performance Measures:
Consolidated and Combined EBITDA
We believe Consolidated and Combined EBITDA is useful to investors in evaluating our operating performance because it helps investors evaluate and compare the results of our operations from period to period by removing the impact of our asset base (depreciation and amortization expense) from our operating results.
We calculate Consolidated and Combined EBITDA as net income, adjusted for net income/ (loss) attributable to noncontrolling interest prior to the Spin-Off, before (a) interest expense (b) provision for income taxes and (c) depreciation and amortization.
Consolidated and Combined Adjusted EBITDA
We adjust Consolidated and Combined EBITDA when evaluating our performance because we believe that the exclusion of certain additional items described below provides useful supplemental information to investors regarding our
ongoing operating performance. We believe that the presentation of Consolidated and Combined Adjusted EBITDA, when considered with Consolidated and Combined EBITDA and GAAP net income is beneficial to an investor’s complete understanding of our operating performance.
We calculate Consolidated and Combined Adjusted EBITDA by adjusting Consolidated and Combined EBITDA to exclude the effects of non-core business items, which for the reported periods includes, to the extent applicable:
•costs at start-up operations;
•share-based compensation expense;
•acquisition related costs;
•Spin-Off related transaction costs;
•redundant or nonrecurring costs incurred as part of the Transition Services Agreement (as defined in Note 3, Related Party Transactions and Net Parent Investment); and
•COVID-19 related costs and supplies.
Segment Adjusted EBITDA from Operations
We calculate Segment Adjusted EBITDA from Operations by adjusting Segment Adjusted EBITDAR from Operations to include rent-cost of services. We believe that the inclusion of rent-cost of services provides useful supplemental information to investors regarding our ongoing operating performance for each segment.
Valuation Measure:
Consolidated and Combined Adjusted EBITDAR
We use Consolidated and Combined Adjusted EBITDAR as one measure in determining the value of prospective acquisitions. It is also a measure commonly used by us, research analysts and investors to compare the enterprise value of different companies in the healthcare industry, without regard to differences in capital structures. Additionally, we believe the use of Consolidated and Combined Adjusted EBITDAR allows us, research analysts and investors to compare operational results of companies with operating and finance leases. A significant portion of finance lease expenditures are recorded in interest, whereas operating lease expenditures are recorded in rent expense.
This measure is not displayed as a performance measure as it excludes rent expense, which is a normal and recurring operating expense and, as such, does not reflect our cash requirements for leasing commitments. Our presentation of Consolidated and Combined Adjusted EBITDAR should not be construed as a financial performance measure.
The adjustments made and previously described in the computation of Consolidated and Combined Adjusted EBITDA are also made when computing Consolidated and Combined Adjusted EBITDAR. We calculate Consolidated and Combined Adjusted EBITDAR by excluding rent-cost of services and rent related to start up operations from Consolidated and Combined Adjusted EBITDA.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue
(a) Home care and other revenue is included with home health revenue in other disclosures in this report.
Our consolidated and combined revenue increased $52.4 million, or 15.5% driven by organic growth of existing operations of $33.2 million or 9.8% as well as increased revenue from acquired operations of $19.2 million or 5.7% during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Home Health and Hospice Services
Home health and hospice revenue increased $47.0 million, or 22.8%. Revenue grew due to an increase in all key performance indicators including an increase in total home health admissions of 17.8%, including an increase in Medicare home health admissions of 21.8%, an increase in average Medicare revenue per 60-day completed episode of 10.0%, an increase of 32.1% in total hospice admissions, and an increase of 24.0% in hospice average daily census. Growth was partially driven by the acquisition of 12 home health, hospice and home care operations between December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2020,
resulting in an increase of $17.2 million or 8.3% overall, as well as additional revenue of $2.8 million due to the sequestration suspension in the current year.
Senior Living Services
Senior living revenue increased $5.4 million, or 4.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the same period in the prior year due to an increase in average monthly revenue per occupied unit and an increase of $2.0 million or 1.5% in revenue from the addition of two senior living communities between December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2020.
Cost of Services
The following table sets forth total cost of services by each of our reportable segments for the periods indicated:
Consolidated and Combined cost of services increased $37.9 million or 14.6%. The increase in cost of services was driven by the increase in revenue, new acquisitions in the current year, and additional costs related to the COVID-19 pandemic. Cost of services as a percentage of revenue decreased by 0.6% from 76.5% to 75.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as the increase in revenue outpaced the increase in costs.
Home Health and Hospice Services
Cost of services related to our home health and hospice services segment increased $32.1 million, or 18.4%, primarily due to increased volume of services provided. Cost of services as a percentage of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased 3.0% compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, from focusing on managing labor and services and additional revenue due to the sequestration suspension in the current year.
Senior Living Services
Cost of services related to our senior living services segment increased $5.9 million, or 6.9%. As a percentage of revenue, costs of service increased by 1.7% as a result of a decrease in occupancy and COVID-19 related costs.
Rent-Cost of Services. Actual rent increased from $35.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2019 to $39.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily as a result of a full year of expense for leases modified in the fourth quarter of 2019 in connection with the Spin-Off. Rent as a percentage of total revenue decreased from 10.3% to 10.1% in the year ended December 31, 2020, as the growth in revenue outpaced the increase in rent expense.
General and Administrative Expense. Our general and administrative expense decreased by $3.8 million from $35.1 million to $31.3 million and as a percent of revenue from 10.4% to 8.0%. The primary driver for the decrease in general and administrative costs was due to the no transaction costs related to the Spin-Off. The reduction of $13.2 million in transaction related costs were partially offset by $8.3 million in share-based compensation in the current year.
Depreciation and Amortization. Depreciation and amortization expense remained relatively flat as a percentage of total revenue.
Provision for Income Taxes. Our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 13.1% of earnings before income taxes. Our effective tax rate decreased from our statutory tax rate by approximately 10.6 percentage points, which was driven by an excess tax benefit from share-based compensation of 10.8 percentage points offset by approximately 0.4 percentage points of non-deductible expenses. Our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2019 was 39.6% of earnings before income taxes. As of the completion of the Spin-Off, approximately $10.3 million of transaction costs became nondeductible, having a one-time impact of increasing our effective tax rate. This was offset by a decrease to our effective tax rate resulting from a tax benefit of share-based compensation. See Note 14, Income Taxes, to the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements included elsewhere in this report filed on Form 10-K for further discussion.
Comparison of Prior Year Information
For a comparison of our results of operations of the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 refer to Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation on Form 10-K filed with the SEC on March 4, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary sources of liquidity are net cash provided by operating activities, including advance payments under the CARES Act, and borrowings under our revolving credit facility.
Revolving Credit Facility
On October 1, 2019, Pennant entered into a credit agreement (the “Credit Agreement”), which provided for a revolving credit facility with a syndicate of banks with a borrowing capacity of $75.0 million.
Amended Credit Facility
On February 23, 2021, Pennant entered into an amendment to the Credit Agreement (the “Amended Credit Agreement”), which provides for an increased revolving credit facility with a syndicate of banks with a borrowing capacity of $150.0 million (the “Revolving Credit Facility”). The Revolving Credit Facility is not subject to interim amortization and the Company will not be required to repay any loans under the Revolving Credit Facility prior to maturity in 2026. The Company is permitted to prepay all or any portion of the loans under the Revolving Credit Facility prior to maturity without premium or penalty, subject to reimbursement of any LIBOR breakage costs of the lenders.
The Amended Credit Agreement contains customary covenants that, among other things, restrict, subject to certain exceptions, the ability of the Company and its independent operating subsidiaries to grant liens on their assets, incur indebtedness, sell assets, make investments, engage in acquisitions, mergers or consolidations, amend certain material agreements and pay certain dividends and other restricted payments. Financial covenants require compliance with certain levels of leverage ratios that impact the amount of interest. As of December 31, 2020, the Company was in compliance with all covenants.
The CARES Act and COVID-19 Capital Considerations
The CARES Act expanded CMS’s ability to provide accelerated/advance payments intended to increase the cash flow of healthcare providers and suppliers impacted by COVID-19. During the year, the Company applied for and received $28.0 million as an advance payment. These funds are subject to automatic recoupment through offsets to new claims beginning one year after payments were issued beginning in April 2021, at which time, Medicare will automatically recoup 25 percent of Medicare payments for 11 months. At the end of the 11 months and assuming full repayment has not occurred, recoupment will increase to 50 percent for another six months. Any balance outstanding after these two recoupment periods will be subject to repayment at a four percent interest rate. We anticipate completing repayment of the AAP within the allotted recoupment periods. The CARES Act also temporarily suspends the 2% sequestration payment adjustment on Medicare fee-for-service payment, meaning a 2% payment increase on Medicare claims with dates of service from May 1, 2020 through December 31, 2020. Through December 31, 2020, we have earned $2.8 million due to the suspension of the sequestration adjustment. Further, the CARES Act allows for the deferral of FICA taxes owed from March - December 31, 2020 with 50% payment due on December 31, 2021 and the remainder due on December 31, 2022. As of December 31, 2020 we deferred $8.4 million, with $4.2 million in other long-term liabilities.
In addition to relief provided by the CARES Act and other legislative and regulatory assistance, we have implemented cost control measures such as reduced spending, non-essential supplies, travel costs and all other discretionary items, and we have delayed non-essential capital expenditure projects. The continued impact of COVID-19 on our liquidity and financial resources is uncertain. We are monitoring the ongoing impact of these actions to our revenue and expenses. The extent to which COVID-19 impacts our operations will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, including the duration of the outbreak, new information that may emerge concerning the severity of the coronavirus and the actions taken to contain the coronavirus or treat its impact, among others.
We believe that our existing cash, cash generated through operations and our access to financing facilities, together with funding through third-party sources such as commercial banks, will be sufficient to fund our operating activities and growth needs, and provide adequate liquidity for the next twelve months.
The following table presents selected data from our combined statement of cash flows for the periods presented:
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Our net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $40.7 million. The increase was primarily due to an increase in net income of $12.4 million and the receipt of $28.0 million related to Advance Payments received from the CARES Act.
Our net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $15.2 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This use of cash is primarily attributable to an increase in acquisitions of $14.4 million and an increase in capital expenditures of $0.5 million in support of establishing post Spin-Off stand-alone systems.
Our net cash used in financing activities decreased by approximately $26.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to an increase in payments on our revolving credit facility in the current year, offset by net cash proceeds from our revolving credit facility in the prior year.
Contractual Obligations, Commitments and Contingencies
(a) Lease amounts include minimum rental payments under our non-cancelable operating leases. The amounts presented are consistent with contractual terms and are not expected to differ significantly from actual results under our existing leases. In connection with the Spin-Off, we amended our master lease agreements with Ensign and certain other landlords.
(b) Assumes all long-term debt under the current credit facility is outstanding until scheduled maturity in 2024. Under the Amended Credit Facility the Company will not be required to repay any loans prior to maturity in 2026.
(c) Interest payments on long-term debt are projected for future periods using the outstanding long-term debt and the interest rates in effect as of December 31, 2020. Interest payments may differ in the future based on changes in market interest rates and borrowings.