ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion summarizes the significant factors affecting the consolidated operating results, financial condition, liquidity and capital resources of Post Holdings, Inc. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the financial statements under Item 8 of this report and the “Cautionary Statement on Forward-Looking Statements” on page 1 of this report.
OVERVIEW
We are a consumer packaged goods holding company, operating in five reportable segments: Post Consumer Brands, Weetabix, Foodservice, Refrigerated Retail and BellRing Brands. Our products are sold through a variety of channels, including grocery, club and drug stores, mass merchandisers, foodservice, food ingredient and eCommerce.
At September 30, 2021, our reportable segments were as follows:
•Post Consumer Brands: North American ready-to-eat (“RTE”) cereal and Peter Pan nut butters;
•Weetabix: primarily United Kingdom (the “U.K.”) RTE cereal and muesli;
•Foodservice: primarily egg and potato products;
•Refrigerated Retail: primarily side dish, egg, cheese and sausage products; and
•BellRing Brands: ready-to-drink (“RTD”) protein shakes, other RTD beverages, powders and nutrition bars.
Transactions
Initial Public Offering of Post Holdings Partnering Corporation
On May 28, 2021, we and Post Holdings Partnering Corporation, a newly formed special purpose acquisition company incorporated as a Delaware corporation (“PHPC”), consummated the initial public offering of 30.0 million units of PHPC (the “PHPC Units”). On June 3, 2021, PHPC issued an additional 4.5 million PHPC Units pursuant to the underwriters’ exercise in full of their over-allotment option. The term “PHPC IPO” as used herein generally refers to the consummation of the initial public offering on May 28, 2021 and the underwriters’ exercise in full of their over-allotment option on June 3, 2021. Each PHPC Unit consists of one share of Series A common stock of PHPC, $0.0001 par value per share (“PHPC Series A Common Stock”), and one-third of one redeemable warrant of PHPC, each whole warrant entitling the holder thereof to purchase one share of PHPC Series A Common Stock at an exercise price of $11.50 per share (the “PHPC Warrants”). The PHPC Units were sold at a price of $10.00 per PHPC Unit, generating gross proceeds to PHPC of $345.0 million. PHPC Sponsor, LLC, our wholly-owned subsidiary (“PHPC Sponsor”), purchased 4.0 million of the 30.0 million PHPC Units in the initial public offering on May 28, 2021 for $40.0 million. The PHPC Units began trading on the New York Stock Exchange (the “NYSE”) under the ticker symbol “PSPC.U” on May 26, 2021. As of July 16, 2021, holders of the PHPC Units could elect to separately trade their shares of PHPC Series A Common Stock and PHPC Warrants, with the shares of PHPC Series A Common Stock and the PHPC Warrants listed on the NYSE under the symbols “PSPC” and “PSPC WS”, respectively. Under the terms of the PHPC IPO, PHPC is required to consummate a partnering transaction within 24 months (or 27 months under certain circumstances) of the completion of the PHPC IPO.
Substantially concurrently with the closing of the initial public offering on May 28, 2021, PHPC completed the private sale of 1.0 million units of PHPC (the “PHPC Private Placement Units”), at a purchase price of $10.00 per PHPC Private Placement Unit, to PHPC Sponsor, and in connection with the underwriters’ exercise in full of their option to purchase additional PHPC Units, PHPC Sponsor purchased an additional 0.1 million PHPC Private Placement Units, generating proceeds to PHPC of $10.9 million (the “PHPC Private Placement”). The PHPC Private Placement Units sold in the PHPC Private Placement are identical to the PHPC Units sold in the PHPC IPO, except that, with respect to the warrants underlying the PHPC Private Placement Units (the “PHPC Private Placement Warrants”) that are held by PHPC Sponsor or its permitted transferees, such PHPC Private Placement Warrants (i) may be exercised for cash or on a cashless basis, (ii) are not subject to being called for redemption (except in certain circumstances when the PHPC Warrants are called for redemption and a certain price per share of PHPC Series A Common Stock threshold is met) and (iii) subject to certain limited exceptions, will be subject to transfer restrictions until 30 days following the consummation of PHPC’s partnering transaction. If the PHPC Private Placement Warrants are held by holders other than PHPC Sponsor or its permitted transferees, the PHPC Private Placement Warrants will be redeemable by PHPC in all redemption scenarios and exercisable by holders on the same basis as the PHPC Warrants.
In addition, we, through PHPC Sponsor’s ownership of 8.6 million shares of Series F common stock of PHPC, $0.0001 par value per share, have certain governance rights in PHPC relating to the election of PHPC directors and voting rights on amendments to PHPC’s certificate of incorporation.
In connection with the completion of the initial public offering on May 28, 2021, PHPC also entered into a forward purchase agreement with PHPC Sponsor (the “Forward Purchase Agreement”), providing for the purchase by PHPC Sponsor, at the election of PHPC, of up to 10.0 million units of PHPC (the “PHPC Forward Purchase Units”), subject to the terms and conditions of the Forward Purchase Agreement, with each PHPC Forward Purchase Unit consisting of one share of PHPC’s Series B common stock, of $0.0001 par value per share, and one-third of one warrant to purchase one share of PHPC Series A Common Stock, for a purchase price of $10.00 per PHPC Forward Purchase Unit, in an aggregate amount of up to $100.0 million in a private placement to occur concurrently with the closing of PHPC’s partnering transaction.
In determining the accounting treatment of our equity interest in PHPC, management concluded that PHPC is a variable interest entity (“VIE”) as defined by Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 810, “Consolidation.” A VIE is an entity in which equity investors at risk lack the characteristics of a controlling financial interest. VIEs are consolidated by the primary beneficiary, the party who has both the power to direct the activities of a VIE that most significantly impact the entity’s economic performance, as well as the obligation to absorb losses of the entity or the right to receive benefits from the entity that could potentially be significant to the entity. PHPC Sponsor is the primary beneficiary of PHPC as it has, through its equity interest, the right to receive benefits or the obligation to absorb losses from PHPC, as well as the power to direct a majority of the activities that significantly impact PHPC’s economic performance, including partnering transaction target identification. As such, PHPC is fully consolidated into our financial statements.
As of September 30, 2021, we beneficially owned 31.0% of the equity of PHPC and the net income and net assets of PHPC were consolidated within our financial statements. The remaining 69.0% of the consolidated net income and net assets of PHPC, representing the percentage of economic interest in PHPC held by the public stockholders of PHPC through their ownership of PHPC equity, were allocated to redeemable noncontrolling interest (“NCI”). All transactions between PHPC and PHPC Sponsor, as well as related financial statement impacts, eliminate in consolidation.
Initial Public Offering of BellRing Brands, Inc.
On October 21, 2019, BellRing Brands, Inc. (“BellRing”), our subsidiary, closed its initial public offering (the “BellRing IPO”) of 39.4 million shares of its Class A common stock, $0.01 par value per share (the “BellRing Class A Common Stock”). BellRing received net proceeds from the BellRing IPO of $524.4 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions. As a result of the BellRing IPO and certain other transactions completed in connection with the BellRing IPO, BellRing became a publicly-traded company with the BellRing Class A Common Stock being traded on the NYSE under the ticker symbol “BRBR” and the holding company of BellRing Brands, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“BellRing LLC”), owning 28.8% of its non-voting membership units (the “BellRing LLC units”) with us owning 71.2% of the BellRing LLC units and one share of BellRing’s Class B common stock, $0.01 par value per share (the “BellRing Class B Common Stock” and, collectively with the BellRing Class A Common Stock, the “BellRing Common Stock”). The BellRing Class B Common Stock has voting rights but no rights to dividends or other economic rights. For so long as we and our affiliates (other than BellRing and its subsidiaries) directly own more than 50% of the BellRing LLC units, the BellRing Class B Common Stock represents 67% of the combined voting power of the BellRing Common Stock, which provides us control over BellRing’s board of directors and results in the full consolidation of BellRing and its subsidiaries into our financial statements. BellRing LLC is the holding company for our historical active nutrition business, reported herein as the BellRing Brands segment and reported historically as the Active Nutrition segment. The term “BellRing” as used herein generally refers to BellRing Brands, Inc.; however, in discussions related to debt facilities, the term “BellRing” refers to BellRing Brands, LLC.
As of September 30, 2021 and 2020, we and our affiliates (other than BellRing and its subsidiaries) owned 71.2% of the BellRing LLC units and the net income and net assets of BellRing and its subsidiaries were consolidated within our financial statements, and the remaining 28.8% of the consolidated net income and net assets of BellRing and its subsidiaries, representing the percentage of economic interest in BellRing LLC held by BellRing (and therefore indirectly held by the public stockholders of BellRing through their ownership of the BellRing Class A Common Stock), were allocated to noncontrolling interest. For additional information, see Notes 4 and 17 within “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.”
Capitalization of 8th Avenue Food & Provisions, Inc.
On October 1, 2018, 8th Avenue Food & Provisions, Inc. (“8th Avenue”) was separately capitalized by us and third parties through a series of transactions (the “8th Avenue Transactions”), and 8th Avenue became the holding company for our historical private brands business, reported historically as our Private Brands segment. We retained shares of common stock equal to 60.5% of the common equity in 8th Avenue. 8th Avenue is no longer consolidated in our financial statements and the 60.5% common equity retained interest in 8th Avenue is accounted for using the equity method. For additional information, see Notes 4 and 7 within “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.”
Acquisitions
We completed the following acquisitions during the reporting period:
Fiscal 2021
•Private label RTE cereal business of TreeHouse Foods, Inc. (the “PL RTE Cereal Business”), acquired on June 1, 2021 and reported in our Post Consumer Brands segment;
•Egg Beaters liquid egg brand (“Egg Beaters”), acquired on May 27, 2021 and reported in our Refrigerated Retail segment;
•Almark Foods business and related assets (“Almark”), acquired on February 1, 2021 and reported in our Foodservice and Refrigerated Retail segments; and
•Peter Pan nut butter brand (“Peter Pan”), acquired on January 25, 2021 and reported in our Post Consumer Brands segment.
Fiscal 2020
•Henningsen Foods, Inc. (“Henningsen”) acquired July 1, 2020 and reported in our Foodservice segment.
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused and continues to cause global economic disruption and uncertainty, including in our business. We continue to closely monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and developments related thereto and are taking, or have taken, necessary actions to ensure our ability to safeguard the health of our employees, including their economic health, maintain the continuity of our supply chain to serve customers and consumers and preserve financial liquidity to navigate the uncertainty caused by the pandemic. Examples of actions we have taken in response to the pandemic include:
•reinforcing manufacturing facilities with adequate supplies, staffing and support;
•enhancing facility safety measures and working closely with public health officials to follow additional health and safety guidelines;
•in fiscal 2020, drawing $500.0 million of our $750.0 million revolving credit facility (the “Revolving Credit Facility”) and $65.0 million of BellRing’s revolving credit facility (the “BellRing Revolving Credit Facility”) to further enhance liquidity in March 2020. Borrowings under both credit facilities were repaid prior to the end of fiscal 2020;
•in fiscal 2020, temporarily suspending our share repurchase program, which we resumed in May 2020; and
•in fiscal 2020 and in the first half of fiscal 2021, actively managing our foodservice egg supply, including taking measures to reduce internal production, delivering contract suspension notices invoking force majeure clauses with respect to certain of our suppliers in the second quarter of fiscal 2020 (these contract suspensions were provisionally lifted on July 1, 2020) and repurposing product into our retail channel.
Our products sold through retail channels generally experienced an uplift in sales starting in March 2020 and continuing through the first half of fiscal 2021 driven by increased at-home consumption in reaction to the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, most of our retail categories exhibited a mix shift to premium products. In the second half of fiscal 2021, most of our retail channel product categories trended toward growth rates in line with their pre-pandemic levels.
At the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, our foodservice business was significantly impacted by lower away-from-home demand resulting from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on various channels, including full service restaurants, quick service restaurants, education and travel and lodging. Since then, the recovery of our foodservice volumes has been closely tracking with changes in the degree of restrictions on mobility and gathering. Volumes have nearly fully recovered to pre-pandemic levels in certain channels and product categories, and volumes in other channels impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic have recovered from low levels experienced at the height of the pandemic, but have recently plateaued at levels below pre-pandemic levels. In the aggregate, our overall foodservice business volumes remain below pre-pandemic levels.
As the overall economy continues to recover from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, labor shortages, input and freight inflation and other supply chain disruptions, including input availability, are pressuring our supply chains in all segments, resulting in missed sales and higher manufacturing costs, most notably in our Foodservice and Refrigerated Retail segments. Per unit product costs escalated as throughput declined and fixed cost absorption worsened. Service levels and fill rates remain below normal levels, and inventories are low, resulting in the placement of certain products on allocation. These factors are expected to persist into fiscal 2022 and are dependent upon our ability to adequately hire, train and retain manufacturing staff, maintain sufficient supplies of ingredients and packaging and rebuild inventory levels.
Volume and profit recovery in our Foodservice segment is dependent on both changes in the degree of restrictions on mobility and gathering and on the ability to navigate supply chain disruptions. We expect our Foodservice segment to return to pre-pandemic profitability in fiscal 2023. Volume growth in our Refrigerated Retail segment, most notably for side dish products, is expected to be constrained until supply chain performance has stabilized.
BellRing’s primary categories returned to growth rates in line with their pre-pandemic levels in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020 and have remained strong in subsequent periods. As the overall economy continues to recover from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, input and freight inflation, equipment delays and input and labor availability are pressuring BellRing’s supply chain. Lower than anticipated production and delays in capacity expansion across the broader third party shake contract manufacturer network have resulted in low inventories and missed sales. Service levels and fill rates remain below normal levels, and certain products have been placed on allocation. These factors are expected to improve but persist throughout fiscal 2022 and are dependent upon BellRing’s contract manufacturer partners’ ability to deliver committed volumes, add capacity on expected timelines, retain manufacturing staff and rebuild inventory levels.
For additional discussion, refer to “Liquidity and Capital Resources” within this section, as well as “Cautionary Statement on Forward-Looking Statements” on page 1 of this report and “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of this report.
Lease Accounting
On October 1, 2019, we adopted Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2016-02, “Leases (Topic 842),” and ASU 2018-11, “Leases (Topic 842): Targeted Improvements.” At adoption, we recognized right-of-use (“ROU”) assets and lease liabilities of $158.1 million and $168.2 million, respectively, on the balance sheet at October 1, 2019. For additional information regarding these ASUs, refer to Notes 3 and 16 within “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements."
Revenue from Contracts with Customers
On October 1, 2018, we adopted ASU 2014-09, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606),” which superseded all previously existing revenue recognition guidance under accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). As a result of the adoption, we reclassified certain payments to customers from “Selling, general, and administrative expenses” to “Net Sales” and recognized revenue that was previously deferred in “Net Sales” in the Consolidated Statement of Operations for the year ended September 30, 2019. For additional information regarding ASU 2014-09, refer to Note 2 within “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.” The following table presents the impact on net sales resulting from the adoption of ASU 2014-09 by segment.
Announcements Subsequent to Period End
In October 2021, we, along with BellRing, entered into a transaction agreement related to our previously announced plan to distribute a significant portion of our interest in BellRing to our shareholders. We expect the distribution to be completed in the first calendar quarter of 2022, subject to certain customary conditions. See Note 23 within “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” for additional information on the announcement.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Net Sales
Fiscal 2021 compared to 2020
Net sales increased $528.0 million, or 9%, during the year ended September 30, 2021. This increase was due to growth in our BellRing Brands, Foodservice, Weetabix and Refrigerated Retail segments, as well as incremental contributions from our current and prior year acquisitions. These positive impacts were partially offset by a decline in our Post Consumer Brands segment. For further discussion, refer to “Segment Results” within this section.
Fiscal 2020 compared to 2019
Net sales increased $17.6 million, or less than 1%, during the year ended September 30, 2020. This increase was due to growth in our BellRing Brands, Post Consumer Brands, Refrigerated Retail and Weetabix segments, as well as the inclusion of incremental contributions from our acquisition of Henningsen. These positive impacts were partially offset by a decline in our Foodservice segment. For further discussion, refer to “Segment Results” within this section.
Operating Profit
Fiscal 2021 compared to 2020
Operating profit decreased $44.8 million, or 6%, for the year ended September 30, 2021. This decrease was primarily due to lower segment profit within our Post Consumer Brands and Refrigerated Retail segments, partially offset by increased segment profit within our Foodservice, BellRing Brands and Weetabix segments, as well as decreased general corporate expenses and other. For further discussion, refer to “Segment Results” within this section.
Fiscal 2020 compared to 2019
Operating profit decreased $80.5 million, or 10%, for the year ended September 30, 2020. In the year ended September 30, 2019, operating profit was impacted by losses related to the impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets of $63.3 million and by a gain on sale of business of $126.6 million related to the 8th Avenue Transactions. Excluding these impacts in fiscal 2019, operating profit decreased $17.2 million, or 2%, primarily due to lower segment profit within our Foodservice and BellRing Brands segments, partially offset by increased segment profit within our Post Consumer Brands, Refrigerated Retail and Weetabix segments, as well as decreased general corporate expenses and other. For further discussion, refer to “Segment Results” within this section.
Interest Expense, net
Interest expense decreased $12.8 million, or 3%, for the year ended September 30, 2021, compared to the prior year. The decrease was driven by decreased losses of $7.5 million on our interest rate swap contracts, a lower weighted-average interest
rate when compared to the prior year period, decreased amortization of debt issuance costs, deferred financing fees and debt discount of $1.9 million and increased amortization of debt premium of $1.7 million. These positive impacts were partially offset by lower interest income of $5.7 million on our cash balances. Our weighted-average interest rate on our total outstanding debt was 5.1% and 5.3% for the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. This decrease in our weighted-average interest rate was driven by refinancing debt at lower interest rates.
Interest expense increased $66.2 million, or 21%, for the year ended September 30, 2020, compared to the prior year. The increase was driven by increased losses (compared to gains in fiscal 2019) of $41.0 million on our interest rate swap contracts. Additionally, interest expense increased from the impact of senior notes issued in fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019 and debt entered into in connection with the BellRing IPO on October 21, 2019, partially offset by reduced interest expense of $56.6 million as a result of the repayment of our previously outstanding term loan in the first quarter of fiscal 2020. Our weighted-average interest rate on our total outstanding debt was 5.3% and 5.2% for the years ended September 30, 2020 and 2019, respectively. This increase in our weighted-average interest rate was driven by a change in the mix of debt outstanding. During the year ended September 30, 2019, we recorded $5.9 million of interest expense related to amounts owed to former holders of shares of Bob Evans common stock who demanded appraisal of their shares of Bob Evans common stock under Delaware law. No such interest expense was recorded during the year ended September 30, 2020.
For additional information on our interest rate swaps, refer to Note 14 within “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.” For additional information on our debt, refer to Note 17 within “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” and “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk” in