ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is intended to provide a better understanding of the significant changes in trends relating to the Company’s financial condition, results of operation, liquidity, and capital resources. This section should be read in conjunction with the disclosures regarding “Forward-Looking Statements” set forth in “Item I. Business-Forward Looking Statements”, as well as the discussion set forth in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” including the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Summary
Our principal business is attracting deposits from small- and middle-market businesses, corporations and consumers and investing those deposits, together with funds generated from operations and borrowings, primarily in commercial loans and various types of commercial real estate loans. The Company expects to fund substantially all of the loans that it originates or purchases through deposits, FHLB advances and other borrowings, and internally generated funds. Deposit flows and cost of funds are influenced by prevailing market rates of interest primarily on competing investments, account maturities, and the levels of savings in the Company’s market area. The Company generates the majority of its revenues from interest income on loans that it originates and purchases, and income from investment in securities. The Company also provides its clients with financial products and services which generate noninterest income such as service charges on customer accounts, trust custodial account fees, and escrow and exchange fees. The Company’s revenues are partially offset by interest expense paid on deposits and borrowings, the provision for credit losses, and noninterest expenses, such as operating expenses. The Company’s operating expenses primarily consist of employee compensation and benefit expenses, premises and occupancy expenses, data processing, deposit expenses, and other general expenses. The Company’s results of operations are also affected by prevailing economic conditions, competition, acquisitions, government policies, and other actions of regulatory agencies.
The COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 outbreak was declared a Public Health Emergency of International Concern by the World Health Organization on January 30, 2020 and a pandemic by the World Health Organization on March 11, 2020. The ongoing COVID-19 global pandemic and national health emergency has caused significant disruption in the United States and international economies and financial markets. The operations and business results of the Company have been and could continue to be materially adversely affected.
Correspondingly, in early March 2020, the Company began preparing for potential disruptions and government limitations of activity in the markets in which we serve. We activated our Business Continuity Program and Pandemic Preparedness Plan, and were able to quickly execute on multiple initiatives to adjust our operations to protect the health and safety of our employees and clients. We expanded remote-access availability to ensure a greater number of employees have the capability to work from home or other remote locations without impacting our operations while continuing to provide a superior level of customer service. We also reconfigured our corporate headquarter offices and branches to promote social distancing for employees by erecting physical barriers, and provided monthly rapid COVID-19 testing for all employees and their partners. The Company also issued a Company-wide employee appreciation bonus related to the COVID-19 pandemic during the fourth quarter of 2020.
Since the beginning of the crisis, we have been in close contact with our clients, assessing the level of impact on their businesses, and implementing a process to evaluate each client’s specific situation, and where appropriate, providing relief programs. We also enhanced client awareness of our digital banking offerings to ensure that we continue to provide a superior level of customer service. We have taken steps to comply with various government directives regarding social distancing and use of personal protective equipment in the work place, and we are following the guidance from the Centers of Disease Control (“CDC”) to protect our employees.
The Company continued its efforts to monitor the loan portfolio to identify potential at-risk segments and line of credit draws for deviations from normal activity, increase the allowance allocated to these portfolios, and support our customers affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, including but not limited to the following:
•Participated in the Small Business Administration’s Paycheck Protection Program
We were able to quickly establish our process for participating in the SBA PPP that enabled our clients to utilize this valuable resource beginning in April 2020. Our team executed PPP loans in the initial two rounds of the program, which allowed us to further strengthen and deepen our client relationships, while positively impacting tens of thousands of individuals. In July 2020, the Bank sold its entire SBA PPP loan portfolio with an aggregate amortized cost of $1.13 billion to a seasoned and experienced non-bank lender and servicer of SBA loans, resulting in improved balance sheet liquidity and a gain on sale of approximately of $18.9 million, net of net deferred origination fees and net purchase discounts.
•Implemented a temporary loan modification program for borrowers affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, including payment deferrals, fee waivers, and extensions of repayment terms.
In keeping with regulatory guidance to work with borrowers during this unprecedented situation and as outlined in the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”), the Bank established COVID-19 temporary modification program, including interest-only payments, or full payment deferrals for clients that are adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. The CARES Act also addressed COVID-19 related modifications and specified that such modifications made during the eligible periods on loans that were current as of December 31, 2019 are not classified as TDRs. In accordance with interagency guidance issued in April 2020, these short-term modifications made to a borrower affected by the COVID-19 pandemic and governmental shutdown orders, including payment deferrals, fee waivers, and extensions of repayment terms, do not need to be classified as TDRs if the loans were current at the time a modification plan was implemented. The Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 (“CAA”), signed into law on December 27, 2020, extends the period to include modifications to loans held by financial institutions executed between March 1, 2020 and the earlier of (i) January 1, 2022, or (ii) 60 days after the date of termination of the COVID-19 national emergency. As of December 31, 2020, 52 loans with an aggregate amortized cost of $79.5 million, or 0.6% of total loans held for investment, remained under modification due to COVID-19 hardship under the CARES Act. Of those, 5 loans totaling $3.1 million were acquired in connection with the acquisition of Opus. Please also see Note 4 - Loans Held for Investment for additional information.
Additionally, the CARES Act provides for relief on existing and new SBA loans through the Small Business Debt Relief program. As part of the SBA Small Business Debt Relief, the SBA will automatically pay principal, interest and fees of certain SBA loans for a period of six months for both existing loans and new loans issued prior to September 27, 2020. On December 27, 2020, the CAA authorized a second round of SBA payments on covered loans approved before March 27, 2020, for a two-month period beginning with the first payment due on the loan on or after February 1, 2021 and for an additional three-month period for certain eligible borrowers. For new loans approved beginning on February 2, 2021 and ending on September 30, 2021, SBA will make the payments for a three-month period subject to the availability of funds. At December 31, 2020, approximately 507 loans, representing approximately $142.8 million aggregate reported balance, are eligible for this relief. The CARES Act also provides for mortgage payment relief and a foreclosure moratorium.
The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic impacts the Company’s business, asset valuations, results of operations, and financial condition, as well as its regulatory capital and liquidity ratios, will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, including the scope and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and the actions taken by governmental authorities and other third parties in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Material adverse impacts may include all or a combination of valuation impairments on our intangible assets, investments, loans, loan servicing rights, and deferred tax assets.
Given the fluidity of the situation, management cannot estimate the long-term impact of the COVID-19 pandemic at this time. During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company, as part of its annual assessment of its goodwill assets for impairment, made an unconditional election to forego a qualitative assessment of goodwill and proceed directly to the first step in the quantitative assessment of goodwill. The results of this assessment indicated the estimated fair value of the Company exceeded its carrying value and that the value of goodwill assets could be supported and were not impaired. As of December 31, 2020, our goodwill totaled $898.6 million. Please also see Note 8 - Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets for additional discussion concerning goodwill.
The preventative measures taken by various state and local governments, as well as the U.S. government, to stem the spread and impact of the on-going COVID-19 pandemic, have contributed to further strain on economic conditions. Certain businesses and service providers have not been able to conduct operations in their usual manner or have had to temporarily halt operations altogether. While the magnitude of the impact from the on-going COVID-19 pandemic and the related preventative measures taken is uncertain and difficult to predict, we anticipate the on-going COVID-19 pandemic to have an impact on the following:
•Loan growth and interest income - Current weakness in economic activity will likely have an impact on our borrowers, the businesses they operate and their financial condition. If we experience a protracted decline in economic activity, our borrowers may have less demand for credit needed to invest in and expand their businesses and/or support their ongoing operations. Additionally, our borrowers may have less demand for real estate and consumer loans. Further, during the first quarter of 2020, the Federal Reserve’s Federal Open Market Committee reduced the federal funds rate to a range of 0% to 0.25%. The potential for a reduction in future loan growth in conjunction with the decline in interest rates will place pressure on the level of and yield on earnings assets which may negatively impact our interest income.
•Credit quality - Increases in unemployment, declines in consumer confidence, and a reluctance on the part of businesses to invest in and expand their operations, among other things, may result in additional weakness in economic conditions, place strain on our borrowers, and ultimately impact the credit quality of our loan portfolio. We expect this would result in increases in the level of past due, nonaccrual, and classified loans, as well as higher net charge-offs. While certain economic metrics have improved from the initial onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in the first quarter of 2020, there can be no assurance the improvement in economic conditions will continue. As such, future deterioration in credit quality in conjunction with weakened economic conditions, may require us to record additional provisions for credit losses.
•CECL - On January 1, 2020, the Company adopted ASC 326, which requires the Company to measure credit losses on certain financial assets, such as loans and debt securities, using the CECL model. The CECL model for measuring credit losses is highly dependent upon expectations of future economic conditions and requires management judgment. Should expectations concerning future economic conditions continue to deteriorate, the Company may be required to record additional provisions for credit losses.
•Impairment charges - Prolonged deterioration in economic conditions will likely adversely impact the Company’s operating results and the value of certain of our assets. As a result, the Company may be required to write-down the value of certain assets such as goodwill or deferred tax assets when there is evidence to suggest their value has become impaired or will not be realizable at a future date.
The U.S. government as well as other state and local policy makers have responded to the on-going COVID-19 pandemic with actions geared to support not only the health and well-being of the public, but also consumers, businesses, and the economy as a whole. However, the impact and overall effectiveness of these actions is difficult to determine at this time. In addition, many economists have expressed concern over the need for additional government stimulus to support an economic recovery. However, the likelihood of additional government stimulus is unknown at this time, and the lack thereof may hinder the prospects of further economic recovery.
Acquisition of Opus
Effective as of June 1, 2020, the Corporation completed the acquisition of Opus, a California-chartered state bank headquartered in Irvine, California, pursuant to a definitive agreement dated as of January 31, 2020. At closing, Opus had $8.32 billion in total assets, $5.94 billion in gross loans, and $6.91 billion in total deposits and operated 46 banking offices located throughout California, Washington, Oregon, and Arizona. As a result of the Opus acquisition, the Corporation acquired specialty lines of business, including trust and escrow services.
Pursuant to the terms of the merger agreement, the consideration paid to Opus shareholders consisted of whole shares of the Corporation’s common stock and cash in lieu of fractional shares of the Corporation’s common stock. Upon consummation of the transaction, (i) each share of Opus common stock issued and outstanding immediately prior to the effective time of the acquisition was canceled and exchanged for the right to receive 0.900 shares of the Corporation’s common stock, with cash to be paid in lieu of fractional shares at a rate of $19.31 per share, and (ii) each share of Opus Series A non-cumulative, non-voting preferred stock issued and outstanding immediately prior to the effective time of the acquisition was converted into and canceled in exchange for the right to receive that number of shares of the Corporation’s common stock equal to the product of (X) the number of shares of Opus common stock into which such share of Opus preferred stock was convertible in connection with, and as a result of, the acquisition, and (Y) 0.900, in each case, plus cash in lieu of fractional shares of the Corporation’s common stock.
The Corporation issued 34,407,403 shares, net of 165,136 shares for tax withholding from Opus equity award holders, of the Corporation’s common stock valued at $21.62 per share, which was the closing price of the Corporation’s common stock on May 29, 2020, the last trading day prior to the consummation of the acquisition, and paid cash in lieu of fractional shares. The Corporation assumed Opus’s warrants and options, which represented the issuance of up to approximately 406,778 and 9,538 additional shares of the Corporation’s common stock, valued at approximately $1.8 million and $46,000, respectively, and issued substitute restricted stock units in an aggregate amount of $328,000. The value of the total transaction consideration paid amounted to approximately $749.6 million. The Opus warrants assumed by the Corporation expired unexercised on September 30, 2020 and no longer remain outstanding. The Opus options assumed by the Corporation have been fully exercised during the third quarter of 2020.
As a result of the Opus acquisition, the Company acquired Opus and recorded net assets of $659.4 million. The estimated fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed primarily consist of the followings:
•$5.81 billion of loans
•$937.1 million of cash and cash equivalents
•$829.9 million of investment securities
•$90.2 million of goodwill
•$16.1 million of core deposit intangible
•$3.2 million of customer relationship intangible
•$6.92 billion of deposits
The fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed were determined based on the requirements of FASB ASC Topic 820: Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures. Such fair values are preliminary estimates and are subject to adjustment for up to one year after the merger date or when additional information relative to the closing date fair values becomes available and such information is considered final, whichever is earlier.
The client account integration and system conversion of Opus was completed in October 2020. At the same time, as a result of the Opus acquisition, the Bank consolidated twenty (20) branch offices primarily in California, Washington, and Arizona into nearby branch offices. The consolidated branches were identified largely based on the proximity of neighboring branches, historic growth, and market opportunity to improve further the overall efficiency of operations in line with the Bank's ongoing cost reduction initiatives. Following the branch consolidations, the Bank operates 65 branches in major metropolitan markets in California, Washington, Oregon, Arizona, and Nevada. For additional information about the acquisition of Opus, please see Note 28 - Acquisitions of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements contained in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We have established various accounting policies that govern the application of accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America in the preparation of the Company’s financial statements in Item 8 hereof. The Company’s significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 - Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Certain accounting policies require management to make estimates and assumptions that have a material impact on the carrying value of certain assets and liabilities; management considers these to be critical accounting policies. The estimates and assumptions management uses are based on historical experience and other factors, which management believes to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ significantly from these estimates and assumptions, which could have a material impact on the carrying value of the Company’s assets and liabilities as well as the Company’s results of operations in future reporting periods.
Allowance for Credit Losses
The Company accounts for credit losses on loans in accordance with ASC 326, which requires the Company to record an estimate of expected lifetime credit losses for loans at the time of origination or acquisition. The ACL is maintained at a level deemed appropriate by management to provide for expected credit losses in the portfolio as of the date of the consolidated statements of financial condition. Estimating expected credit losses requires management to use relevant forward-looking information, including the use of reasonable and supportable forecasts. The measurement of the ACL is performed by collectively evaluating loans with similar risk characteristics. The Company measures the ACL on commercial real estate loans and commercial loans using a discounted cash flow approach, and a historical loss rate methodology is used to determine the ACL on retail loans. The Company’s discounted cash flow methodology incorporates a probability of default and loss given default model, as well as expectations of future economic conditions, using reasonable and supportable forecasts. The use of reasonable and supportable forecasts require significant judgment, such as selecting forecast scenarios and related scenario-weighting, as well as determining the appropriate length of the forecast horizon. Management leverages economic projections from a reputable and independent third party to inform and provide its reasonable and supportable economic forecasts. Other internal and external indicators of economic forecasts may also be considered by management when developing the forecast metrics. The Company’s ACL model reverts to long-term average loss rates for purposes of estimating expected cash flows beyond a period deemed reasonable and supportable. The Company forecasts economic conditions and expected credit losses over a two-year time horizon before reverting to long-term average loss rates over a period of three years. The duration of the forecast horizon, the period over which forecasts revert to long-term averages, the economic forecasts that management utilizes, as well as additional internal and external indicators of economic forecasts that management considers, may change over time depending on the nature and composition of our loan portfolio. Changes in economic forecasts, in conjunction with changes in loan specific attributes, impact a loan’s probability of default and loss given default, which can drive changes in the determination of the ACL.
Expectations of future cash flows are discounted at the loan’s effective interest rate. The resulting ACL represents the amount by which the loan’s amortized cost exceeds the net present value of a loan’s discounted cash flows. The ACL is recorded through a charge to provision for credit losses and is reduced by charge-offs, net of recoveries on loans previously charged-off. It is the Company’s policy to promptly charge-off loan balances at the time they have been deemed uncollectible.
The Company’s ACL model also includes adjustments for qualitative factors, where appropriate. Since historical information (such as historical net losses and economic cycles) may not always, by themselves, provide a sufficient basis for determining future expected credit losses, the Company periodically considers the need for qualitative adjustments to the ACL. Qualitative adjustments may be related to and include, but not limited to, factors such as: (i) management’s assessment of economic forecasts used in the model and how those forecasts align with management’s overall evaluation of current and expected economic conditions, (ii) organization specific risks such as credit concentrations, collateral specific risks, regulatory risks, and external factors that may ultimately impact credit quality, (iii) potential model limitations such as limitations identified through back-testing, and other limitations associated with factors such as underwriting changes, acquisition of new portfolios, changes in portfolio segmentation, and (iv) management’s overall assessment of the adequacy of the ACL, including an assessment of model data inputs used to determine the ACL.
The Company has a credit portfolio review process designed to detect problem loans. Problem loans are typically those of a substandard or worse internal risk grade, and may consist of loans on nonaccrual status, troubled debt restructurings, loans where the likelihood of foreclosure on underlying collateral has increased, collateral dependent loans and other loans where concern or doubt over the ultimate collectability of all contractual amounts due has become elevated. Such loans may, in the opinion of management, be deemed to no longer possess risk characteristics similar to other loans in the loan portfolio, and as such may require individual evaluation to determine an appropriate ACL for the loan. When a loan is individually evaluated, the Company typically measures the expected credit loss for the loan based on a discounted cash flow approach, unless the loan has been deemed collateral dependent. Collateral dependent loans are loans where the repayment of the loan is expected to come from the operation of and/or eventual liquidation of the underlying collateral. The ACL for collateral dependent loans is determined using estimates for the fair value of the underlying collateral, less costs to sell. Although management uses the best information available to derive estimates necessary to measure an appropriate level of the ACL, future adjustments to the ACL may be necessary due to economic, operating, regulatory, and other conditions that may extend beyond the Company’s control.
Various regulatory agencies, as an integral part of their examination process, periodically review the Company’s ACL and credit risk grading process. Such agencies may require the Company to recognize additions to the allowance based on judgments different from those of management.
Please also see Note 5 - Allowance for Credit Losses, of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion concerning the Company’s ACL methodology, including discussion concerning economic forecasts used in the determination of the ACL and the estimated impact of COVID-19 on current expectations of economic conditions.
Allowance for Loan Losses
Prior to the Company’s adoption of ASC 326 on January 1, 2020, the Company maintained an allowance for loan and leases losses (“ALLL”) in accordance with ASC 450, Contingencies and ASC 310, Receivables. The ALLL was maintained at a level deemed appropriate by management to provide for known or probable incurred losses in the portfolio as of the date of the consolidated statements of financial condition. Management’s determination of the adequacy of the ALLL was based on an evaluation of the composition of the portfolio, actual historical loss experience, industry charge-off experience on income property loans, current economic conditions and other relevant factors in the area in which the Company’s lending and real estate activities are based. These factors may affect a borrower’s ability to pay as well as the value of the underlying collateral securing loans. The allowance was calculated by applying loss factors to loans held for investment according to loan type and loan credit classification. The loss factors were based primarily upon the Bank’s historical loss experience and industry charge-off experience, and are evaluated on a quarterly basis. Loan credit classifications were based on an internal loan review system, which was designed to provide for the detection of problem loans and assign an appropriate level of ALLL to them. The ALLL was periodically adjusted to reflect the estimated potential impact that relevant internal and external factors may have on losses inherent in the loan portfolio. These factors typically consisted of:
•Changes in lending policies and procedures, including underwriting standards and collection, charge-offs, and recovery practices;
•Changes in the nature and volume of the loan portfolio, including new types of lending;
•Changes in the experience, ability, and depth of lending management and other relevant staff that may have an impact on our loan portfolio;
•Changes in the volume and severity of adversely classified or graded loans;
•Changes in the quality of our loan review system and the management oversight;
•The existence and effect of any concentrations of credit and changes in the level of such concentrations;
•Changes in national, regional, and local economic conditions, including trends in real estate values and the interest rate environment;
•Changes in the value of the underlying collateral for collateral-dependent loans; and
•The effect of external factors, such as competition, legal developments, and regulatory requirements on the level of estimated credit losses in our current loan portfolio.
The ALLL was increased by provisions for loan losses, and reduced by charge-offs, net of recoveries of amounts previously charged-off.
Business Combinations
The Company accounts for business combinations under the acquisition method of accounting. Upon obtaining control of the acquired entity, the Company records all identifiable assets and liabilities at their estimated fair values. Goodwill is recorded when the consideration paid for an acquired entity exceeds the estimated fair value of the net assets acquired. Changes to the acquisition date fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed may be made as adjustments to goodwill over a 12-month measurement period following the date of acquisition. Such adjustments are attributable to additional information obtained related fair value estimates of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Certain costs associated with business combinations are expensed as incurred.
Goodwill
Goodwill assets arise from the acquisition method of accounting for business combinations and represent the excess value of the consideration paid over the fair value of the net assets acquired. Goodwill assets are deemed to have indefinite lives, are not subject to amortization and instead are tested for impairment at least annually. The Company’s policy is to assess goodwill for impairment in the fourth quarter of each year or more frequently if events or circumstances lead management to believe the value of goodwill may be impaired. Impairment testing is performed at the reporting unit level, which is considered the Corporation level as management has identified the Corporation as its sole reporting unit as of the date of the consolidated balance sheets. Management’s assessment of goodwill is performed in accordance with ASC 350-20 - Goodwill and Other - Goodwill, which allows the Company to first perform a qualitative assessment of goodwill to determine if it is more likely than not the fair value of the Company’s equity is below its carrying value. However, GAAP also allows the Company, at its option, to unconditionally forego the qualitative assessment and proceed directly to a quantitative assessment. When performing a qualitative assessment of goodwill, should the results of such analysis indicate it is more likely than not the fair value of the Company’s equity is below its carrying value, the Company then performs the quantitative assessment of goodwill to determine the fair value of the reporting unit and compares it to its carrying value. If the fair value of the reporting unit is below its carrying value, the Company would then recognize the amount of impairment as the amount by which the reporting unit’s carrying value exceeds its fair value, limited to the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit. Impairment losses are recorded as a charge to noninterest expense.
The Company is required to employ the use of significant judgment in its assessment of goodwill, both in a qualitative assessment and a quantitative assessment, if needed. Assessments of goodwill often require the use of fair value estimates, which are dependent upon various factors including estimates concerning the Company’s long term growth prospects. Imprecision in estimates can affect the estimated fair value of the reporting unit in a goodwill assessment. Additionally, various events or circumstances could have a negative effect on the estimated fair value of a reporting unit, including declines in business performance, increases in credit losses, as well as deterioration in economic or market conditions, which may result in a material impairment charge to earnings in future periods.
Please also see Note 8 - Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion concerning the Company’s goodwill and other intangible assets.
Acquired Loans
Loans acquired through purchase or a business combination are recorded at their fair value at the acquisition date. The Company performs an assessment of acquired loans to first determine if such loans have experienced more than insignificant deterioration in credit quality since their origination and thus should be classified and accounted for as purchased credit deteriorated (“PCD”) loans. For loans that have not experienced more than insignificant deterioration in credit quality since origination, referred to as non-PCD loans, the Company records such loans at fair value, with any resulting discount or premium accreted or amortized into interest income over the remaining life of the loan using the interest method. Additionally, upon the purchase or acquisition of non-PCD loans, the Company measures and records an ACL based on the Company’s methodology for determining the ACL. The ACL for non-PCD loans is recorded through a charge to provision for credit losses in the period in which the loans were purchased or acquired.
Acquired loans that are classified as PCD are acquired at fair value, which includes any resulting discounts or premiums. Discounts and premiums are accreted or amortized into interest income over the remaining life of the loan using the interest method. Unlike non-PCD loans, the initial ACL for PCD loans is established through an adjustment to the acquired loan balance and not through a charge to provision for credit losses in the period in which the loans were acquired. The ACL for PCD loans is determined with the use of the Company’s ACL methodology, and is recorded as an adjustment to the acquired loan balance on the date of acquisition. Characteristics of PCD loans include: delinquency, downgrade in credit quality since origination, loans on nonaccrual status, loans that had been modified, and/or other factors the Company may become aware of through its initial analysis of acquired loans that may indicate there has been more than insignificant deterioration in credit quality since a loan’s origination. In connection with the Opus acquisition on June 1, 2020, the Company acquired PCD loans with an aggregate fair value of approximately $841.2 million, and recorded a net ACL of approximately $21.2 million, which was added to the amortized cost of the loans.
Subsequent to acquisition, the ACL for both non-PCD and PCD loans are determined with the use of the Company’s ACL methodology in the same manner as all other loans.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
We use fair value measurements to record fair value adjustments to certain financial instruments and to determine fair value disclosures. Investment securities available-for-sale, derivative instruments, and equity warrant assets are financial instruments recorded at fair value on a recurring basis. Additionally, from time to time, we may be required to record other financial assets at fair value on a non-recurring basis, such as collateral dependent loans that are individually evaluated and OREO. These non-recurring fair value adjustments typically involve the application of lower of cost or fair value accounting or write-downs of individual assets. Please also see Note 19 - Fair Value of Financial Instruments of the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information about the extent to which fair value is used to measure assets and liabilities, the valuation methodologies used, and its impact to earnings, as well as the estimate fair value disclosures for financial instruments not recorded at fair value.
Income Taxes
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recorded for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in the Company’s financial statements or tax returns using the asset liability method. In estimating future tax consequences, all expected future events other than enactments of changes in tax laws or tax rates are considered. The effect on deferred taxes of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. Deferred tax assets are to be recognized for temporary differences that will result in deductible amounts in future years and for tax carryforwards if, in the opinion of management, it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will be realized. See also Note 15 of the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 hereof.
Operating Results
Overview. The comparability of financial information is affected by our acquisitions. On June 1, 2020, the Corporation completed the acquisition of Opus, and on July 1, 2018, completed the acquisition of Grandpoint.
Non-GAAP Measurements
The Company uses certain non-GAAP financial measures to provide meaningful supplemental information regarding the Company’s operational performance and to enhance investors’ overall understanding of such financial performance. Generally, a non-GAAP financial measure is a numerical measure of a company’s financial performance, financial position or cash flows that exclude (or include) amounts that are included in (or excluded from) the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP. However, these non-GAAP financial measures are supplemental and are not a substitute for an analysis based on GAAP measures and may not be comparable to non-GAAP financial measures that may be presented by other companies. The non-GAAP measures the Company uses include the following:
•Tangible common equity amounts and ratios, tangible assets, and tangible book value per share: These figures represent total shareholders’ equity reduced by the amount of intangible assets, including goodwill. Given that the use of these measures is prevalent among banking regulators, investors, and analysts, we disclose them in addition to equity-to-assets ratio, total assets, and book value per share, respectively.
•Efficiency ratio: This figure represents the ratio of noninterest expense less other real estate owned operations, amortization of intangible assets, and merger-related expense to the sum of net interest income before provision for credit losses and total noninterest income, less gain/(loss) on sale of securities, other-than-temporary impairment (“OTTI”) recovery/(loss) on investment securities, gain/(loss) on sale of other real estate owned, and gain/(loss) from debt extinguishment.
•Return on average tangible common equity: This figure is calculated by excluding amortization of intangible assets and excluding the average intangible assets and average goodwill from the average stockholders’ equity during the period.
•Core net interest income and core net interest margin: Core net interest income is calculated by excluding scheduled accretion income, accelerated accretion income, premium amortization on CDs, and nonrecurring nonaccrual interest paid from net interest income. The core net interest margin is calculated as the ratio of core net interest income to average interest-earning assets.
•Pre-provision net revenue: Pre-provision net revenue is calculated by excluding income tax, provision for credit losses, and merger-related expenses from the net income.
The following tables provide reconciliations of the non-GAAP measures with financial measures defined by GAAP:
Tangible Common Equity Amounts and Ratios
______________________________
(1) Related to the adoption of Accounting Standards Update 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments. See Note 1 - Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Efficiency Ratio
Return on Average Tangible Common Equity
______________________________
(1) Amortization of intangible assets expense adjusted by statutory tax rate
Core Net Interest Margin
Pre-Provision Net Revenue
Net Interest Income. Our primary source of revenue is net interest income, which is the difference between the interest earned on loans, investment securities, and interest earning balances with financial institutions (“interest-earning assets”) and the interest paid on deposits and borrowings (“interest-bearing liabilities”). Net interest margin is net interest income expressed as a percentage of average interest earning assets. Net interest income is affected by changes in volumes, mix, and rates of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, as well as days in a period.
For 2020, net interest income totaled $574.2 million, an increase of $126.9 million, or 28%, from 2019. This reflected an increase in average interest-earning assets of $5.05 billion, primarily due to the acquisition of Opus on June 1, 2020, which at acquisition added $5.81 billion of loans, $937.1 million of cash and cash equivalents, and $829.9 million of investment securities, as well as organic loan growth of $2.54 billion, investment securities purchases of $2.72 billion in 2020, and a lower cost of funds, partially offset by an increase in average interest-bearing liabilities of $3.03 billion, loan paydowns of $1.83 billion, and lower average loan and investment yields. Net interest margin decreased 59 basis points to 3.74% in 2020 from 4.33% in 2019. The decrease was primarily due to yields on interest-earning assets decreasing 100 basis points, driven primarily by the impact of the lower yielding Opus loan portfolio added in June 2020, the shift in interest-earning asset mix, and the deployment of excess liquidity into highly rated, lower yielding investment securities, partially offset by our cost of funds decreasing 44 basis points, driven principally by lower rates paid on deposits resulting from the decline in market interest rates.
For 2019, net interest income totaled $447.3 million, an increase of $54.6 million, or 14%, from 2018. The increase reflected an increase in average interest-earning assets of $1.48 billion, primarily due to the acquisitions of Grandpoint on July 1, 2018, which at acquisition added $2.40 billion of loans, and organic loan growth from new loan originations of $1.56 billion in 2019, partially offset by an increase in average interest-bearing liabilities of $631.4 million and loan paydowns of $1.36 billion. Net interest margin decreased 11 basis points to 4.33% from 4.44% in 2018, primarily due to cost of funds increasing 15 basis points, partially offset by yield on interest-earning assets increasing 3 basis points.
The following table presents the average dollar amounts from selected balance sheet categories calculated from daily average balances and the total dollar amount, including adjustments to yields and costs, of:
•interest income earned from average interest-earning assets and the resultant yields; and
•interest expense incurred from average interest-bearing liabilities and resultant costs, expressed as rates.
The table also sets forth our net interest income, net interest rate spread, and net interest rate margin for the periods indicated. The net interest rate spread represents the difference between the yield on interest-earning assets and the cost of interest-bearing liabilities. The net interest rate margin reflects the ratio of net interest income as a percentage of interest-earning assets for the year.
______________________________
(1) Average balance includes loans held for sale and nonperforming loans and is net of deferred loan origination fees/costs and discounts/premiums.
(2) Interest income includes net discount accretion of $33.2 million, $20.6 million, and $16.1 million, respectively.
(3) Represents net interest income divided by average interest-earning assets.
(4) Represents annualized total interest expense divided by the sum of average total interest-bearing liabilities and noninterest-bearing deposits.
Changes in our net interest income are a function of changes in volumes, mix, and rates of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, as well as days in a period. The following table presents the impact the volume, days in period, and rate changes have had on our net interest income for the years indicated. For each category of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, we have provided information on changes to our net interest income with respect to:
•Changes in volume (changes in volume multiplied by the prior period rate);
•Changes in days in a period (changes in days in a period multiplied by daily interest; no changes in days for comparisons of the year ended December 31, 2019 to the year ended December 31, 2018);
•Changes in interest rates (changes in interest rates multiplied by the prior period volume and includes the recognition of discounts/premiums and deferred fees/costs); and
•The net change or the combined impact of volume, days in a period, and rate changes allocated proportionately to changes in volume, days in a period, and changes in interest rates.
Provision for Credit Losses. For 2020, we recorded a total of $191.8 million in provision for credit losses compared to $5.7 million recorded in 2019, and $8.3 million recorded for 2018. The significant increase in 2020, which included a $172.3 million provision for loan losses and $19.6 million provision for off-balance sheet loan commitments, was primarily reflective of unfavorable economic forecasts employed in the Company’s CECL model, and the Day 1 provision for credit losses of $84.4 million, which included $75.9 million for loans held for investment and the provision for unfunded commitments of $8.6 million resulting from the acquisition of Opus.
The provision in 2019 included a $1.4 million recapture of provision for credit losses on off-balance sheet loan commitments, as well as a $53,000 provision recapture for loans sold. The provision for 2018 included a $163,000 provision for off-balance sheet loan commitments, slightly offset by a $66,000 provision recapture for loans sold.
Net loan charge-offs for 2020 amounted to $16.9 million, compared to $7.5 million in 2019, and $1.0 million in 2018. The increase was primarily due to the higher charge-offs in commercial and industrial loans and franchise non-real estate secured loans as compared to the same periods last year.
Noninterest Income. For 2020, noninterest income totaled $71.3 million, an increase of $36.1 million, or 102.4%, from 2019. The increase was primarily related to $16.7 million of trust custodial account fees from our Pacific Premier Trust division acquired in the Opus acquisition, an increase in net gain on sales from investments securities of $5.3 million as the Bank sold $752.6 million of securities during 2020 compared to $543.2 million in 2019, a $2.0 million increase in net gain from loan sales, from $6.6 million in 2019 to $8.6 million in 2020, as well as a $3.7 million increase in earnings on bank-owned life insurance (“BOLI”), primarily due to additional BOLI from Opus. Also, the Bank had an increase in other income of $7.7 million, which is primarily attributable to a $2.7 million escrow and exchange fee income attributable to the Commerce Escrow division acquired in the Opus acquisition, $1.6 million higher income on CRA related equity investments, $1.2 million higher recoveries on pre-acquisition charged-off loans, and $1.4 million lower loan servicing income.
During 2020, we sold $1.38 billion of loans with an average price of 100.4%, compared to 2019 in which we sold $191.5 million of loans with an average price of 103.3%. In 2020, total loans sold included $1.18 billion in SBA and U.S. Department of Agriculture (“USDA”) loans, primarily PPP loans, for a net gain of $20.3 million and $193.8 million in other loans for a net loss of $11.7 million, compared with sales of $99.9 million in SBA and USDA loans with a net gain of $8.4 million and $91.7 million in other loans for a net loss of $1.8 million in 2019.
In addition, the Bank had increases of $943,000, $188,000, and $116,000 in service charges on deposit accounts, loan servicing income, and other service fee income, respectively, reflecting growth in core transaction deposit and loan accounts from both organic growth and the Opus acquisition. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in debit card interchange fee income of $478,000, primarily the result of the Bank becoming a non-exempt institution under the Durbin Amendment that regulates debit card interchange fee income.
For 2019, noninterest income totaled $35.2 million, an increase of $4.2 million, or 13.6%, from 2018. The increase was primarily due to an increase in net gain on sales from investment securities of $7.2 million as the Bank sold $543.2 million of securities during 2019 compared to $393.1 million in 2018 and other income of $845,000, which is primarily attributable to a $2.2 million increase in income on CRA related equity investments, partially offset by $612,000 of loss on debt extinguishment, and lower rental income and recoveries from pre-acquisition charge-offs of $339,000 and $318,000, respectively.
Also, the Bank had increases of $641,000, $536,000, and $395,000 in services charges on deposit accounts, other service fee income, and loan servicing income, respectively, reflecting growth in core transaction deposit and loan accounts from both organic growth and the Grandpoint acquisition. These increases were partially offset by a $4.1 million decrease in gain on loan sales, from $10.8 million in 2018 to $6.6 million in 2019. During 2019, we sold $191.5 million of loans with an average price of 103.3%, compared to 2018 in which we sold $307.5 million of loans with an average price of 103.5%. In 2019, total loans sold included $99.9 million in SBA and USDA loans for a net gain of $8.4 million and $91.7 million in other loans for a net loss of $1.8 million, compared with sales of $123.6 million in SBA and USDA loans for a net gain of $9.3 million and $183.8 million in other loans for a net gain of $1.5 million in 2018.
In addition, debit card interchange fee income decreased $1.3 million, primarily the result of the Bank becoming a non-exempt institution, effective July 1, 2019, under the Durbin Amendment.
Noninterest Expense. For 2020, noninterest expense totaled $381.1 million, an increase of $122.1 million, or 47.1%, from 2019. Merger-related expense increased $48.5 million as compared to 2019, reflecting the costs of the acquisition of Opus in 2020. The increase in noninterest expense excluding merger-related expense was primarily due to higher compensation and benefits of $41.3 million, higher occupancy expense of $12.5 million, higher data processing expense of $8.2 million, and higher deposit expense of $4.4 million, all of which was attributable to increases in personnel, branches, and operations retained from the acquisition of Opus on June 1, 2020. The remaining expense categories grew by $7.2 million, or 11.7%, in 2020, due to both a combination of expense growth related to the acquisition of Opus and increased expenses to support the Company’s organic growth in loans and deposits. The most significant increases in expense from these remaining categories were $2.8 million in FDIC insurance premiums, $2.8 million in legal professional services, and $2.4 million in office expenses.
For 2019, noninterest expense totaled $259.1 million, an increase of $9.2 million, or 3.7%, from 2018. The increase in noninterest expense was mostly due to higher compensation and benefits of $9.3 million, which was primarily related to an increase in staff from our acquisitions of Grandpoint on July 1, 2018 and internal growth in staff to support our overall growth. Occupancy expense grew by $6.2 million in 2019, mostly due to the additional branches retained from the Grandpoint acquisition in 2018. Deposit expense increased by $5.4 million attributable largely to higher deposit balances. The remaining expense categories, excluding merger-related expense, grew by $6.1 million in 2019, due to both a combination of expense growth related to the acquisition of Grandpoint and increased expenses to support the Company’s organic growth in loans and deposits. The most significant increases in expense from these remaining categories were $3.7 million in amortization of intangible assets, $2.8 million in legal and professional services, and $2.3 million in other expenses. Merger-related expense decreased $17.8 million as compared to 2018, reflecting the costs of the acquisition of Grandpoint in 2018.
Our efficiency ratio was 49.8% for 2020, compared to 50.8% for 2019 and 51.6% for 2018.
Income Taxes. The Company recorded income tax expense of $12.3 million in 2020, compared to $58.0 million in 2019, and $42.2 million in 2018. Our effective tax rate was 16.9% for 2020, 26.7% for 2019, and 25.5% for 2018. The effective tax rate in each year is affected by various items, including tax-exempt income from municipal securities and loans, BOLI, tax benefits associated with low-income housing tax credit (“LIHTC”) investments, merger-related expenses, the settlement of stock compensation, and other permanent differences.
The effective tax rate for 2020 decreased from 2019 primarily attributable to the effect of favorable permanent differences on lower pre-tax book income and a favorable tax rate benefit associated with changes to the 2018 net operating loss (“NOL”) carryback rules from the enactment of the CARES Act on March 27, 2020.
See Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 hereof for further discussion of income taxes and an explanation of the factors that impact our effective tax rate.
Financial Condition
At December 31, 2020, total assets of the Company were $19.74 billion, an increase of $7.96 billion, or 68%, from total assets of $11.78 billion at December 31, 2019. The increase was a result of the acquisition of Opus, which added $5.81 billion in loans, $937.1 million in cash, $829.9 million in investment securities, $191.4 million in BOLI, and $90.2 million of goodwill, after purchase accounting adjustments. These increases were partially offset by increases of $232.3 million in allowance for credit losses on loans, reflecting a provision for loan losses of $172.3 million, a $55.7 million addition associated with the Company’s adoption of ASC 326 on January 1, 2020, and an initial ACL of $21.2 million with respect to PCD loans from the acquisition of Opus. The provision increase was primarily a result of the Opus acquisition and the unfavorable changes in economic forecasts employed in the Company’s CECL modeling driven by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Investment Securities
Our investment policy, as established by our Asset/Liability Committee, attempts to provide and maintain liquidity, generate a favorable return on investments without incurring undue interest rate and credit risk, and complement our lending activities. Specifically, our investment policy generally limits our investments to U.S. government securities, federal agency-backed securities, U.S. government-sponsored (“GSE”) guaranteed mortgage-backed securities (“MBS”), which are guaranteed by Fannie Mae (“FNMA”), Freddie Mac (“FHLMC”), Federal Farm Credit Banks (“FFCB”), or Ginnie Mae (“GNMA”), U.S. Treasury, municipal bonds, and corporate bonds, specifically bank debt notes. The Bank has designated all investment securities, other than investments made for CRA purposes, as available-for-sale.
Effective January 1, 2020, the Company adopted the new CECL accounting standard. The Company’s assessment of held-to-maturity and available-for-sale investment securities as of January 1, 2020 indicated that an ACL was not required. The Company determined the likelihood of default on held-to-maturity investment securities was remote, and the amount of expected non-repayment on those investments was zero. The Company also analyzed available-for-sale investment securities that were in an unrealized loss position as of January 1, 2020 and determined the decline in fair value for those securities was not related to credit, but rather related to changes in interest rates and general market conditions. As of January 1, 2020 or December 31, 2020, there was no ACL for the Company’s held-to-maturity and available-for-sale investment securities. There were no investment securities classified as PCD upon acquisition of Opus during the second quarter of 2020. We recorded no allowance for credit losses for available-for-sale or held-to-maturity investment securities during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020.
Below is a breakdown of the investment security portfolio for the past three years by investment type and designation.
Our investment securities portfolio amounted to $3.95 billion at December 31, 2020, an increase of $2.55 billion, or 181%, from $1.41 billion at December 31, 2019. The increase was a result of $2.72 billion in purchases, primarily municipal bonds and mortgage-backed securities, $829.9 million acquired in connection with the Opus acquisition, and a mark-to-market fair value adjustment increase of $54.3 million, partially offset by $752.6 million in sales and $298.4 million in principal payments, amortization, and redemptions. In general, the purchase of investment securities primarily related to investing excess liquidity from our banking operations.
The following table sets forth the fair values and weighted average yields on our investment security portfolio by contractual maturity as of the date indicated:
As of December 31, 2020, our investment securities portfolio consisted of $1.45 billion in municipal bonds, $855.6 million in GSE MBS, $690.4 million of agency bonds, $513.4 million in GSE CMOs, $415.3 million in corporate bonds, $32.5 million in U.S. Treasury securities, and $1.6 million in other securities. The total end of period weighted average interest rate on investments at December 31, 2020 was 1.79%, compared to 2.85% at December 31, 2019, reflecting investment securities purchases at lower market yields during 2020.
The following table lists the percentage of our portfolio exposure, including available-for-sale and held-to-maturity securities, to any one issuer as a percentage of capital. The only issuers with greater than 10% exposure are the, FNMA, FHLMC, and FFCB at December 31, 2020 and FNMA at December 31, 2019. At December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, there were no holdings of securities of any one issuer, other than the U.S. Government and its agencies, in an amount greater than 10% of stockholders’ equity.
All of the municipal bond securities in our portfolio have an underlying rating of investment grade, with the majority insured by the largest bond insurance companies to bring each of these securities to a Moody’s A+ rating or better. The Company has predominantly purchased general obligation bonds that are risk-weighted at 20% for regulatory capital purposes. The Company reduces its exposure to any single adverse event by holding securities from geographically diversified municipalities. We are continually monitoring the quality of our municipal bond portfolio in accordance with current financial conditions. To our knowledge, none of the municipalities in which we hold bonds are exhibiting financial problems that would require us to record an allowance for credit losses.
The following is a listing of the breakdown by state for our municipal holdings, for all states with greater than 5% of the portfolio listed. 75% of the Texas issues are insured by The Texas Permanent School Fund.
Loans
Loans held for investment totaled $12.97 billion at December 31, 2020, an increase of $4.28 billion, or 49.3%, from $8.69 billion at December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to the acquisition of Opus Bank, which added $5.81 billion of loans held for investment, after purchase accounting adjustments, as well as new loan originations partially offset by loan prepayments, payoffs, and lower business line of credit utilization. Business lines of credit utilization rates decreased to 36.2% at the end of the fourth quarter of 2020 from 44.3% at the end of the fourth quarter of 2019. The increase in loans was primarily attributed to increases in multifamily loans of $3.60 billion, CRE non-owner occupied loans of $604.9 million, C&I loans of $375.6 million, and CRE owner occupied loans of $267.5 million, partially offset by decreases from franchise non-real estate secured loans of $119.6 million, construction and land loans of $116.8 million, and retail loans of $66.5 million.
The total end of period weighted average interest rate on loans, excluding fees and discounts, as of December 31, 2020 was 4.27%, compared to 4.91% at December 31, 2019. The decrease reflects the impact of lower rates on new loan originations, the change in the mix of loans, as well as repricing of portfolio loan yields as a result of the Federal Reserve Board's federal funds rate decrease in March 2020.
Loans held for sale primarily represent the guaranteed portion of SBA loans, which the Bank originates for sale, and totaled $601,000 at December 31, 2020, a decrease of $1.1 million from $1.7 million at December 31, 2019.
The Company participated in the SBA PPP program under the CARES Act during the second quarter of 2020 and originated SBA PPP loans. At June 30, 2020, the Company’s SBA PPP loan balance was $1.13 billion. In July 2020, the Company concluded the sale of its entire SBA PPP loan portfolio with an aggregate amortized cost of $1.13 billion to a seasoned and experienced non-bank lender and servicer of SBA loans, resulting in improved balance sheet liquidity and a gain on sale of approximately of $18.9 million, net of net deferred origination fees and net purchase discounts.
The following table sets forth the composition of our loan portfolio in dollar amounts and as a percentage of the portfolio at the dates indicated:
______________________________
(1) Includes unaccreted fair value net purchase discounts of $113.8 million and $40.7 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(2) The allowance for credit losses as of December 31, 2019 was accounted for under ASC 450 and ASC 310, which is reflective of probable incurred losses as of the balance sheet date. Effective January 1, 2020, the allowance for credit losses is accounted for under ASC 326, which is reflective of estimated expected lifetime credit losses.
______________________________
(1) Includes unaccreted fair value net purchase discounts of $61.0 million, $29.1 million, and $7.6 million as of December 31, 2018, 2017, and 2016, respectively.
(2) The allowance for credit losses as of December 31, 2018, 2017, and 2016 was accounted for under ASC 450 and ASC 310, which is reflective of probable incurred losses as of the balance sheet date.
The following table shows the contractual maturity of the Company’s loans without consideration of prepayment assumptions, at the date indicated:
The following table sets forth at December 31, 2020 the dollar amount of gross loans receivable that are contractually due after December 31, 2021 and whether such loans have fixed interest rates or adjustable interest rates.
Delinquent Loans. When a borrower fails to make required payments on a loan and does not cure the delinquency within 30 days, we normally initiate proceedings to pursue our remedies under the loan documents. For loans secured by real estate, we record a notice of default and, after providing the required notices to the borrower, commence foreclosure proceedings. If the loan is not reinstated within the time permitted by law, we may sell the property at a foreclosure sale. At these foreclosure sales, we generally acquire title to the property. At December 31, 2020, loans delinquent 60 or more days as a percentage of total loans held for investment was 0.09%, down from 0.20% at December 31, 2019.
The following table sets forth delinquencies in the Company’s loan portfolio at the dates indicated:
Troubled Debt Restructurings
We sometimes modify or restructure loans when the borrower is experiencing financial difficulties by making a concession to the borrower in the form of changes in the amortization terms, reductions in the interest rates, the acceptance of interest only payments, and, in limited cases, concessions to the outstanding loan balances. These loans are classified as TDRs. At December 31, 2020, there were no loans modified as TDRs. At December 31, 2019, TDRs consisted of two loans totaling $3.0 million that were both current and on accrual status. During the year ended December 31, 2020, both loans experienced payment defaults and the remaining balance, which were $1.3 million for the commercial and industrial loan and $344,000 for franchise non-real estate secured loan, were charged off in 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, there were no new loans modified as TDRs.
In accordance with the CARES Act, the Company has implemented various loan modification programs to provide its borrowers relief from the economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and determined none of the related loan modifications need to be characterized as TDRs. The CAA, signed into law on December 27, 2020, extends the applicable period to include modification to loans held by financial institutions executed between March 1, 2020 and the earlier of (i) January 1, 2022, or (ii) 60 days after the date of termination of the COVID-19 national emergency. As of December 31, 2020, 52 loans with an aggregate amortized cost of $79.5 million, or 0.60% of total loans held for investment, remained under modification due to the COVID-19 pandemic hardship under the CARES Act. Of those, 5 loans totaling $3.1 million were acquired in connection with the acquisition of Opus. As of December 31, 2020, no loans were in-process for potential modification. See Note 4 - Loans Held for Investment for additional information.
The following table presents the population of loans with active payment modifications as of the date indicated.
Nonperforming Assets
Nonperforming assets consist of loans on which we have ceased accruing interest (nonaccrual loans), OREO, and other repossessed assets owned. Nonaccrual loans consisted of all loans 90 days or more past due and on loans where, in the opinion of management, there is reasonable doubt as to the collection of principal and interest.
At December 31, 2020, we had $29.2 million of nonperforming assets, which consisted of $29.2 million of nonperforming loans. At December 31, 2019, we had $9.0 million of nonperforming assets, which consisted of $8.5 million of nonperforming loans and $441,000 of OREO. The increase in nonperforming loans in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily attributable to the addition of a franchise credit relationship of $13.2 million, a CRE owner-occupied credit relationship of $5.3 million, and a CRE non-owner-occupied loan of $2.0 million. It is our policy to take appropriate, timely, and aggressive action when necessary to resolve nonperforming assets. When resolving problem loans, it is our policy to determine collectability under various circumstances, which are intended to result in our maximum financial benefit. We accomplish this by working with the borrower to bring the loan current, selling the loan to a third party, or by foreclosing upon and selling the asset.
The Company had no loans 90 days or more past due and still accruing at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
At December 31, 2020, we had no OREO, compared to $441,000 at December 31, 2019, which consisted of a two-office condo property with a carrying value of $126,000 and a retail warehouse property with a carrying value of $315,000. Properties acquired through or in lieu of foreclosure are recorded at fair value less costs to sell. The Company generally obtains an appraisal and/or a market evaluation on all OREO prior to obtaining possession. After foreclosure, valuations are periodically performed by management as needed due to changing market conditions or factors specifically attributable to the property’s condition. If the carrying value of the property exceeds its fair value, less estimated cost to sell, the asset is written down and a charge to other expense is recorded.
The following table sets forth composition of nonperforming assets at the date indicated:
______________________________
(1) The allowance for credit losses at December 31, 2020 is accounted for under ASC 326, which is reflective of estimated expected lifetime credit losses. The allowance for credit losses prior to the adoption of ASC 326 on January 1, 2020 was accounted for under ASC 450 and ASC 310, which is reflective of probable incurred losses as of the balance sheet date.
Allowance for Credit Losses
Effective January 1, 2020, the Company adopted the provisions of ASC 326, which requires the Company to record an estimate of expected lifetime credit losses for loans and off-balance sheet loan commitments at the time of origination or acquisition. As a result, the Company recorded an increase of $55.7 million to the ACL for loans held-for-investment and an $8.3 million increase to the ACL for off-balance sheet loan commitments. The Company applied the modified retrospective transition approach, and recorded a decrease of $45.6 million, net of tax, to the beginning balance of retained earnings as of January 1, 2020 for the cumulative effect adjustment, commonly referred to as the “Day 1” adjustment.
The ACL is maintained at a level deemed appropriate by management to provide for expected credit losses in the portfolio as of the date of the consolidated statements of financial condition. Estimating expected credit losses requires management to use relevant forward-looking information, including the use of reasonable and supportable forecasts. The measurement of the ACL is performed by collectively evaluating loans with similar risk characteristics. Loans that have been deemed by management to no longer possess similar risk characteristics are evaluated individually under a discounted cash flow approach, and loans that have been deemed collateral dependent are evaluated individually based on the estimated fair value of the underlying collateral. The ACL is recorded through a charge to provision for credit losses and is reduced by charge-offs, net of recoveries, on loans previously charged-off.
We separate our assets, largely loans, by type, and we use various loan classifications to segregate the loans into various risk grade categories. We use the various loan classifications as a means of measuring risk for determining the valuation allowance for groups and individual assets at a point in time. Currently, we designate our assets into a category of “Pass,” “Special Mention,” “Substandard,” “Doubtful,” or “Loss.” A brief description of these classifications follows:
•Pass classifications represent assets with a level of credit quality, in which no well-defined deficiencies or weaknesses exist.
•Special Mention assets do not currently expose the Bank to a sufficient risk to warrant classification in one of the adverse categories, but possess correctable deficiencies or potential weaknesses deserving management’s close attention.
•Substandard assets are inadequately protected by the current net worth and paying capacity of the obligor or of the collateral pledged, if any. These loans are characterized by the distinct possibility that the Bank will sustain some loss if the deficiencies are not corrected.
•Doubtful credits have all the weaknesses inherent in substandard loans, with the added characteristic that the weaknesses make collection or liquidation in full, on the basis of currently existing facts, conditions and values, highly questionable and improbable.
•Loss assets are those that are considered uncollectible and of such little value that their continuance as assets is not warranted. Amounts classified as loss are promptly charged off.
At December 31, 2020, we had $128.3 million of loans classified as substandard, compared to $44.7 million at December 31, 2019. The year-over-year increase was driven, in part, by the migration to substandard risk grade of approximately $57.4 million of loans subject to temporary loan modifications as of December 31, 2020, the addition of classified loans from the Opus acquisition in the second quarter of 2020, as well as the net changes in risk rating during fiscal 2020. There were no loans classified as doubtful as of December 31, 2020 or 2019.
The following tables stratify the loan portfolio by the Company’s internal risk grading as of the dates indicated:
The Company measures the ACL on commercial real estate and commercial loans using a discounted cash flow approach, using the loan’s effective interest rate, while the ACL for retail loans is based on a historical loss rate model. The discounted cash flow methodology relies on several significant components essential to the development of estimates for future cash flows on loans and off-balance sheet loan commitments. These components consist of: (i) the estimated probability of default, (ii) the estimated loss given default, which represents the estimated severity of the loss when a loan is in default, (iii) estimates for prepayment activity on loans, and (iv) the estimated exposure to the Company at default. In the case of off-balance sheet loan commitments, the Company’s incorporates estimates for utilization, based on its own historical data. Probability of default and loss given default for commercial real estate loans are derived from a third party, using proxy loan information, and loan and property level attributes. Additionally, loss given default for commercial loans and commercial real estate loans incorporates an estimate for the loss severity associated with loans where the borrower fails to meet their debt obligation at maturity. External factors that impact loss given default for commercial real estate loans include: changes in the CRE Price Index, GDP growth rate, unemployment rates, and the Moody’s Baa rating corporate debt interest rate spread.
For commercial loans, probability of default is based on an internally developed rating scale that assigns probability of default based on the Company’s internal risk grades for each loan. Changes in risk grades for commercial loans result in changes in probability of default. The Company obtains loss given default for commercial loans from a third party that has a considerable database of credit-related information specific to the financial services industry and the type of loans within this segment.
Probability of default for both commercial real estate and commercial loans are also heavily impacted by changes in current and expected economic conditions.
The ACL for retail loans is based on a historical loss rate model, which incorporates loss rates derived from a third party that has a considerable database of credit related information for retail loans. Loss rates for retail loans are dependent upon loan level and external factors such as: FICO, vintage, geography, unemployment rates, and changes in consumer real estate prices.
The Company’s ACL includes assumptions concerning current and future economic conditions using reasonable and supportable forecasts and how those forecasts are expected to impact a borrower’s ability to satisfy their obligation to the Bank and the ultimate collectability of future cash flows over the life of the loan. The Company uses economic forecast scenarios from Moody’s Analytics. These economic forecast scenarios are based on past events, current conditions, and the likelihood of future events occurring. Management periodically evaluates economic forecast scenarios, determines whether to utilize multiple probability-weighted scenarios in the Company’s ACL model, and, if multiple scenarios are utilized, evaluates, and determines the weighting for each scenario used in the Company’s ACL model, and thus the scenarios and their weightings may change in future periods. Economic forecast scenarios as well as assumptions within those scenarios can vary based on changes in current and expected economic conditions and due to the occurrence of specific events such as the on-going COVID-19 pandemic.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company’s ACL model used three probability weighted scenarios, representing a forecasted base-case scenario, an upside scenario, and a downside scenario. The weightings assigned to each scenario were as follows: the base-case scenario, or most likely scenario, was assigned a weighting of 40%, while the upside and downside scenarios were each assigned weightings of 30%. The Company evaluated the weightings of each economic forecasted scenario in the current period with the assistance of an independent third party, Moody’s Analytics, and determined the current weightings appropriately reflect the likelihood of outcomes for each scenario given the current economic environment.
The Company currently forecasts economic conditions over a two-year period, which we believe is a reasonable and supportable period. Beyond the point which the Company can provide for a reasonable and supportable forecast, economic variables revert to their long-term averages. The Company has reflected this reversion over a period of three years in each of its economic forecast scenarios.
The economic forecasts used in the Company’s ACL model are produced by Moody's Analytics and have been widely used by banks, credit unions, government agencies, and real estate developers. The Company has identified certain economic variables within these forecasts that have significant influence in the Company’s model for determining the ACL. As of December 31, 2020, the Company’s ACL model incorporated the following assumptions for key economic variables in the base-case and downside scenarios:
Base-case Scenario:
•CRE Price Index experiences declines throughout 2021, with the estimated annualized rate of decline slowing from approximately -28% in early 2021 to approximately -13% by the end of 2021. This scenario also assumes the CRE Price Index returns to modest levels of growth by the second quarter of 2022.
•U.S. real GDP experiences modestly increasing levels of growth throughout 2021 in the range of 2-6% on an annualized basis. This scenario also assumes modest levels of growth in 2022 at an approximate annualized rate of 4%.
•U.S. unemployment of approximately 7% throughout 2021, followed by modest declines throughout 2022 to an approximate level of 5% by the end of 2022.
Upside Scenario:
•CRE Price Index experiences declines throughout 2021, with the estimated annualized rate of decline slowing from approximately -16% in early 2021 to approximately -9% by the end of 2021. This scenario also assumes the CRE Price Index returns to modest levels of growth by the second quarter of 2022.
•U.S. real GDP experiences modestly increasing levels of growth throughout 2021 in the range of 5-8% on an annualized basis. This scenario also assumes modest levels of annualized growth in 2022 in an approximate range of 2-4%.
•U.S. unemployment declining from approximately 6% to approximately 5% by the end of 2021. This scenario also assumes the rate of unemployment continues to decline throughout 2022 to an approximate level of 4% by the end of 2022.
Downside Scenario:
•CRE Price Index experiences significant declines throughout 2021, with the estimated annualized rate of decline slowing from approximately -36% in early 2021 to approximately -26% by the end of 2021. This scenario also assumes the CRE Price Index returns to modest levels of growth by the third quarter of 2022.
•U.S. real GDP experiences slowing rates of decline through the third quarter of 2020, from an approximate rate of -5% to -0.3%, before returning to growth in the fourth quarter of 2022. This scenario also assumes modest levels of annualized growth in 2022 in an approximate range of 2-4%.
•Increasing levels of U.S. unemployment throughout 2021, with the rate of unemployment increasing each quarter to approximately 10% by the end of 2021. This scenario also assumes the rate of unemployment remains elevated in 2022, but begins to fall to approximately 9% by the end of 2022.
The Company recognizes that historical information used as the basis for determining future expected credit losses may not always, by themselves, provide a sufficient basis for determining future expected credit losses. The Company, therefore, periodically considers the need for qualitative adjustments to the ACL. As of December 31, 2020, qualitative adjustments included in the ACL totaled $10.0 million. These adjustments relate to management’s overall assessment of the adequacy of the ACL and the potential for the model, as of December 31, 2020, to underestimate the effects of current changes in asset quality. Management reviews the need for and appropriate level of qualitative adjustments on a quarterly basis, and as such, the amount and allocation of qualitative adjustments may change in future periods.
At December 31, 2020, our ACL on loans was $268.0 million, an increase of $232.3 million from $35.7 million at December 31, 2019. The increase in ACL during 2020 is reflective of a $55.7 million adjustment to the ACL on loans associated with the Company’s adoption of ASC 326 on January 1, 2020, which was recorded through a cumulative effect adjustment to retained earnings, as well as $172.3 million in provision for credit losses on loans, net charge-offs of $16.9 million, and the establishment of $21.2 million in net ACL for PCD loans acquired in the Opus acquisition. In accordance with ASC 326, the ACL for PCD loans was established through an adjustment to the initial amortized cost of the loan. The provision for credit losses during the year ended December 31, 2020 is inclusive of approximately $75.9 million related to the initial ACL required for the acquisition of non-PCD loans in the Opus acquisition. Under ASC 326, the Company is required to record an ACL for estimates of lifetime credit losses on loans at the time of acquisition. For non-PCD loans, the initial ACL is established through a charge to provision for credit losses at the time of acquisition. Excluding the impact of the Opus acquisition, the provision for credit losses of $96.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 is also reflective of unfavorable economic forecasts employed in the Company’s ACL model driven by the on-going COVID-19 pandemic.
The Company incurred $16.9 million of net charge-offs during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $7.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to the higher charge-offs in commercial and industrial loans and franchise non-real estate secured loans as compared to same periods last year.
No assurance can be given that we will not, in any particular period, sustain credit losses that exceed the amount reserved, or that subsequent evaluation of our loan portfolio, in light of prevailing factors, including current and future economic conditions that may adversely affect our market area or other circumstances, will not require significant increases in the ACL. In addition, regulatory agencies, as an integral part of their examination process, periodically review our ACL and may require us to recognize additional provisions to increase the ACL and record charge-offs in anticipation of future losses. At December 31, 2020, the Company believes the ACL was adequate to cover current expected credit losses in the loan portfolio. Should any of the factors considered by management in evaluating the appropriate level of the ACL change, including the size and composition of the loan portfolio, the credit quality of the loan portfolio, as well as forecasts of future economic conditions, the Company’s estimate of current expected credit losses could also significantly change and affect the level of future provisions for credit losses.
At December 31, 2020, the ratio of allowance for credit losses to loans held for investment was 2.02%, a significant increase from 0.41% at December 31, 2019 due to the adoption of the CECL accounting standard. Our unamortized fair value discount on the loans acquired totaled $113.8 million, or 0.85% of total loans held for investment at December 31, 2020, compared to $40.7 million, or 0.46% of total loans held for investment, at December 31, 2019. At December 31, 2020, the ACL as a percent of nonperforming loans was 918%, compared with 419% at December 31, 2019.
The following table sets forth the Company’s ACL and its corresponding percentage of the loan category balance and the percent of loan balance to total gross loans in each of the loan categories listed at the dates indicated:
______________________________
(1) The allowance for credit losses as of December 31, 2019 was accounted for under ASC 450 and ASC 310, which is reflective of probable incurred losses as of the balance sheet date. The allowance for credit losses at December 31, 2020 is accounted for under ASC 326, which is reflective of estimated expected lifetime credit losses.
______________________________
(1) The allowance for credit losses as of December 31, 2018, 2017, and 2016 was accounted for under ASC 450 and ASC 310, which is reflective of probable incurred losses as of the balance sheet date.
The following table sets forth the ALLL amounts calculated by the categories listed at the dates indicated:
The following table sets forth the activity within the Company’s allowance for credit losses in each of the loan categories listed for the periods indicated:
(1) The allowance for credit losses at December 31, 2020 is accounted for under ASC 326, which is reflective of estimated expected lifetime credit losses. The allowance for credit losses prior to the adoption of ASC 326 on January 1, 2020 was accounted for under ASC 450 and ASC 310, which is reflective of probable incurred losses as of the balance sheet date.
Deposits
At December 31, 2020, total deposits were $16.21 billion, an increase of $7.32 billion, or 82.2%, from December 31, 2019. The increase in deposits included increases in noninterest-bearing checking of $2.15 billion, interest-bearing checking of $2.33 billion, money market and savings of $2.26 billion, and time deposits of $579.0 million. The increase in deposits during 2020 was primarily due to the acquisition of Opus in June 2020, which added $6.92 billion of deposits after purchase accounting adjustments, higher noninterest-bearing deposits, reflecting SBA PPP loans funded in the Bank's clients' demand deposit accounts, and increased liquidity maintained by customers due to the economic impact of the pandemic. The total end-of-period weighted average interest rate of total deposits was 0.18% and 0.53% at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The following table sets forth the average balance of deposit accounts and the weighted average rates paid for the periods indicated:
The decrease in the weighted average cost of deposits was principally driven by lower pricing across all deposit product categories, favorably impacted by the Federal Reserve Board’s federal funds rate decrease in March 2020, as well as higher average noninterest-bearing deposits.
At December 31, 2020, we had $1.34 billion in certificates of deposit accounts with balances of $100,000 or more, and we had $825.9 million in certificates of deposit accounts with balances of $250,000 or more with the maturity distribution as follows:
Borrowings
Borrowings represent a secondary source of funds for our lending and investing activities. The Company has a variety of borrowing relationships that it can draw upon to fund its activities. At December 31, 2020, total borrowings amounted to $532.5 million, a decrease of $199.7 million, or 27.3%, from December 31, 2019. The decrease in borrowings at December 31, 2020 from December 31, 2019 was primarily due to a decrease of $486.0 million in FHLB advances, partially offset by the issuance in June 2020 of $150.0 million in aggregate principal amount of the Company's 5.375% Fixed-to-Floating Rate Subordinated Notes (the “Notes III”) due June 15, 2030, as well as the $135.0 million aggregate principal amount of subordinated notes assumed by the Bank in connection with the acquisition of Opus in the second quarter of 2020.
At December 31, 2020, total borrowings represented 2.7% of total assets and had an end-of-period weighted average rate of 5.16%, compared with 6.2% of total assets at a weighted average rate of 2.77% at December 31, 2019.
FHLB Advances
The FHLB system functions as a source of credit to financial institutions that are members. Advances are secured by certain real estate loans, investment securities, and the capital stock of the FHLB owned by the Company. Subject to the FHLB’s advance policies and requirements, these advances can be requested for any business purpose in which the Company is authorized to engage. In granting advances, the FHLB considers a member’s creditworthiness and other relevant factors. The Company has a line of credit with the FHLB, which provides for advances totaling up to 40% of its assets. At December 31, 2020, the maximum amount we could borrow through the FHLB was $7.94 billion, of which $4.74 billion was remaining available for borrowing based on collateral pledge of $7.25 billion in real estate loans. At December 31, 2020, the Company had $31.0 million in term FHLB advances compared to $26.0 million in term FHLB advances and $491.0 million in overnight FHLB advances at December 31, 2019.
Other Borrowings
The Company maintains unsecured lines of credit to purchase federal funds totaling $340.0 million and access through the Federal Reserve discount window to borrow $21.3 million based upon current pledged investment security collateral, to be utilized as business needs dictate. Federal funds purchased are short-term in nature and utilized to meet short-term funding needs.
Beginning the first quarter of 2019, the Bank no longer had HOA reverse repurchase agreements and unpledged all the supporting investment securities. The Company did not sell any securities under such agreements to repurchase throughout 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Subordinated Debentures
At December 31, 2020, total subordinated debentures, consisting of subordinated notes and junior subordinated debentures, amounted to $501.5 million with a weighted interest rate of 5.38%, compared to $215.1 million with a weighted interest rate of 5.37% at December 31, 2019. The increase of $286.4 million, or 133.10%, is primarily driven by the issuance in June 2020 of $150.0 million in aggregate principal amount of the Notes III, as well as the $135.0 million aggregate principal amount of subordinated notes assumed by the Bank in connection with the acquisition of Opus in the second quarter of 2020. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, outstanding subordinated notes were $493.4 million and $207.2 million, respectively. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, junior subordinated debentures to affiliated trusts in connection with the issuance of trust preferred securities by such trusts were $7.7 million and $7.6 million, respectively.
For additional information, see Note 14 - Subordinated Debentures to Consolidated Financial Statements included Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The following table sets forth certain information regarding the Company’s borrowed funds at or for the years ended on the dates indicated:
Stockholders’ Equity
At December 31, 2020, our stockholders’ equity amounted to $2.75 billion, compared with $2.01 billion at December 31, 2019. The increase of $734.1 million, or 36%, is primarily the result of the $749.6 stock consideration issued in connection with the acquisition of Opus in the second quarter of 2020, net income in 2020 of $60.4 million, and comprehensive income of $38.8 million, partially offset by the $79.9 million in cash dividends paid during 2020, and the $45.6 million cumulative-effect adjustment to the opening balance of retained earnings upon the adoption of the new CECL accounting standard.
Liquidity
Our primary sources of funds are deposits, principal and interest payments on loans, FHLB advances and other borrowings, and income from investments. While maturities and scheduled amortization of loans are a predictable source of funds, deposit flows and loan prepayments are greatly influenced by market interest rates, economic conditions, and competition. We seek to maintain a level of liquid assets to ensure a safe and sound operation. Our liquid assets are comprised of cash and unpledged investments. As part of our daily monitoring, we calculate a liquidity ratio by dividing the sum of cash balances plus unpledged securities by the sum of deposits that mature in one year or less, plus transaction accounts and FHLB advances. At December 31, 2020, our liquidity ratio was 28.32%, compared with 17.08% at December 31, 2019.
We believe our level of liquid assets is sufficient to meet current anticipated funding needs. At December 31, 2020, liquid assets of the Company represented approximately 23.6% of total assets, compared to 13.3% at December 31, 2019. At December 31, 2020, the Company had eight unsecured lines of credit with other correspondent banks to purchase federal funds totaling $340.0 million and access through the Federal Reserve Bank discount window to borrow $21.3 million secured by investments securities, as business needs dictate. We also have a line of credit with the FHLB allowing us to borrow up to 40% of the Bank’s total assets equating to a credit line of $7.94 billion, of which $4.74 billion was available for borrowing. The amount available for borrowing was based on collateral pledged by real estate loans with an aggregate balance of $7.25 billion. At December 31, 2020, FHLB outstanding borrowings totaled $31.0 million.
At December 31, 2020, the Company’s loan to deposit and borrowing ratio was 79.0%, compared with 90.6% at December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily associated with our deposits and borrowings increasing at a faster rate relative to our loans during the period as a result of the Opus acquisition and the issuance of $150.0 million in aggregate principal amount of the Notes III in June 2020. Certificates of deposit, which are scheduled to mature in one year or less from December 31, 2020, totaled $1.43 billion.
The Bank has a policy in place that permits the purchase of brokered funds, in an amount not to exceed 15% of total deposits, or 12% of total assets, as a secondary source for funding. At December 31, 2020, the Company had $155.3 million, or 0.8% of total assets, in brokered time deposits. At December 31, 2019, the Company had $74.4 million, or 0.6% of total assets, in brokered time deposits.
The Corporation is a corporate entity separate and apart from the Bank that must provide for its own liquidity. The Corporation’s primary sources of liquidity are dividends from the Bank. There are statutory and regulatory provisions that limit the ability of the Bank to pay dividends to the Corporation. Management believes that such restrictions will not have a material impact on the ability of the Corporation to meet its ongoing cash obligations. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Bank paid $29.9 million in dividends to the Corporation.
The Corporation maintains a line of credit with US Bank with availability of $15.0 million line of credit that will expire on September 28, 2021. The Corporation anticipates renewing the line of credit upon expiration. This line of credit provides an additional source of liquidity at the Corporation level and had no outstanding balances at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The Financial Code provides that a bank may not make a cash distribution to its stockholders in excess of the lesser of a (i) bank’s retained earnings; or (ii) bank’s net income for its last three fiscal years, less the amount of any distributions made by the bank or by any majority-owned subsidiary of the bank to the stockholders of the bank during such period. However, a bank may, with the approval of the DFPI, make a distribution to its stockholders in an amount not exceeding the greatest of (x) its retained earnings; (y) its net income for its last fiscal year; or (z) its net income for its current fiscal year. In the event that the DFPI determines that the stockholders’ equity of a bank is inadequate or that the making of a distribution by the bank would be unsafe or unsound, the DFPI may order the bank to refrain from making a proposed distribution. Under these provisions, the amount available for distribution from the Bank to the Corporation was approximately $298.4 million at December 31, 2020.
During 2020, the Corporation declared and paid dividends of $79.9 million, or $1.03 per share on its common stock. On January 22, 2021, the Company's Board of Directors declared a $0.30 per share quarterly dividend, payable on February 12, 2021 to shareholders of record on February 5, 2021. This represented a $0.02 per share, or 7% increase, compared to the prior quarter’s quarterly dividend rate. The Corporation anticipates that it will continue to pay quarterly cash dividends in the future, although there can be no assurance that payment of such dividends will continue or that they will not be reduced. The payment and amount of future dividends remain within the discretion of the Corporation’s Board of Directors and will depend on the Corporation’s operating results and financial condition, regulatory limitations, tax considerations, and other factors. Interest on deposits will be paid prior to payment of dividends on the Corporation’s common stock.
On January 11, 2021, the Company’s Board of Directors approved a new stock repurchase program, which authorized the repurchase up to 4,725,000 shares of its common stock, representing approximately 5% of the Company’s issued and outstanding shares of common stock and approximately $150 million of common stock as of December 31, 2020 based on the closing price of the Company’s common stock on December 31, 2020. The stock repurchase program may be limited or terminated at any time without notice. The new stock repurchase program replaces and supersedes the previous $100 million stock repurchase program approved by the Board of Directors in December 2019, which the Company announced was suspended indefinitely in March 2020. The Company had not repurchased any shares of common stock under the previous stock repurchase program. See Part II, Item 5 - Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters, and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities for additional information.
Capital Resources
The Corporation and the Bank are subject to various regulatory capital requirements administered by federal banking agencies. Failure to meet minimum capital requirements can trigger certain mandatory and possibly additional discretionary actions by regulators that, if undertaken, could have a direct material effect on our financial condition and results of operations. Under capital adequacy guidelines and the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action, the Bank must meet specific capital guidelines that involve quantitative measures of the Bank’s assets, liabilities, and certain off-balance sheet items as calculated under regulatory accounting practices. The Bank’s capital amounts and classification are also subject to qualitative judgments by the regulators about components, risk weightings, and other factors.
At December 31, 2020, the Bank’s leverage capital was $2.08 billion and risk-weighted capital was $2.39 billion. At December 31, 2019, the Bank’s leverage capital was $1.32 billion and risk-weighted capital was $1.36 billion. At December 31, 2020, the Bank’s Tier 1 capital leverage ratio was 10.89%, common equity Tier 1 capital ratio was 13.84%, Tier 1 capital ratio was 13.84%, and total capital ratio was 15.89%. These capital ratios exceeded the “well capitalized” standards defined by the federal banking regulators under prompt corrective action rules of 5.00% for Tier 1 leverage ratio, 6.5% for common equity Tier 1 capital ratio, 8.00% for Tier 1 capital ratio, and 10.00% for total capital ratio and exceeded the minimum capital ratio levels inclusive of the fully phased-in capital conservation buffer of 4.0%, 7.0%, 8.5%, and 10.5%, respectively.
Provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act require that if a depository institution holding company exceeds $15 billion due to an acquisition, then trust preferred securities are to be excluded from Tier 1 capital beginning in the period in which the transaction occurred. The Corporation’s acquisition of Opus resulted in total consolidated assets exceeding $15 billion. As the result, at December 31, 2020, the $7.7 million of trust preferred debt securities net of fair value adjustments no longer qualified as Tier 1 capital and are now included in Tier 2 capital. At December 31, 2019, Tier 1 capital included $7.6 million of trust preferred debt securities net of fair value adjustments. Tier 2 capital also included $464.4 million at December 31, 2020 and $195.2 million December 31, 2019 of eligible subordinated notes. See Note 2 - Regulatory Capital Requirements and Other Regulatory Matters to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 hereof for a discussion of the Bank’s and Corporation’s capital ratios.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The Company enters into contractual obligations in the normal course of business as a source of funds for its asset growth and to meet required capital needs. The following schedule summarizes maturities and payments due on our obligations and commitments, excluding accrued interest, at the date indicated:
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The following table summarizes our contractual commitments with off-balance sheet risk by expiration period at the date indicated:
See Note 18 - Financial Instruments with Off-Balance Sheet Risk to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 hereof for narrative disclosure regarding off-balance sheet arrangements.
Impact of Inflation and Changing Prices
Our consolidated financial statements and related data presented in this Annual Report on Form 10-K have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, which require the measurement of financial position and operating results in terms of historical dollar amounts (except with respect to securities classified as available-for-sale that are carried at market value) without considering the changes in the relative purchasing power of money over time due to inflation. The impact of inflation is reflected in the increased cost of our operations. Unlike most industrial companies, substantially all of our assets and liabilities are monetary in nature. As a result, interest rates have a greater impact on our performance than do the effects of general levels of inflation. Interest rates do not necessarily move in the same direction or to the same magnitude as the price of goods and services.
Impact of New Accounting Standards
See Note 1 - Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 hereof for a listing of recently issued accounting pronouncements and the impact of them on the Company.