Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion includes a comparison of our results of operations and liquidity and capital resources for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. A discussion of changes in our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 has been omitted from this Form 10-K, but may be found in “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our 2019 Form 10-K, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on February 20, 2020.
Performance Overview
Net Sales by Region
Net sales decreased $1,312 million due to the following:
● Lower sales volumes (-10%)
● Unfavorable foreign currency translation (-1%)
Partially offset by:
● Higher selling prices (+1%)
● Acquisition-related sales (+1%)
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and reduced global economic activity, lower sales volumes and unfavorable foreign currency translation reduced net sales in most regions and in both reportable business segments. Higher selling prices and acquisition-related sales partially offset this downturn.
Foreign currency translation decreased net sales by approximately $150 million as the U.S. dollar strengthened against several foreign currencies versus the prior year, most notably the Mexican peso.
For specific business results, see the Segment Results section within Item 7 of this Form 10-K.
Cost of sales, exclusive of depreciation and amortization
2020 PPG ANNUAL REPORT AND 10-K 16
Cost of sales, exclusive of depreciation and amortization, decreased $876 million due to the following:
● Lower sales volumes
● Foreign currency translation
● Restructuring and other cost savings
Partially offset by:
● Cost of sales attributable to acquired businesses
● General cost inflation
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased $215 million primarily due to:
● Cost savings initiatives, including restructuring actions
Partially offset by:
● Wage and other cost inflation
● Charge for potential uncollectible accounts related to COVID-19 incurred in the first quarter of 2020
● Selling, general and administrative expenses from acquired businesses
Other charges and other income
Interest expense, net of Interest income
Interest expense, net of Interest income increased $15 million in 2020 versus 2019 primarily due to the $1.5 billion 364-day term loan credit agreement entered into in April 2020. As of December 31, 2020, $400 million remains outstanding under this agreement.
Impairment charges
In 2020, impairment charges were recorded for the write-down of certain assets and liabilities related to the planned sale of certain entities and the carrying value of an indefinite-lived trademark. Refer to Note 3, ”Acquisitions and Divestitures” and Note 7, “Goodwill and Other Identifiable Intangible Assets” in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information.
Business restructuring, net
Pretax restructuring charges of $203 million were recorded in 2020, offset by certain changes in estimates to complete previously recorded programs of $29 million. Pretax restructuring charges of $194 million were recorded in 2019, offset by certain changes in estimates to complete previously recorded programs of $18 million. Refer to Note 8, "Business Restructuring" in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information.
Other charges
Other charges consist primarily of environmental remediation charges. These charges were principally for environmental remediation at a former chromium manufacturing plant and associated sites in New Jersey. Refer to Note 15, "Commitments and Contingent Liabilities" in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information.
Other income
Other income was lower in 2020 than prior year primarily due to slightly lower equity earnings and royalty income.
2020 PPG ANNUAL REPORT AND FORM 10-K 17
Effective tax rate and earnings per diluted share, continuing operations
The effective tax rate for the year-ended December 31, 2020 was 21.4%, a decrease of 2.2% from the prior year. The lower effective income tax rate included higher net benefits for changes in valuation allowance reserves and for U.S. research and development credits. The Company expects that its full year 2021 effective tax rate will be between 22% and 24%.
As reported earnings per diluted share from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased year-over-year due to the economic downturn caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and certain impairment charges. Refer to the Regulation G Reconciliations - Results from Operations for additional information.
Regulation G Reconciliations - Results from Operations
PPG believes investor’s understanding of the Company’s performance is enhanced by the disclosure of net income from continuing operations, earnings per diluted share from continuing operations and PPG’s effective tax rate from continuing operations adjusted for certain items. PPG’s management considers this information useful in providing insight into the Company’s ongoing performance because it excludes the impact of items that cannot reasonably be expected to recur on a quarterly basis or that are not attributable to our primary operations. Net income from continuing operations, earnings per diluted share from continuing operations and the effective tax rate from continuing operations adjusted for these items are not recognized financial measures determined in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP”) and should not be considered a substitute for net income, earnings per diluted share, the effective tax rate or other financial measures as computed in accordance with U.S. GAAP. In addition, adjusted net income, adjusted earnings per diluted share from continuing operations and the adjusted effective tax rate from continuing operations may not be comparable to similarly titled measures as reported by other companies.
Income before income taxes from continuing operations is reconciled to adjusted income before income taxes from continuing operations, the effective tax rate from continuing operations is reconciled to the adjusted effective tax rate from continuing operations and net income from continuing operations (attributable to PPG) and earnings per share - assuming dilution (attributable to PPG) are reconciled to adjusted net income from continuing operations (attributable to PPG) and adjusted earnings per share - assuming dilution below:
2020 PPG ANNUAL REPORT AND 10-K 18
(1) Earnings per diluted share is calculated based on unrounded numbers. Figures in the table may not recalculate due to rounding.
(2) Included in net charges related to business restructuring-related costs, are business restructuring charges, accelerated depreciation of certain assets and other related costs, offset by releases related to previously approved programs.
(3) Impairment charges were recorded in the fourth quarter 2020 related to the planned sale of certain smaller entities in non-strategic regions and for certain asset write-downs. The revenue of the entities to be sold represents less than 1% of PPG annual net sales. Net income of $64 million is attributable to PPG and net income of $4 million is attributable to noncontrolling interests.
(4) In the second half of 2020, Hurricanes Laura and Delta damaged a southern U.S. factory that supports the Company's specialty coatings and materials business.
(5) Acquisition-related costs include advisory, legal, accounting, valuation, and other professional or consulting fees incurred to effect acquisitions. These costs are included in Selling, general and administrative expense in the consolidated statement of income. Acquisition-related costs also include the impact for the step up to fair value of inventory acquired in certain acquisitions which are included in Cost of sales, exclusive of depreciation and amortization in the consolidated statement of income.
Performance of Reportable Business Segments
Performance Coatings
Performance Coatings net sales decreased due to the following:
● Lower sales volumes (-8%)
● Unfavorable foreign currency translation (-1%)
Partially offset by:
● Higher selling prices (+2%)
● Acquisition-related sales (+1%)
In 2020, businesses within the Performance Coatings reportable business segment suffered from lower sales volumes due to the COVID-19 pandemic but achieved higher selling prices across all regions.
Architectural coatings - Americas and Asia Pacific net sales, excluding the impact of currency and acquisitions (organic sales) increased a low-single-digit percentage during the year with differences by channel and region. Higher do-it yourself (“DIY”) sales volumes were more than offset by the unfavorable impact of retail store shutdowns in the U.S., Canada and Mexico and unfavorable foreign currency translation driven by the Mexican peso. PPG-Comex organic sales were higher by a mid-single-digit percentage, as the concessionaire network sell-out of PPG products was strong throughout the year.
Architectural coatings - EMEA organic sales increased by a mid-single-digit percentage driven by a strong volumes in the second half of the year offset by lower demand in Southern Europe earlier in the year when various countries mandated the temporary closure of retail paint stores due to COVID-19.
Net sales for automotive refinish coatings were down about 15% versus prior year consistent with the sharp decline in global miles driven and traffic density in most of the world due to mobility restrictions and stay-at-home mandates due to the pandemic. In the U.S., body shops were impacted by a reduction in collision claims activity throughout the year. In the Asia Pacific region, sales volumes did improve in the second half of 2020 as congestion in China neared 2019 levels.
Aerospace coatings sales volumes decreased about 25% year-over-year due to a sharp decline in commercial OEM, general aviation and after-market products. Net sales benefited from consistent demand for the company’s military applications and acquisition-related sales from Dexmet and Texstars.
2020 PPG ANNUAL REPORT AND FORM 10-K 19
Sales volumes in the protective and marine coatings business were down a mid-single-digit percentage driven by delayed projects as a result of the pandemic and lower demand for protective coatings products. Lower sales volumes in the U.S. were related to continued soft demand in the oil and gas industry. Sales volumes in Europe suffered from delayed projects due to the pandemic. In the Asia-Pacific region, sales volumes were flat versus 2019 reflecting strong demand for PPG’s technology-advantaged products and despite lower demand for marine coatings products.
Net sales in the traffic solutions business were entirely attributable to the Ennis-Flint acquisition which closed in late December 2020.
Segment income decreased $50 million year-over-year, including unfavorable foreign currency translation impacts of approximately $20 million. Segment income was impacted by lower sales volumes related to the pandemic and unfavorable foreign currency translation partially offset by higher selling prices, execution of cost-mitigation efforts and restructuring initiatives.
Looking Ahead
Looking ahead, overall segment net sales in the first quarter 2021, are anticipated to be generally similar to the fourth quarter. Sales volumes are expected to be slightly lower on a year-over-year basis. Sharp year-over-year declines in the commercial aerospace coatings business will continue. Lastly, acquisitions are forecast to add about $90 million of net sales, primarily from Ennis-Flint. First quarter sales and earnings for the Ennis-Flint business are historically low due to normal seasonality in that business. It is expected that raw material, logistics, and certain other costs will be inflationary in 2021. The company has already announced selling price increases in most of the businesses within the Performance Coatings reportable segment and will continue to execute various cost-savings initiatives. Finally, foreign currency translation is expected to have a favorable impact on segment net sales and earnings of about $80 million and $10 million, respectively, in the first quarter 2021 based on current exchange rates.
Industrial Coatings
Industrial Coatings segment net sales decreased due to the following:
● Lower sales volumes (-13%)
● Unfavorable foreign currency translation (-1%)
Partially offset by:
● Acquisition-related sales (+1%)
Automotive OEM coatings sales volumes decreased by approximately 15% year-over-year, driven by the significant curtailment in global automotive industry production rates due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Although sales volumes decreased year-over-year, strong sales volumes in China and the company’s strong technology and service capabilities led PPG to outpace the global industry build rate.
For the industrial coatings business, net sales decreased by about 10% compared to prior year. Acquisition-related sales from Whitford and modest increases in selling prices were more than offset by lower demand stemming from reduced industrial production in most regions due to customer shutdowns. Global industrial production improved during the second half of the year compared to the start of the pandemic.
Packaging coatings organic sales were slightly higher year-over-year as sales volume growth in the U.S. and Latin America offset softer demand in the Asia Pacific region. In the U.S. and Latin America, sales volume growth was driven by strong demand in the canned food and beverage segment.
Specialty coatings and materials net sales were lower by approximately 20% versus the prior year, driven by lower sales volumes in the U.S. and Europe. Additionally, in the second half of 2020, a company facility in Louisiana was damaged by both Hurricanes Laura and Delta, causing an estimated $10 million in lost revenues due to production interruptions.
Segment income decreased $112 million year-over-year, including unfavorable foreign currency translation impacts of about $10 million. Segment income was impacted by lower sales volumes driven by customer shutdowns related to the pandemic, partially offset by cost-mitigation actions, restructuring cost savings, and modestly higher selling prices.
Looking ahead
Looking ahead, sales volumes for the Industrial Coatings reportable business segment in the first quarter 2021 are expected to be higher than the prior-year first quarter by a mid-to-high-single-digit percentage, including the benefit of an
2020 PPG ANNUAL REPORT AND 10-K 20
easier comparison due to the lower industrial activity in China during the first quarter of 2020 due to the pandemic. It is expected that raw material, logistics, and certain other costs will be inflationary in early 2021. The company is planning or has instituted selling price increases to help mitigate these cost pressures, along with continued execution of the previously announced restructuring initiatives. Finally, foreign currency translation is expected to have a favorable impact on segment sales and earnings of about $40 million and $5 million, respectively, in the first quarter 2021 based on current exchange rates.
Review and Outlook
During 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic significantly impacted global economic conditions.The impact in the first quarter was concentrated in China and broadened to most of the rest of the world in the second quarter. Coatings end-use markets related to mobility were more negatively impacted, such as the aerospace and automotive refinish coatings businesses. Some end-use markets benefited from the government mandated restrictions, including architectural coatings DIY and the packaged food segment. PPG’s net sales, excluding foreign currency translation impact, decreased approximately 8% versus the prior year. Acquisition-related sales contributed 1% to net sales growth compared to prior year. Foreign currency translation was unfavorable throughout the year and impacted net sales by about 1%. Raw material costs moderated during the first half of the year and then increased sequentially throughout the second half of 2020 and are expected to continue to be inflationary into the first quarter of 2021. Some other key costs continued to increase in 2020 such as logistics, employee wage and benefit costs.
U.S. and Canada
During 2020, economic activity was impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic with overall economic activity sharply falling in the first half of the year and then continuously improving in the second half of the year. For the full year, U.S. GDP fell by about 5%. Automotive OEM industry builds were down about 20% compared to 2019 with minimal production in the second quarter and improving trends in the second-half of the year. Demand in the residential and commercial construction markets were mixed in 2020 compared to 2019. New home starts advanced approximately 5% in 2020 versus approximately 2% in 2019. Residential remodeling was up 2% in 2020 versus 2019 supported by stay-at-home mandates. Commercial construction was down approximately 10% compared to 2019. Market demand for architectural paint shifted significantly to the DIY channel during the year as higher U.S. unemployment and increased work-from-home resulted in consumers choosing to spend more time renovating their homes. PPG’s architectural coatings sales volumes in the U.S. and Canada were positively impacted by DIY trends and negatively impacted by lower commercial demand trends. The aerospace coatings business was significantly impacted by the pandemic. Before the pandemic, the company’s sales mix was approximately 70% commercial and 30% military. During the pandemic, PPG sales volumes for military applications remained solid, in part due to specification of PPG products with advantaged technology. The commercial segment was down about 50% due to lower passenger miles flown and fewer industry OEM builds. The automotive refinish coatings business was impacted by stay-at-home mandates. These mandates led to less commuting to work, less congestion and fewer miles driven leading to lower collision claims. PPG’s packaging coatings business was favorably impacted by higher packaged food demand. PPG’s automotive OEM coatings business performance was slightly below industry demand levels due to customer mix. Higher acquisition-related sales partially offset lower sales volumes in the automotive OEM coatings business. For the industrial coatings business, acquisition-related sales and higher selling prices were more than offset by lower sales volumes. The U.S. and Canada remained PPG’s largest region, representing approximately 41% of 2020 net sales.
Europe, Middle East and Africa
European economic activity was weak in 2020. Industrial production and manufacturing rates in the region were lower than 2019. The region was impacted by continuing uncertainty over the United Kingdom’s exit from the European Union and overall contracting demand in most end-use markets that PPG supplies due to the pandemic. Regional demand continued to be mixed by country and end-use. Demand for PPG products was impacted by a decline in demand for automotive refinish, automotive OEM, aerospace, and general industrial coatings products. Demand for architectural and packaging coatings products was better, led by higher coatings sales for architectural DIY and the packaged food segment. PPG’s architectural coatings - EMEA business’ organic sales were higher by a mid-single-digit percentage driven by higher selling prices and higher sales volumes.
EMEA represented approximately 31% of PPG’s 2020 net sales, similar to prior year levels. Regional coatings volumes remain approximately 20% below 2008 pre-recession levels. Net sales, excluding the impact of foreign currency translation, decreased in 2020 compared to 2019 as higher selling prices and acquisition-related sales were more than offset by lower sales volumes. Foreign currencies were relatively flat compared to 2019.
Asia Pacific and Latin America
The emerging regions of Asia Pacific and Latin America represented 28% of PPG’s 2020 net sales in aggregate, similar to the prior year.
2020 PPG ANNUAL REPORT AND FORM 10-K 21
Asia Pacific remained the largest emerging region, with net sales of approximately $2.4 billion, led by China, which remained PPG’s second largest country by revenue. Overall net sales were lower in 2020 compared to 2019 driven by lower demand of coatings products due to the pandemic. First quarter sales in China were sharply lower due to a broad shut-down caused by the pandemic. As the year progressed, demand in China was the best of any major region and was higher than the levels seen in 2019 in each of the last three quarters of 2020. In China, the automotive OEM coatings business had retail sales higher than 2019 in each of the last 9 months of 2020. PPG’s organic sales in the Asia Pacific region were lower by about 5% as higher year-over-year sales in China were more than offset by lower sales in India and Southeast Asia due to the pandemic.
Overall, demand in Latin America declined year-over-year driven by lower automotive industry builds and overall softer economic conditions in most countries, including Mexico. In Mexico, the PPG-Comex business added a net of approximately 80 new concessionaire locations. The overall region’s performance was supported by strong growth in the packaging coatings business. Foreign currency translation was volatile and finished about 10% unfavorable compared to 2019, principally driven by weaker currencies, including the Mexican peso and Brazilian real.
Outlook
Looking ahead to 2021, we expect solid global market growth that will likely be uneven by region and end-use. We expect regional growth rates to be higher than 2020 in all regions as demand continues to recover from the pandemic.
We anticipate PPG’s U.S. and Canada regional growth will be led by automotive OEM and general industrial coatings as industrial production levels are expected to be higher than 2020. Automotive OEM builds are expected to be approximately a mid-teen percentage higher compared to 2020. We expect positive growth in housing and continued weakness in commercial construction and maintenance. Architectural DIY demand is expected to remain at elevated levels in the first half of 2021. Demand for aerospace and automotive refinish coatings is expected to remain subdued during the first half of 2021.
We expect industry demand trends in 2021 in Europe to improve from those experienced in 2020 with continuing improvement in profitability due to margin improvement. Regional growth is expected to remain mixed by sub-region and country. Favorable end-use trends are expected to continue in automotive OEM and general industrial coatings. Overall demand is expected to be higher but be mixed by country in the architectural coatings business. We continue to monitor the economic environment in the U.K., as its exit from the European Union progresses and impacts consumer sentiment and coatings demand. Demand for aerospace and automotive refinish coatings is expected to remain soft.
In Asia Pacific, we expect continued improvement in industrial production growth in China, Southeast Asia and India as the year progresses. In China, we foresee continued above global average growth with heightened risk as the Chinese economy continues to shift and rely more on domestic consumption. Industrial production in India is expected to be sharply higher in 2021 from a very low level in 2020 due to the pandemic. The recovery in marine coatings new-build demand is expected to remain subdued.
In Latin America, we anticipate slightly better economic conditions in Mexico, most of Central America and South America compared to 2020. We expect continued strong demand for the PPG-Comex architectural coatings business.
Significant other factors
In June 2020, PPG initiated a $176 million pretax global restructuring program. The program addresses weakened global economic conditions stemming from the COVID-19 pandemic and related pace of recovery in a few end-use markets along with further opportunities to optimize supply chain and functional costs. The plan includes a voluntary separation program that was offered in the U.S. and Canada. PPG recognized approximately $45 million of savings from this program in 2020. The majority of these restructuring actions are expected to be completed by the end of 2021.
We made significant progress on the global restructuring programs that were announced in May 2018 and June 2019. The Company achieved approximately $70 million of savings in 2020 relating to these programs. The majority of these restructuring actions are expected to be completed by the end of the first quarter 2021 with the remainder of the actions expected to be completed by 2022. Aggregate restructuring savings related to the 2020, 2019 and 2018 programs was approximately $115 million in 2020.
We will continue to aggressively manage the Company’s cost structure to ensure alignment with the overall demand environment and will make adjustments as required to remain cost competitive in the marketplace. Aggregate restructuring savings are expected to be at least $120 million in 2021.
Raw materials are a significant input cost to the process of manufacturing coatings. PPG experiences fluctuating energy and raw material costs driven by various factors, including changes in supplier feedstock costs and inventories, global industry activity levels, foreign currency exchange rates, and global supply and demand factors. In aggregate, average raw material costs were modestly lower in 2020 versus 2019 due to variety of reasons, including softer industry demand and lower crude oil prices. PPG currently expects overall raw material prices to increase by a low-single-digit percentage
2020 PPG ANNUAL REPORT AND 10-K 22
in the first quarter 2021. Cost inflation is expected in several other areas including wage, benefit, and logistics costs in 2021. PPG expects certain regional logistics equipment shortages in 2021, impacting the Company’s supply chain and distribution channels.
In 2020, we achieved selling price improvement, primarily in the Performance Coatings reportable business segment, reflecting the Company’s efforts to offset various inflationary pressures. Further benefits from selling price actions are necessary in 2021 to recover operating margins, reflecting the value of our products. The Company will carefully monitor all costs during 2021 and assess the need for additional selling price increases.
In 2020, we experienced unfavorable foreign currency translation throughout the year. Based on mid-January 2021 exchange rates, the Company expects favorable year-over-year foreign currency translation in 2021. The foreign currency environment continues to be volatile, and the impact on 2021 net sales and income before income taxes could differ from this expectation. The Company generally purchases raw materials, incurs manufacturing costs and sells finished goods in the same currency, so we typically incur only modest foreign currency transaction related impacts.
The 2021 effective tax rate from continuing operations is expected to be in the range of 22% to 24%, varying by quarter. This range represents the Company’s best estimate.
Over the past five years, the Company used over $3.9 billion of cash to repurchase approximately 35 million shares of PPG stock. No shares were repurchased in 2020. The Company ended the year with approximately $1.5 billion remaining under its current share repurchase authorization. During 2020, the Company deployed nearly $1.2 billion for acquisitions, approximately $300 million for capital expenditures and approximately $495 million for dividends. PPG increased its per-share dividend in September 2020, marking the 49th annual per share dividend increase and the 121st consecutive year of annual dividend payments.
PPG ended 2020 with approximately $1.9 billion in cash and short-term investments. The Company expects continued strong cash generation in 2021.
Also, beginning in 2021, the Company will report adjusted earnings per diluted share excluding amortization expense relating to intangible assets from completed acquisitions.
Accounting Standards Adopted in 2020
Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” under Item 8 of this Form 10-K describes the Company’s recently adopted accounting pronouncements.
Accounting Standards to be Adopted in Future Years
Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” under Item 8 of this Form 10-K describes accounting pronouncements that have been promulgated prior to December 31, 2020 but are not effective until a future date.
Commitments and Contingent Liabilities, including Environmental Matters
PPG is involved in a number of lawsuits and claims, both actual and potential, including some that it has asserted against others, in which substantial monetary damages are sought. See Item 3. “Legal Proceedings” and Note 15, “Commitments and Contingent Liabilities” under Item 8 of this Form 10-K for a description of certain of these lawsuits.
As discussed in Item 3 and Note 15, although the result of any future litigation of such lawsuits and claims is inherently unpredictable, management believes that, in the aggregate, the outcome of all lawsuits and claims involving PPG, including asbestos-related claims, will not have a material effect on PPG’s consolidated financial position or liquidity; however, any such outcome may be material to the results of operations of any particular period in which costs, if any, are recognized.
It is PPG’s policy to accrue expenses for contingencies when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. Reserves for environmental contingencies are exclusive of claims against third parties and are generally not discounted. In management’s opinion, the Company operates in an environmentally sound manner and the outcome of the Company’s environmental contingencies will not have a material effect on PPG’s financial position or liquidity; however, any such outcome may be material to the results of operations of any particular period in which costs, if any, are recognized. Management anticipates that the resolution of the Company’s environmental contingencies will occur over an extended period of time.
As also discussed in Note 15, PPG has significant reserves for environmental contingencies. Please refer to the Environmental Matters section of Note 15 for details of these reserves. A significant portion of our reserves for environmental contingencies relate to ongoing remediation at PPG's former chromium manufacturing plant in Jersey City, N.J. and associated sites ("New Jersey Chrome"). There are multiple, future events yet to occur, including further remedy selection and design, remedy implementation and execution and applicable governmental agency or community organization approvals. Considerable uncertainty exists regarding the timing of these future events for the New Jersey
2020 PPG ANNUAL REPORT AND FORM 10-K 23
Chrome sites. Further resolution of these events is expected to occur over the next several years. As these events occur and to the extent that the cost estimates of the environmental remediation remedies change, the existing reserve for this environmental remediation matter will continue to be adjusted.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
During the past two years, PPG had sufficient financial resources to meet its operating requirements, to fund our capital spending, including acquisitions, share repurchases and pension plans and to pay increasing dividends to shareholders.
Cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments
Cash from operating activities - continuing operations
2020 vs. 2019
The $45 million increase in Cash from operating activities - continuing operations was primarily due to favorable changes in working capital, excluding the impact of business acquisitions.
Operating working capital
Operating working capital is a subset of total working capital and represents (1) receivables from customers, net of allowance for doubtful accounts, (2) inventories, and (3) trade liabilities. See Note 4, “Working Capital Detail” under Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further information related to the components of the Company’s operating working capital. We believe operating working capital represents the key components of working capital under the operating control of our businesses.
A key metric we use to measure our working capital management is operating working capital as a percentage of sales (fourth quarter sales annualized).
Environmental expenditures
We expect cash outlays for environmental remediation activities in 2021 to be between $80 million and $100 million.
Defined benefit pension plan contributions
Contributions to PPG’s non-U.S. defined benefit pension plans in 2020 were required by local funding requirements. PPG expects to make contributions to its defined benefit pension plans in the range of $10 million to $20 million in 2021. PPG may make voluntary contributions to its defined benefit pension plans in 2021 and beyond.
2020 PPG ANNUAL REPORT AND 10-K 24
Cash used for investing activities
2020 vs. 2019
The $438 million increase in cash used for investing activities - continuing operations, was primarily due to higher spending on business acquisitions.
Capital expenditures, including business acquisitions
(1) Includes modernization and productivity improvements, expansion of existing businesses and environmental control projects.
Capital expenditures related to modernization and productivity improvements, expansion of existing businesses and environmental control projects is expected to be approximately $450 million in 2021, reflecting a return to pre-pandemic levels of spending in support of future organic growth opportunities.
A primary focus for the Company in 2021 will continue to be cash deployment focused on shareholder value creation, with a preference for business acquisitions. The near-term cash deployment priority will be to complete the announced acquisitions using a combination of cash on hand and external financing.
Cash used for financing activities
2020 vs. 2019
The $699 million decrease in cash used for financing activities - continuing operations, was primarily due the issuance of short-term debt in 2020 and lower net purchases of treasury stock year-over-year.
Share repurchase activity
The Company has approximately $1.5 billion remaining under the current authorization from the Board of Directors, which was approved in December 2017. The current authorized repurchase program has no expiration date.
Dividends paid to shareholders
PPG has paid uninterrupted annual dividends since 1899, and 2020 marked the 49th consecutive year of increased annual per-share dividend payments to shareholders. The Company raised its per-share quarterly dividend by 6% to $0.54 per share paid in September 2020.
2020 PPG ANNUAL REPORT AND FORM 10-K 25
Debt issued and repaid
Credit agreements and lines of credit
In August 2019, PPG amended and restated its five-year credit agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) with several banks and financial institutions as further discussed in Note 10, "Borrowings and Lines of Credit" under Item 8 of this Form 10-K. The Credit Agreement amends and restates the Company's existing five year credit agreement dated as of December 18, 2015. The Credit Agreement provides for a $2.2 billion unsecured revolving credit facility. The Credit Agreement will terminate on August 30, 2024. In March 2020, PPG borrowed $800 million under the Credit Agreement and repaid that amount in full in April 2020. There were no amounts outstanding under the credit agreement as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
The Credit Agreement also supports the Company’s commercial paper borrowings which are classified as long-term based on PPG’s intent and ability to refinance these borrowings on a long-term basis. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, there were $250 million and $100 million of commercial paper borrowings outstanding, respectively.
The Credit Agreement requires the Company to maintain a ratio of Total Indebtedness to Total Capitalization, as defined in the Credit Agreement, of 60% or less; provided, that for any fiscal quarter in which the Company has made an acquisition for consideration in excess of $1 billion and for the next five fiscal quarters thereafter, the ratio of Total Indebtedness to Total Capitalization may not exceed 65% at any time. As of December 31, 2020, Total Indebtedness to Total Capitalization as defined under the Credit Agreement and the Term Loan was 46%.
In addition to the amounts available under lines of credit, the Company maintains access to the capital markets and may issue debt or equity securities from time to time, which may provide an additional source of liquidity.
See Note 10, “Borrowings and Lines of Credit” under Item 8 of this Form 10-K for information regarding notes entered into and repaid as well as details regarding the use and availability of committed and uncommitted lines of credit, letters of credit, guarantees and debt covenants.
2020 PPG ANNUAL REPORT AND 10-K 26
Contractual obligations
We continue to believe that our cash on hand and short term investments, cash from operations and the Company’s access to capital markets will continue to be sufficient to fund our operating activities, capital spending, acquisitions, dividend payments, debt service, share repurchases, contributions to pension plans, and PPG’s significant contractual obligations.
(1)Interest on all outstanding debt, including finance lease obligations.
(2)Includes interest payments.
(3)Includes the high end of the range of the expected pension contributions for 2021 only, as PPG is unable to estimate the pension contributions beyond 2021.
(4)The unconditional purchase commitments are principally take-or-pay obligations related to the purchase of certain materials, including industrial gases and electricity, consistent with customary industry practice.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company’s off-balance sheet arrangements include unconditional purchase commitments disclosed in the “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section in the contractual obligations table as well as letters of credit and guarantees as discussed in Note 10, “Borrowings and Lines of Credit” under Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Other liquidity matters
At December 31, 2020, the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits for uncertain tax positions, including an accrual of related interest and penalties along with positions only impacting the timing of tax benefits, was $188 million. The timing of payments will depend on the progress of examinations with tax authorities. PPG does not expect a significant tax payment related to these obligations within the next year. The Company is unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate as to when any significant cash settlements with taxing authorities may occur.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Management has evaluated the accounting policies used in the preparation of the financial statements and related notes presented under Item 8 of this Form 10-K and believes those policies to be reasonable and appropriate. We believe that the most critical accounting estimates made in the preparation of our financial statements are those related to accounting for contingencies, under which we accrue a loss when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated, and to accounting for pensions, other postretirement benefits, business combinations, goodwill and other identifiable intangible assets with indefinite lives because of the importance of management judgment in making the estimates necessary to apply these policies.
Contingencies
Contingencies, by their nature, relate to uncertainties that require management to exercise judgment both in assessing the likelihood that a liability has been incurred as well as in estimating the amount of potential loss. The most important contingencies impacting our financial statements are those related to environmental remediation, to pending, impending or overtly threatened litigation against the Company and to the resolution of matters related to open tax years. For more information on these matters, see Note 15, “Commitments and Contingent Liabilities” and Note 13, “Income Taxes” under Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans
Accounting for pensions and other postretirement benefits involves estimating the cost of benefits to be provided well into the future and attributing that cost over the time period each employee works. To accomplish this, we make extensive use
2020 PPG ANNUAL REPORT AND FORM 10-K 27
of assumptions about inflation, investment returns, mortality, turnover, medical costs and discount rates. The Company has established a process by which management reviews and selects these assumptions annually. See Note 14, “Employee Benefit Plans” under Item 8 of this Form 10-K for information on these plans and the assumptions used.
Business Combinations
In accordance with the accounting guidance for business combinations, the Company uses the acquisition method of accounting to allocate costs of acquired businesses to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values at the dates of acquisition. The excess costs of acquired businesses over the fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed will be recognized as goodwill. The valuations of the acquired assets and liabilities will impact the determination of future operating results. In addition to using management estimates and negotiated amounts, the Company uses a variety of information sources to determine the estimated fair values of acquired assets and liabilities including: third-party appraisals for the estimated value and lives of identifiable intangible assets and property, plant and equipment; third-party actuaries for the estimated obligations of defined benefit pension plans and similar benefit obligations; and legal counsel or other experts to assess the obligations associated with legal, environmental and other contingent liabilities.
The business and technical judgment of management was used in determining which intangible assets have indefinite lives and in determining the useful lives of finite-lived intangible assets in accordance with the accounting guidance for goodwill and other intangible assets.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
The Company tests indefinite-lived intangible assets and goodwill for impairment by either performing a qualitative evaluation or a quantitative test at least annually, or more frequently if an indication of impairment arises. The qualitative evaluation is an assessment of factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit or asset is less than its carrying amount. In the quantitative test, fair values are estimated using a discounted cash flow model. Key assumptions and estimates used in the discounted cash flow model include discount rates, tax rates, future revenues, operating cash flows and capital expenditures. For more information on these matters, see Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” under Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
We believe that the amounts recorded in the financial statements under Item 8 of this Form 10-K related to these contingencies, pensions, other postretirement benefits, business combinations, goodwill and other identifiable intangible assets with indefinite lives are based on the best estimates and judgments of the appropriate PPG management, although actual outcomes could differ from our estimates.
Currency
Comparing spot exchange rates at December 31, 2020 and at December 31, 2019, the U.S. dollar strengthened against certain currencies in the countries where PPG operates, most notably the Mexican peso. As a result, consolidated net assets at December 31, 2020 decreased by $36 million from December 31, 2019. Comparing spot exchange rates at December 31, 2019 and at December 31, 2018, the U.S. dollar weakened against certain currencies in the countries where PPG operates, most notably the British pound, Canadian dollar, and the Mexican peso. As a result, consolidated net assets at December 31, 2019 increased by $106 million from December 31, 2018.
Comparing average exchange rates during 2020 to those of 2019, the U.S. dollar strengthened against currencies of the countries within the regions PPG operates, including EMEA and Latin America. This had an unfavorable impact of approximately $26 million on full year 2020 income before income taxes from the translation of this foreign income into U.S. dollars. Comparing average exchange rates during 2019 to those of 2018, the U.S. dollar strengthened against currencies of the countries within the regions PPG operates, including EMEA, Asia Pacific, and Latin America. This had an unfavorable impact of approximately $50 million on full year 2019 income before income taxes from the translation of this foreign income into U.S. dollars.
Forward-Looking Statements
Management’s Discussion and Analysis and other sections of this Annual Report contain forward-looking statements that reflect the Company’s current views with respect to future events and financial performance.
You can identify forward-looking statements by the fact that they do not relate strictly to current or historic facts. Forward-looking statements are identified by the use of the words “aim,” “believe,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “estimate,” “project,” “outlook,” “forecast” and other expressions that indicate future events and trends. Any forward-looking statement speaks only as of the date on which such statement is made, and the Company undertakes no obligation to update any forward looking statement, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. You are advised, however, to consult any further disclosures we make on related subjects in our reports to the Securities and Exchange Commission. Also, note the following cautionary statements.
2020 PPG ANNUAL REPORT AND 10-K 28
Many factors could cause actual results to differ materially from the Company’s forward-looking statements. Such factors include statements related to expected effects on our business of the COVID-19 pandemic, global economic conditions, increasing price and product competition by our competitors, fluctuations in cost and availability of raw materials, the ability to achieve selling price increases, the ability to recover margins, customer inventory levels, our ability to maintain favorable supplier relationships and arrangements, the timing of and the realization of anticipated cost savings from restructuring and other initiatives, the ability to identify additional cost savings opportunities, difficulties in integrating acquired businesses and achieving expected synergies therefrom, economic and political conditions in the markets we serve, the ability to penetrate existing, developing and emerging foreign and domestic markets, foreign exchange rates and fluctuations in such rates, fluctuations in tax rates, the impact of future legislation, the impact of environmental regulations, unexpected business disruptions, the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting, the results of governmental investigations and the unpredictability of existing and possible future litigation. However, it is not possible to predict or identify all such factors.
Consequently, while the list of factors presented here and under Item 1A is considered representative, no such list should be considered to be a complete statement of all potential risks and uncertainties. Unlisted factors may present significant additional obstacles to the realization of forward-looking statements.
Consequences of material differences in the results compared with those anticipated in the forward-looking statements could include, among other things, lower sales or income, business disruption, operational problems, financial loss, legal liability to third parties, other factors set forth in Item 1A of this Form 10-K and similar risks, any of which could have a material adverse effect on the Company’s consolidated financial condition, results of operations or liquidity.