Item 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
General
Certain statements contained in this Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ("MD&A"), which can be identified by the use of forward-looking terminology such as "may," "will," "expect," "continue," "remains," "intend," "aim," "should," "prospects," "could," "future," "potential," "believes," "plans," "likely," and "probable," or the negative thereof or other variations thereon or comparable terminology, constitute "forward-looking statements" within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Exchange Act and are subject to the safe harbors created thereby. These statements should be considered as subject to the many risks and uncertainties that exist in the Company's operations and business environment. Such risks and uncertainties could cause actual results to differ materially from those projected as a result of many factors, including, but not limited to, those under the headings Cautionary Statements Regarding Forward Looking Information and Item 1A. Risk Factors.
The Company is engaged in the manufacture and sale of products in one reportable segment: Piping Systems. Since the Company's revenues are significantly dependent upon large discrete projects, the Company's operating results in any reporting period could be negatively impacted as a result of variations in the level of the Company's large discrete project orders or delays in the timing of the specific project phases.
COVID-19 and Depressed Oil and Gas Market
The Company’s results of operations, financial condition, liquidity and cash flow in 2020 have been materially adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic and the current depressed market prices for oil and gas, and will likely continue to be materially adversely affected, the extent to which remains unclear at this time. See Item 1A. Risk Factors for additional information.
As of the date of filing this Form 10-K, all of the Company’s plants are operating and, to date, the Company's global supply chains have not been materially affected by the global pandemic. Due to the unprecedented actions taken to stem the spread of the virus and the uncertainty of the duration and impact of additional actions that may be required, the resulting future disruptions to the Company’s operations are uncertain.
In response to the extraordinary steps taken to combat the spread of COVID-19 and the impact of decreased oil prices, the Company has updated its forecasts more frequently during this period to determine the continuing financial impact of these events on the Company’s results of operations, financial condition and liquidity. As a result of these reforecasts, the Company reduced headcount, planned capital expenditures and non-essential operating expenses. Due to continued project delays as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and related disruptions, as of January 31, 2021, the Company and its subsidiaries failed to achieve the necessary fixed charge coverage ratio of 1.10 to 1.00 for the three-month period ended January 31, 2021 under its Amendment and Waiver for the North American Loan Parties. Based upon the actions taken by the Company and expected future results, the Company believes it has alleviated any concerns about its ability to satisfy its obligations in the normal course of business for the next year after the date these financial statements are available to be issued. See further discussion below and in Note 5 - Debt, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
On May 1, 2020, the Company entered into a loan agreement under the PPP and received proceeds of approximately $3.2 million. Interest on the loan accrued at a fixed interest rate of 1.0%. Under Section 1106 of the CARES Act, borrowers are eligible for forgiveness of principal and accrued interest on the loans to the extent that the proceeds are used to cover eligible payroll costs, mortgage interest costs, rent and utility costs, otherwise described as qualified expenses. During the three months ended July 31, 2020, the Company used all of the PPP loan proceeds to pay for qualified expenses. 100% of the PPP loan proceeds were used for payroll related expenses. The Company believes the PPP loan proceeds will be forgiven under the terms of the CARES Act, although no assurance to that effect can be provided. Under the current provisions of the CARES Act, any recipient of a PPP loan may be subject to an audit by the SBA to confirm it qualifies for the loan and that the proceeds were used for qualified expenses as prescribed by the PPP rules.
Based on the facts and circumstances of the Company's PPP loan and according to the applicable accounting guidance described herein, the Company has elected to account for the PPP loan proceeds as a grant that has reasonable assurance of being forgiven. As such, the Company recognized the proceeds in earnings during the year ended January 31, 2021. The amounts are recognized in other income in the consolidated statements of operations. The Company has submitted its application and supporting documentation for forgiveness to its bank, which has submitted the application and supporting documents to the SBA. We are currently awaiting approval of forgiveness from the SBA.
Beginning in April 2020, the Company's subsidiary, Perma-Pipe Canada, Ltd. ("PPCA"), applied for relief in the form of grants from the Canadian government under the CEWS program. Based on the CEWS program rules, the grants are applied for each month and are granted based on the amount of eligible employee expenses incurred over the previous month. Beginning in October 2020, PPCA also applied for grants under the CERS program. PPCA was approved for and received approximately $1.9 million and $0.1 million in grants under the CEWS and CERS programs, respectively, during the year ended January 31, 2021. Both programs are scheduled to continue through June 2021. The proceeds from CEWS and CERS are recognized in other income in the consolidated statements of operations.
Results of Operations
The analysis presented below and discussed in more detail throughout this MD&A was organized to provide instructive information for better understanding the Company's results of operations, financial condition and cash flows. However, this MD&A should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including the notes thereto and the risk factors contained herein. The Company's fiscal year ends on January 31. Years, results and balances described as 2020 and 2019 are for the fiscal years ended January 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively
Consolidated Results of Operations:
2020 Compared to 2019
Net sales:
Net sales were $84.7 million in 2020, a decrease of $42.9 million, or 33.7%, from $127.7 million in 2019. The decrease was a result of lower sales volumes driven by the impact of lower oil prices, combined with project delays arising as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company expects these delayed projects to commence in 2021.
Gross profit:
Gross profit decreased to $11.2 million, or 13.2% of net sales, in 2020, a decrease of $17.8 million, or 61.5%, from $29.0 million, or 22.8% of net sales, in 2019. This decrease was primarily driven by lower sales volumes.
General and administrative expenses:
General and administrative expenses were $17.2 million in 2020 compared to $18.9 million in 2019, a decrease of $1.7 million, or 9.0%. This decrease was driven primarily by cost cutting measures enacted as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Selling expenses:
Selling expenses increased by $0.1 million, from $5.2 million in 2019 to $5.3 million in 2020. This increase was primarily due the addition of new sales employees and severance for terminated employees in the current year, partially offset by lower overall personnel costs.
Interest expense:
Interest expense decreased to $0.4 million in 2020 from $0.9 million in 2019 due to lower net borrowings during 2020.
Other income, net:
Other income was $4.0 million in 2020 compared to $1.1 million in 2019, an increase of $2.9 million. This increase was primarily the result of recognition of the Company's reasonable expectation of forgiveness of its PPP loan proceeds during the period of $3.2 million, as well as income recorded for funds received under the CEWS program in Canada. These amounts were offset partially by the encashment of a performance bond securing one of the Company's contracts with a customer in Qatar. The Company has recorded the expense related to this encashment of approximately $0.6 million in other income in the consolidated statement of operations. The Company believes the customer's claims of non-performance under the contract are invalid and that the customer's actions were themselves a breach of the contract. The Company has engaged local counsel to seek reimbursement as well as additional compensation for lost profits suffered as a result of cancellation of certain work orders under the contract.
Income/(loss) from operations before income taxes:
Income from operations before income taxes decreased to a loss of $(7.8) million in 2020 compared to income of $5.0 million in 2019. The decrease was a result of lower sales volumes driven by the impact of lower oil prices, combined with project delays arising as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company expects these delayed projects to commence in 2021.
Income taxes:
The Company's worldwide effective tax rates ("ETR") were 1.7% and 29.0% in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The change in the ETR from the prior year to the current year is largely due to the Company’s valuation allowance against its domestic deferred tax asset and changes to the mix of income in various jurisdictions, including losses in the zero rate jurisdiction of the United Arab Emirates (the "U.A.E.").
As a result of the one-time transition tax from the U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (“Tax Act”), the Company estimates that distributions from foreign subsidiaries will not be subject to incremental U.S. tax as they will either be remittances of previously taxed earnings and profits or eligible for a full dividends received deduction. Current and future earnings in the Company's subsidiaries in Canada and Egypt are not permanently reinvested, and earnings in its Indian subsidiary are partially permanently reinvested. Earnings from these subsidiaries are subject to tax in their local jurisdiction, and withholdings taxes in these jurisdictions are considered. As such, the Company has reduced the liability from $0.4 million as of January 31, 2020 to $0.2 million as of January 31, 2021 related to these taxes.
For further information, see Note 7 - Income taxes, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Net income/(loss):
The resulting net loss of $7.6 million in 2020 was an $11.2 million decrease from the net income of $3.6 million in 2019. The decrease was a result of lower sales volumes driven by the impact of lower oil prices, combined with project delays arising as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company expects these delayed projects to commence in 2021.
Liquidity and capital resources
Cash and cash equivalents as of January 31, 2021 and 2020 were $7.2 million and $13.4 million, respectively. On January 31, 2021, $0.1 million was held in the United States and $7.1 million was held by the Company's foreign subsidiaries. The Company's working capital was $25.6 million on January 31, 2021 compared to $31.4 million on January 31, 2020. Of the working capital components, cash decreased $6.2 million primarily as a result of the activity discussed below.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $0.2 million in 2020 compared to $4.1 million in 2019. This decrease of $4.0 million was due primarily to the decrease in net income and increases in prepaid expenses and other current assets, partially offset by decreases in inventory and increases in accounts payable in the current period compared to the prior year period.
Net cash used in investing activities during 2020 and 2019 was $2.0 million and $1.9 million, respectively.
Net cash used in financing activities was $4.1 million in 2020 compared to $0.3 million in 2019. The primary reason for this change was that during the current period the Company had greater net repayments under its revolving credit facility of approximately $3.2 million, as compared to the prior year period where the Company had net borrowings under its revolving credit facility of approximately $0.3 million. Debt totaled $13.2 million and $16.9 million as of January 31, 2021 and January 31, 2020, respectively. For additional information, see Note 5 - Debt, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
There was no restricted cash held in the United States on January 31, 2021 or January 31, 2020. Restricted cash held by foreign subsidiaries was $1.2 million and $1.3 million as of January 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Restricted cash held by foreign subsidiaries related to fixed deposits that also serve as security deposits and guarantees.
The following table summarizes the Company's estimated contractual obligations on January 31, 2021.
(1)
Interest obligations exclude floating rate interest on debt payable under the North American revolving line of credit. Based on the amount of such debt on January 31, 2021, and the weighted average interest rate of 6.25% on that debt, such interest was being incurred at an annual rate of approximately $0.2 million.
(2)
Scheduled maturities, excluding interest.
(3)
Scheduled maturities of foreign revolver line, excluding interest.
(4)
Minimum contractual amounts, assuming no changes in variable expenses.
(5)
Refer to Note 7 - Income taxes, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of the uncertain tax position obligations.
Financing
Revolving line - North America. On September 20, 2018, the Company and certain of its U.S. and Canadian subsidiaries (collectively, together with the Company, the “North American Loan Parties”) entered into a Revolving Credit and Security Agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) with PNC Bank, National Association ("PNC"), as administrative agent and lender, providing for a three-year $18 million Senior Secured Revolving Credit Facility, subject to a borrowing base including various reserves (the “Senior Credit Facility”).
The Company has used proceeds from the Senior Credit Facility to pay outstanding amounts under a prior credit facility, a cash collateralized letter of credit, and for on-going working capital needs, and expects to continue using this facility to fund future capital expenditures, working capital needs and other corporate purposes. Borrowings under the Senior Credit Facility bear interest at a rate equal to an alternate base rate or London Interbank Offered Rate ("LIBOR"), plus, in each case, an applicable margin. The applicable margin is based on average quarterly undrawn availability with respect to the Senior Credit Facility. Interest on alternate base rate borrowings are generally payable monthly in arrears and interest on LIBOR borrowings are generally payable in arrears on the last day of each interest period. Additionally, the Company is required to pay a 0.375% per annum facility fee on the unused portion of the Senior Credit Facility. The facility fee is payable quarterly in arrears.
Subject to certain exceptions, borrowings under the Senior Credit Facility are secured by substantially all of the assets of the Company and certain assets of its North American subsidiaries. The North American Loan Parties’ obligations under the Senior Credit Facility are guaranteed by Perma-Pipe Canada, Inc. The Senior Credit Facility will mature on September 20, 2021. Subject to certain qualifications and exceptions, the Senior Credit Facility contains covenants that, among other things, restrict the North American Loan Parties’ ability to create liens, merge or consolidate, consummate acquisitions, make investments, dispose of assets, incur debt, and pay dividends and other distributions. In addition, the North American Loan Parties cannot allow capital expenditures to exceed $3.0 million annually (plus a limited carryover of unused amounts).
The Senior Credit Facility also contains financial covenants requiring (i) the North America Loan Parties to achieve a ratio of their EBITDA (with certain additional adjustments) to the sum of scheduled cash principal payments on indebtedness for borrowed money and interest payments on the advances under the Senior Credit Facility (excluding from the calculation items related to the financial performance of the Company’s foreign subsidiaries not party to the Credit Agreement) to be not less than 1.10 to 1.00 at each quarter end on a trailing four-quarter basis; and (ii) the Company and its subsidiaries (including the Company’s foreign subsidiaries not party to the Credit Agreement) to achieve a ratio of their EBITDA (with certain additional adjustments) to the sum of scheduled cash principal payments on indebtedness for borrowed money and interest payments on the advances under the Senior Credit Facility of not less than 1.10 to 1.00 at each quarter end on a trailing four-quarter basis.
Due to project delays as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, as of October 31, 2020, the Company and its subsidiaries failed to achieve the necessary fixed charge coverage ratio of 1.10 to 1.00 for the trailing four-quarters ended October 31, 2020 under its Credit Agreement for both the North American Loan Parties and the Company and its subsidiaries.
On December 18, 2020, the Company entered into the First Amendment and Waiver to the Revolving Credit and Security Agreement (“Amendment and Waiver”) with PNC, which (i) reflected PNC’s waiver of the Company’s failure to maintain a fixed charge coverage ratio of 1.10 to 1.00 as of October 31, 2020 on a trailing four quarter basis as required under the Company’s Credit Agreement and (ii) further amended certain future fixed charge coverage ratio covenants requirements under the Credit Agreement as described below. Additionally, the Company was also required to have received, and applied to reduce the outstanding balance under the Credit Agreement, $1 million from one of its foreign subsidiaries, Perma-Pipe Middle East FZC, in the U.A.E. The transfer and repayment occurred on December 17, 2020 and did not cause the Company to incur any additional fees or taxes, nor did it force the Company to change any of its assertions with regards to permanent reinvestment in any of its foreign subsidiaries. The Company will incur additional fees over the remainder of the Amendment and Waiver of approximately $0.2 million. The Amendment and Waiver also eliminated the Company’s ability to make LIBOR borrowings and reduced the overall availability by $2.0 million until maturity.
The amended fixed charge coverage ratio requirements for the Company and its subsidiaries under the Amendment and Waiver are (i) 1.25 to 1.00 for the six-month period ending April 30, 2021 and (ii) 1.25 to 1.00 for the nine-month period ending July 31, 2021. The amended fixed charge coverage ratio requirements for the North American Loan Parties under the Amendment and Waiver are (i) 1.10 to 1.00 for the three-month period ending January 31, 2021; (ii) 1.10 to 1.00 for the six-month period ending April 30, 2021; and (iii) 1.10 to 1.00 for the nine-month period ending July 31, 2021. In order to cure any future breach of the fixed charge coverage ratio covenant by the North American Loan Parties, the Company may repatriate cash from any of its foreign subsidiaries that are otherwise not a party to the Credit Agreement in an amount which, when added to the amount of the Company’s Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA, would result in pro forma compliance with the covenant.
Due to continued project delays as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, as of January 31, 2021, the Company and its subsidiaries failed to achieve the necessary fixed charge coverage ratio of 1.10 to 1.00 for the three-month period ended January 31, 2021 under the Amendment and Waiver for the North American Loan Parties. Per the Amendment and Waiver, the Company will repatriate approximately $0.8 million in cash from its subsidiary in the United Arab Emirates in April 2021 to cure the breach. The repatriation will not cause the Company to incur any additional fees or taxes, nor did it force the Company to change any of its assertions with regards to permanent reinvestment in any of its foreign subsidiaries. As of January 31, 2021, the Company’s foreign subsidiaries that are not a party to the Credit Agreement had approximately $6.6 million of cash available to satisfy a future potential repatriation cure of any potential future breach of the fixed charge coverage ratio covenant. The Company estimates that it may need to repatriate cash of up to $0.1 million in the next six months. Any cash required to cure future covenant defaults would be repatriated through the Company’s subsidiaries in the United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia, Egypt and/or India. Most of this cash could be repatriated without any tax consequences, however, some repatriation would require payment of withholding taxes. The Company does not anticipate any material tax impacts of any potential future repatriation.
The Company believes it has alleviated any concerns about its ability to satisfy its obligations in the normal course of business for the next year after the date these financial statements are available to be issued based on the following:
●
The Company’s execution of the Amendment and Waiver described above;
●
The Company’s ability to repatriate cash from its foreign subsidiaries to cure any future covenant defaults without any material cost or tax consequences;
●
The Company expects an increase in business activity and cash flow from operations over the remaining term of the Amendment and Waiver;
●
Management expects to be able to borrow within the reduced availability parameters noted above; and
●
The Company’s flexibility in deciding when to incur its planned capital expenditures, allowing the Company to defer cash spending if necessary to ensure compliance with loan covenants in the future.
As of January 31, 2021, the Company had borrowed an aggregate of $2.8 million at a rate of 6.25% and had $1.7 million available under the Senior Credit Facility.
Revolving lines - foreign. The Company also has credit arrangements used by its Middle Eastern subsidiaries in the U.A.E. and Egypt as discussed further below. The Company has a revolving line for 8.0 million Dirhams (approximately $2.2 million at January 31, 2021) from a bank in the U.A.E. The facility has an interest rate of approximately 3.4% and was originally set to expire in November 2020. However, the expiration has been extended due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the inability to finalize renewal documentation prior to that time. The Company is awaiting final documentation to complete the renewal process, which is expected to occur in April 2021.
The Company has a second revolving line for 19.5 million Dirhams (approximately $5.3 million at January 31, 2021) from a bank in the U.A.E. The facility was renewed in January 2021 under the same terms. It has an interest rate of approximately 3.9% and is set to expire in January 2022.
These credit arrangements are in the form of overdraft facilities and project financing at rates competitive in the countries in which the Company operates. The lines are secured by certain equipment, certain assets (such as accounts receivable and inventory), and a guarantee by the Company. Some credit arrangement covenants require a minimum tangible net worth to be maintained, including maintaining certain levels of intercompany subordinated debt. In addition, some of the revolving credit facilities restrict payment of dividends or undertaking of additional debt.
In November 2019, the Company's Egyptian subsidiary entered into a credit arrangement with a bank in Egypt for a revolving line of 200.0 million Egyptian Pounds (approximately $12.7 million at January 31, 2021). This credit arrangement was in the form of project financing at rates competitive in Egypt. The line was secured by certain assets (such as accounts receivable) of the Company's Egyptian subsidiary. Among other covenants, the credit arrangement established a maximum leverage ratio allowable and restricts the Company's Egyptian subsidiary's ability to undertake any additional debt. The facility was originally set to expire in June 2020, however, the expiration was extended to January 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the inability to finalize renewal documentation prior to that time. The Company has not made borrowings under this facility. The Company is currently negotiating the renewal of the facility under similar terms, with a revolving line of 100.0 million Egyptian Pounds and the renewal process is expected to be completed in April 2021.
In January 2021, the Company entered into a second credit arrangement for project financing with a bank in Egypt for 46.2 million Egyptian Pounds (approximately $2.9 million at January 31, 2021). This credit arrangement is in the form of project financing at rates competitive in Egypt. The line is secured by the contract for a project being financed by the Company's Egyptian subsidiary. The facility has an interest rate of approximately 8.0% and is expected to expire in August 2021 in connection with the completion of the project.
The Company’s credit arrangements used by its Middle Eastern subsidiaries renew on an annual basis. The Company guarantees the subsidiaries' debt including all foreign debt.
The Company was in compliance with the covenants under the credit arrangements in the U.A.E. and the 200.0 million Egyptian Pound facility in Egypt as of January 31, 2021. The Company was not in compliance with a covenant under its 46.2 million Egyptian Pound project financing in Egypt as of January 31, 2021. The Company did not have a share capital increase registered with the General Authority for Investment, as required by facility covenants, but is in the process of curing the breach and has received a waiver from the bank as of January 31, 2021. On January 31, 2021, interest rates were based on the Emirates Inter Bank Offered Rate plus 3.0% to 3.5% per annum for the U.A.E. credit arrangements, one of which has a minimum interest rate of 4.5% per annum, and based on the stated interest rate in the agreement for the Egypt credit arrangement. Based on these base rates, as of January 31, 2021, the Company's interest rates ranged from 3.4% to 8.0%, with a weighted average rate of 6.05%, and the Company could borrow $23.1 million under these credit arrangements. As of January 31, 2021, $5.8 million of availability was used to support letters of credit to guarantee amounts committed for inventory purchases and for performance guarantees. Additionally, as of January 31, 2021, the Company had borrowed $3.3 million, and had an additional $1.3 million of borrowing remaining available under the foreign revolving credit arrangements. The foreign revolving lines balances as of January 31, 2021 and 2020 were included as current maturities of long-term debt in the Company's consolidated balance sheets.
Additional liquidity from the PPP
On May 1, 2020, the Company entered into a loan agreement under the SBA's PPP and received proceeds of approximately $3.2 million. Interest on the loan accrued at a fixed interest rate of 1.0%, and the loan had a maturity date of April 28, 2022. Under Section 1106 of the CARES Act, borrowers are eligible for forgiveness of principal and accrued interest on the loans to the extent that the proceeds are used to cover eligible payroll costs, mortgage interest costs, rent and utility costs, otherwise described as qualified expenses. During the three months ended July 31, 2020, the Company used all of the PPP loan proceeds to pay for qualified expenses. 100% of the PPP loan proceeds were used for payroll related expenses. The Company believes the PPP loan proceeds will be forgiven under the terms of the CARES Act, although no assurance to such effect may be provided. Under the current provisions of the CARES Act, any recipients of a PPP loan may be subject to an audit by the SBA to confirm they qualify for the loan and that the proceeds were used for qualified expenses as prescribed by the program rules.
Based on the facts and circumstances of the Company's loan and according to the applicable accounting guidance described herein, the Company has elected to account for the PPP proceeds as a grant that has reasonable assurance of being forgiven. As such, the Company recognized the proceeds in earnings during the year ended January 31, 2021. The amounts are recognized in other income in the consolidated statements of operations.
Additional liquidity from the CEWS and CERS Programs
Beginning in April 2020, the Company's subsidiary, PPCA, applied for relief in the form of grants from the Canadian government under the CEWS program. Based on the program rules, the grants are applied for each month and are granted based on the amount of eligible employee expenses incurred over the previous month. Beginning in October 2020, PPCA also applied for grants under the CERS program. PPCA was approved for and received approximately $1.9 million and $0.1 million in grants under the CEWS and CERS programs, respectively, during the year ended January 31, 2021. Both programs are scheduled to continue through June 2021. The proceeds from CEWS and CERS are recognized in other income in the consolidated statements of operations.
Accounts receivable:
In 2013, the Company started a project in the Middle East as a sub-contractor, with billings in the aggregate amount of approximately $41.9 million. The Company completed all of its deliverables in 2015, and has since then collected approximately $38.1 million, with a remaining balance due in the amount of $3.8 million. Included in this balance is an amount of $3.4 million, which pertains to retention clauses within the agreements of the Company's customer (contractor), and which become payable by the customer when this project is fully tested and commissioned. In the absence of a firm date for the final commissioning of the project, and due to the long-term nature of this receivable, $2.4 million of this retention amount was reclassified to a long-term receivable account.
The Company has been engaged in ongoing active efforts to collect the outstanding amount. During 2020, the Company received approximately $0.2 million from the customer. The Company has also received an updated acknowledgment of the outstanding balances and assurances of payment from the customer. As a result, the Company did not reserve any allowance against this amount as of January 31, 2021. However, if the Company’s efforts to collect on this account are not successful in fiscal 2021, then the Company may be required to recognize an allowance for all, or substantially all, of any such then uncollected amounts in the future.
Critical accounting estimates and policies
The Company's significant accounting policies are discussed in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The application of certain of these policies requires significant judgments or a historical based estimation process that can affect the results of operations and financial position of the Company, as well as the related footnote disclosures. The Company bases its estimates on historical experience and other assumptions that it believes are reasonable. If actual amounts ultimately differ from previous estimates, the revisions are included in the Company's results of operations for the period in which the actual amounts become known.
Revenue recognition. In accordance with Accounting Standards Update No. 2014-19, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers” (“ASC 606”), the Company recognizes revenue when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services. See Note 4 - Revenue recognition, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, for more detail.
• Percentage of completion revenue recognition. Certain domestic divisions have contracts that recognize revenues using periodic recognition of income. For these contracts, the Company uses the "percentage of completion" accounting method. Under this approach, income is recognized in each reporting period based on the status of the uncompleted contracts and the current estimates of costs to complete. The choice of accounting method is made at the time the contract is received based on the expected length and complexity of the project. The percentage of completion is determined by the relationship of costs incurred to the total estimated costs of the contract. Provisions are made for estimated losses on uncompleted contracts in the period in which such losses are determined. Changes in job performance, job conditions, and estimated profitability, including those arising from contract penalty provisions and final contract settlements, may result in revisions to costs and income. Such revisions are recognized in the period in which they are determined. Claims for additional compensation due to the Company are recognized in contract revenues when realization is probable and the amount can be reliably estimated.
Inventories. Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is determined using the first-in, first-out method for all inventories.
Income taxes. Deferred income taxes have been provided for temporary differences arising from differences in the basis of assets and liabilities for tax and financial reporting purposes. Deferred income taxes on temporary differences have been recorded at the current tax rate. The Company assesses its deferred tax assets for realizability at each reporting period.
The Company recognizes a tax position in its consolidated financial statements only after determining that the relevant tax authority would more likely than not sustain the position following an audit. For tax positions meeting the more likely than not threshold, the amount recognized in the financial statements is the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with the relevant tax authority. For further information, See Note 7 - Income taxes, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
New accounting pronouncements. See Recent accounting pronouncements in Note 2 - Significant accounting policies, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.