ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion generally focuses on the change in financial condition, results of operation and cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 and be should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes to those statements which accompany this report. For a full discussion of the changes in the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, please refer to Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" section of ProAssurance's December 31, 2019 report on Form 10-K.
Throughout the discussion we use certain terms and abbreviations, which can be found in the Glossary of Terms and Acronyms at the beginning of this report. In addition, a glossary of insurance terms and phrases is available on the investor section of our website. Throughout the discussion, references to "ProAssurance," "PRA," "Company," "we," "us" and "our" refer to ProAssurance Corporation and its consolidated subsidiaries. The discussion contains certain forward-looking information that involves significant risks, assumptions and uncertainties. As discussed under the heading "Caution Regarding Forward-Looking Statements," our actual financial condition and results of operations could differ significantly from these forward-looking statements.
ProAssurance Overview
ProAssurance Corporation is a holding company for property and casualty insurance companies. Our wholly owned insurance subsidiaries provide professional liability insurance, liability insurance for medical technology and life sciences risks and workers' compensation insurance. We also provide capital to Syndicate 1729 and Syndicate 6131 at Lloyd's of London.
We operate in five segments which are based on our internal management reporting structure for which financial results are regularly evaluated by our CODM to determine resource allocation and assess operating performance. Descriptions of ProAssurance's five operating and reportable segments are as follows:
•Specialty P&C - This segment includes our professional liability business and medical technology liability business. Our professional liability insurance is primarily comprised of medical professional liability products offered to healthcare providers and institutions. We also offer, to a lesser extent, professional liability insurance to attorneys and their firms. Medical technology liability insurance is offered to medical technology and life sciences companies that manufacture or distribute products including entities conducting human clinical trials. We also offer custom alternative risk solutions including loss portfolio transfers, assumed reinsurance and captive cell programs for healthcare professional liability insureds. For our alternative market captive cell programs, we cede either all or a portion of the premium to certain SPCs in our Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance segment.
•Workers' Compensation Insurance - This segment includes our workers' compensation insurance business which is provided primarily to employers with 1,000 or fewer employees. Our workers' compensation products include guaranteed cost policies, policyholder dividend policies, retrospectively-rated policies, deductible policies and alternative market solutions. Alternative market program premiums are 100% ceded to either SPCs in our Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance segment or, to a limited extent, an unaffiliated captive insurer.
•Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance - This segment includes the results (underwriting profit or loss, plus investment results, net of U.S. federal income taxes) of SPCs at Inova Re and Eastern Re, our Cayman Islands SPC operations. Each SPC is owned, fully or in part, by an agency, group or association, and the results of the SPCs are attributable to the participants of that cell. We participate to a varying degree in the results of selected SPCs and, for the SPCs in which we participate, our participation interest ranges from a low of 20% to a high of 85%. SPC results attributable to external cell participants are reflected as an SPC dividend expense (income) in our Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance segment. The SPCs assume workers' compensation insurance, healthcare professional liability insurance or a combination of the two from our Workers' Compensation Insurance and Specialty P&C segments.
•Lloyd's Syndicates - This segment includes the results from our participation in Lloyd's of London Syndicate 1729 (29% for the 2020 underwriting year) and Syndicate 6131 (100% for the 2020 underwriting year). The results of this segment are normally reported on a quarter lag, except when information is available that is material to the current period. Syndicate 1729 underwrites risks over a wide range of property and casualty insurance and reinsurance lines in both the U.S. and international markets while Syndicate 6131 focuses on contingency and specialty property business, also within the U.S. and international markets. To support and grow our core insurance operations, we decreased our participation in the results of Syndicate 1729 for the 2021 underwriting year to 5% from 29%. Syndicate 6131 is an SPA that underwrites on a quota share basis with Syndicate 1729. Effective July 1, 2020, Syndicate 6131 entered into a six-month quota share reinsurance agreement with an unaffiliated insurer. Under this agreement, Syndicate 6131 ceded essentially half of the premium assumed from Syndicate 1729 to the
unaffiliated insurer; the agreement was non-renewed on January 1, 2021 and we decreased our participation in the results of Syndicate 6131 to 50% from 100% for the 2021 underwriting year. Due to the quarter lag, the change in our participation in the results of Syndicates 1729 and 6131 will not be reflected in our results until the second quarter of 2021.
•Corporate - This segment includes our investment operations, other than those reported in our Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance and Lloyd's Syndicates segments, interest expense and U.S. income taxes. This segment also includes non-premium revenues generated outside of our insurance entities and corporate expenses.
Additional information regarding our segments is included in Note 16 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, Part I and in the Segment Results sections that follow.
Growth Opportunities and Outlook
Over the long-term we expect our growth to come primarily through controlled expansion of our existing operations. In addition, from time to time, we may identify opportunities for growth through the acquisition of other insurers, service providers or books of business. In early 2020, we entered into a definitive agreement to acquire NORCAL, an underwriter of medical professional liability insurance, subject to the demutualization of NORCAL Mutual, NORCAL's ultimate controlling party. If consummated, the transaction will provide strategic and financial benefits including additional scale and geographic diversification in the physician professional liability market. Upon satisfaction of the various remaining regulatory approvals required, we are anticipating to close the transaction in the second quarter of 2021. See further discussion under the heading "Acquisitions" in the Liquidity and Capital Resources and Financial Condition section that follows. We continue to see new opportunities from each of our acquisitions and believe each will provide organic growth through expansion in their existing markets and relationships.
We operate in very competitive markets and face strong competition from other insurance companies for all of our insurance products. HCPL insurance represents the largest product line in our gross premiums written (41% in 2020) and the healthcare market has been trending toward the formation of larger medical practice groups and the employment of physicians by hospitals. Large medical groups and facilities frequently manage their healthcare professional liability exposure outside of the traditional first dollar insurance marketplace using self-insured mechanisms and other risk sharing arrangements. In response to these trends, we offer products designed to provide greater risk sharing options to hospitals and large physician groups. Since the middle of 2019, new senior leadership in our Specialty P&C segment has executed a comprehensive underwriting strategy in response to emerging loss trends and changing conditions in the HCPL industry. This includes organizational structure enhancements, recruitment of additional talent in specialty underwriting, focus on state strategies to achieve greater concentration and predictability, price strengthening and tightening of underwriting criteria, terms and conditions. Furthermore, the new senior leadership team for our Specialty P&C segment executed several strategic business decisions intended to improve operating performance by bringing together all of the Specialty P&C segment lines of business and operations under a unified organizational and management structure.
Our operations at Eastern, a provider of workers' compensation insurance, currently represents the second largest product line in our gross premiums written (29% in 2020, including alternative market premiums). The workers’ compensation industry is highly competitive in the geographic markets in which we operate and multi-line insurers continue to increase their leverage of workers’ compensation business in their product offerings. We believe our workers' compensation product offerings allow us to provide flexibility in offering solutions to our customers at a competitive price. In addition, we believe that our claims handling and risk management services are attractive to our customers and provide us with a competitive advantage even when our pricing is higher than our competitors.
Beginning in 2014, we started participating in and providing capital to Syndicate 1729 and beginning in 2018, began participating in and providing capital to Syndicate 6131. Our participation in Syndicate 1729 for the 2014 through 2020 underwriting years has ranged from a low of 29% to a high of 62%. Our participation in Syndicate 6131 was 100% for the 2018 through 2020 underwriting years. Our Lloyd's Syndicates segment represents 10% of our gross premiums written in 2020. For the 2021 underwriting year, we have decreased our participation in Syndicate 1729 (to 5% from 29%) and Syndicate 6131 (to 50% from 100%) in order to support and grow our core insurance operations, as previously discussed.
With the changes in executive leadership beginning in 2019, we have performed a detailed strategic review which led us to make significant organizational adjustments to our operating structure which we believe will improve our ability to grow our business profitably while strengthening our industry leading products and services. This review included consideration of the external environment on our business, agency partners’ operations and valued customer base, with the ultimate goal of enhancing our service platform to meet the ever-changing needs of the marketplace.
COVID-19 continues to present challenges for all in the insurance marketplace. Policyholders, agency partners and insurance carriers are conducting business in ways never before considered, and some of these changes may persist even after the pandemic subsides. We believe our enhanced operating structure and strategy have positioned us well to face these challenges and support our policyholders and agency partners as we navigate the current environment.
We believe our emphasis on the fair treatment of our insureds and other important stakeholders through our commitment to “Treated Fairly” has enhanced our market position and differentiated us from other insurers. We will continue to practice our values of integrity, leadership, relationships and enthusiasm in all of our activities. We will honor these values in the execution of “Treated Fairly” to perform our Mission and realize our Vision. We believe that as we reach more customers with this message we will continue to improve retention and add new insureds.
Key Performance Measures
We are committed to disciplined underwriting, pricing and loss reserving practices as well as conservative investment practices, even during difficult market conditions. We are also committed to maintaining prudent operating and financial leverage. We recognize the importance that our customers and producers place on the financial strength of our insurance subsidiaries, and we manage our business to protect our financial security.
In evaluating our performance, we consider a number of performance measures, including the following:
•The net loss ratio which is calculated as net losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred divided by net premiums earned and is a component of underwriting profitability.
•The underwriting expense ratio which is calculated as underwriting, policy acquisition and operating expenses incurred divided by net premiums earned and is a component of underwriting profitability.
•The combined ratio which is the sum of the net loss ratio and the underwriting expense ratio and measures underwriting profitability.
•The investment income ratio which is calculated as net investment income divided by net premiums earned and measures the contribution investment earnings provide to our overall profitability.
•The operating ratio which is the combined ratio, less the investment income ratio. This ratio provides the combined effect of underwriting profitability and investment income.
•The tax ratio which is calculated as total income tax expense (benefit) divided by income (loss) before income taxes and measures our effective tax rate.
•ROE which is calculated as net income (loss) divided by the average of beginning and ending shareholders’ equity. This ratio measures our overall after-tax profitability and shows how efficiently capital is being used.
•Book value per share which is calculated as total shareholders’ equity at the balance sheet date divided by the total number of common shares outstanding. This ratio measures the net worth of the company to shareholders on a per-share basis. The declaration of dividends decreases book value per share. Growth in book value per share, adjusted for dividends declared, is an indicator of overall profitability.
We particularly focus on our combined ratio and investment returns, both of which directly affect our ROE and growth in our book value. We currently target a dynamic long-term ROE of 700 basis points above the 10-year U.S. Treasury rate, which at December 31, 2020 was approximately 7.9%.
Our emphasis on rate adequacy, selective underwriting, effective claims management and prudent investments is a key factor in our ability to achieve our long-term ROE target. We closely monitor premium revenues, losses and loss adjustment expenses, and underwriting and policy acquisition expenses. Our overall investment strategy is to focus on maximizing current income from our investment portfolio while maintaining safety, liquidity, duration and portfolio diversification. While we engage in activities that generate other income, these activities, such as insurance agency services, do not constitute a significant use of our resources or a significant source of revenues or profits.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our Consolidated Financial Statements are prepared in conformity with GAAP. Preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts we report on those statements. We evaluate these estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis based on current and historical developments, market conditions, industry trends and other information that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. We can make no assurance that actual results will conform to our estimates and assumptions; reported results of operations may be materially affected by changes in these estimates and assumptions.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we are reevaluating certain of these estimates and assumptions which could result in material changes to our results of operations including, but not limited to, higher losses and loss adjustment expenses, lower premium volume, asset impairment charges, declines in investment valuations, reductions in audit premium estimates, deferred tax valuation allowances and increases in the allowance for expected credit losses related to available-for-sale securities, premiums receivable and reinsurance receivables. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic impacts our business, results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. These factors include, but are not limited to, the duration, spread, severity, reemergence or mutation of the COVID-19 pandemic, development and wide-scale distribution of medicines or vaccines that effectively treat the virus, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our insureds, the loss environment, the healthcare industry, the labor market and Lloyd's, the actions and stimulus measures taken by governments and governmental agencies, and to what extent normal economic and operating conditions can resume. Even after the COVID-19 pandemic has subsided, we may experience an impact to our business as a result of any economic recession that has occurred or may occur in the future. Please see "Item 1A, Risk Factors" included in this report for additional information.
Management considers the following accounting estimates to be critical because they involve significant judgment by management and those judgments could result in a material effect on our financial statements.
Reserve for Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses
The largest component of our liabilities is our reserve for losses and loss adjustment expenses ("reserve for losses" or "reserve"), and the largest component of expense for our operations is incurred losses and loss adjustment expenses (also referred to as “losses and loss adjustment expenses,” “incurred losses,” “losses incurred” and “losses”). Incurred losses reported in any period reflect our estimate of losses incurred related to the premiums earned in that period as well as any changes to our previous estimate of the reserve required for prior periods.
As of December 31, 2020, our reserve is comprised almost entirely of long-tail exposures. The estimation of long-tailed losses is inherently difficult and is subject to significant judgment on the part of management. Due to the nature of our claims, our loss costs, even for claims with similar characteristics, can vary significantly depending upon many factors, including but not limited to the specific characteristics of the claim and the manner in which the claim is resolved. Long-tailed insurance is characterized by the extended period of time typically required both to assess the viability of a claim and potential damages, if any, and to reach a resolution of the claim. The claims resolution process may extend to more than five years. The combination of continually changing conditions and the extended time required for claim resolution results in a loss cost estimation process that requires actuarial skill and the application of significant judgment, and such estimates require periodic modification.
Our reserve is established by management after taking into consideration a variety of factors including premium rates, historical paid and incurred loss development trends and our evaluation of the current loss environment including frequency, severity, the expected effect of inflation, general economic and social trends, and the legal and political environment. We also take into consideration the conclusions reached by our internal and consulting actuaries. We update and review the data underlying the estimation of our reserve for losses each reporting period and make adjustments to loss estimation assumptions that we believe best reflect emerging data. Both our internal and consulting actuaries perform an in-depth review of our reserve for losses on at least a semi-annual basis using the loss and exposure data of our insurance subsidiaries.
We partition our reserves by accident year, which is the year in which the claim becomes our liability. For claims-made policies, the insured event generally becomes a liability when the event is first reported to us. For occurrence policies, the insured event becomes a liability when the event takes place. For retroactive coverages, the insured event becomes a liability at inception of the underlying contract. As claims are incurred (reported) and claim payments are made, they are aggregated by accident year for analysis purposes. We also partition our reserves by reserve type: case reserves and IBNR reserves. Case reserves are established by our claims departments based upon the particular circumstances of each reported claim and represent our estimate of the future loss costs (often referred to as expected losses) that will be paid on reported claims. Case reserves are decremented as claim payments are made and are periodically adjusted upward or downward as estimates regarding the amount of future losses are revised; reported loss for an individual claim is the case reserve at any point in time plus the claim payments that have been made to date. IBNR reserves represent our estimate in the aggregate of future development on losses that have been reported to us and our estimate of losses that have been incurred but not reported to us.
Our reserving process can be broadly grouped into three areas: the establishment of the reserve for the current accident year (the initial reserve), the re-estimation of the reserve for prior accident years (development of prior accident years) and the establishment of the initial reserve for risks assumed in business combinations, applicable only in periods in which acquisitions occur (the acquired reserve). A summary of the activity in our net reserve for losses during 2020 and 2019 is provided under the heading "Losses" in the Liquidity and Capital Resources and Financial Condition section that follows.
Current Accident Year - Initial Reserve
Considerable judgment is required in establishing our initial reserve for any current accident year period, as there is limited data available upon which to base our estimate (see further discussion that follows under the heading "Uses of Judgment"). Our process for setting an initial reserve considers the unique characteristics of each product, but in general we rely heavily on the loss assumptions that were used to price business, as our pricing reflects our analysis of loss costs that we expect to incur relative to the insurance product being priced.
Specialty P&C Segment. Loss costs within this segment are impacted by many factors including but not limited to the nature of the claim, including whether or not the claim is an individual or a mass tort claim, the personal situation of the claimant or the claimant's family, the outcome of jury trials, the legislative and judicial climate where any potential litigation may occur, general economic and social trends and, for claims involving bodily injury, the trend of healthcare costs. Within our Specialty P&C segment, for our professional liability business (80% of our consolidated gross reserve for losses and loss adjustment expenses as of December 31, 2020; predominately comprised of our HCPL products), we set an initial reserve based upon our evaluation of the current loss environment including frequency, severity, economic inflation, social inflation and legal trends.
The current accident year net loss ratio in the Specialty P&C segment has ranged from 87% to 106% in recent years, excluding the effect of a single large national healthcare account that generated outsized losses and distorted results for 2019 and 2020. We recorded a higher than average current accident year net loss ratio in 2019 due to increased reserve estimates related to this large national healthcare account that exceeded the assumptions we made when originally underwriting the account. During the second quarter of 2020, the policy term associated with this account's claims-made coverage expired. This account did not renew on terms offered by us and the insured exercised its contractual option to purchase the extended reporting endorsement or "tail" coverage resulting in a net underwriting loss of $45.7 million recognized in the second quarter of 2020 associated with this policy, which increased our current accident year net loss ratio for the year ended December 31, 2020. Excluding the impact of this large national healthcare account, the current accident year net loss ratio was 94.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020. This reflects loss severity in the broader medical professional liability industry and a higher loss pick in our Specialty line of business.
During 2020, we have observed a reduction in claims frequency as compared to 2019, some of which is likely associated with the COVID-19 pandemic; however, we have remained cautious in recognizing these favorable frequency trends in our current accident year reserve due to the long-tailed nature of our HCPL claims as well as the uncertainty surrounding the length and severity of the pandemic. During 2020, we established a $10 million reserve related to COVID-19. This reserve represents our best estimate of ultimate COVID-19 related losses based on currently available information and reported incidents; no adjustment has been made to this reserve since the second quarter of 2020. See further discussion in our Segment Results - Specialty Property & Casualty section that follows under the heading "Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses."
The risks insured in our Medical Technology Liability business (3% of our consolidated gross reserve for losses and loss adjustment expenses as of December 31, 2020) are more varied, and policies are individually priced based on the risk characteristics of the policy and the account. The insured risks range from startup operations to large multinational entities, and the larger entities often have significant deductibles or self-insured retentions. Reserves are established using our most recently developed actuarial estimates of losses expected to be incurred based on factors which include results from prior analysis of similar business, industry indications, observed trends and judgment. Claims in this line of business primarily involve bodily injury to individuals and are affected by factors similar to those of our HCPL line of business. For the Medical Technology Liability business, we also establish an initial reserve using a loss ratio approach, including a provision in consideration of historical loss volatility that this line of business has exhibited.
Workers' Compensation Insurance Segment. Many factors affect the ultimate losses incurred for our workers' compensation coverages (8% of our consolidated gross reserve for losses and loss adjustment expenses as of December 31, 2020) including but not limited to the type and severity of the injury, the age, health and occupation of the injured worker, the estimated length of disability, medical treatment and related costs, and the jurisdiction and workers' compensation laws of the state of the injury occurrence.
We use various actuarial methodologies in developing our workers’ compensation reserve, combined with a review of the payroll exposure base. For the current accident year, given the lack of seasoned information, the different actuarial methodologies produce results with significant variability; therefore, more emphasis is placed on supplementing results from
the actuarial methodologies with trends in exposure base, medical expense inflation, general inflation, severity, and claim counts, among other things, to select an expected loss ratio.
Similar to our Specialty P&C segment, we have also observed a reduction in claims frequency in our Workers' Compensation Insurance segment, some of which is likely associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. During the third quarter of 2020, we reduced our current accident year net loss ratio in response to the continuation of favorable trends in 2020, including lower claims frequency and severity, as our workers' compensation claims are shorter-tailed in nature as compared to our HCPL claims; however, we remain cautious in our evaluation of the current accident year reserve due to uncertainty surrounding the length and severity of the pandemic, and legislative and regulatory bodies in certain states changing or attempting to broaden compensability requirements for COVID-19 claims. If these legislative and regulatory bodies are successful, it could have an adverse impact on the frequency and severity related to COVID-19 claims. See previous discussion in Part I under the heading "Insurance Regulatory Matters- COVID-19." Furthermore, as it relates to both our Workers' Compensation Insurance and Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance segments, the current economic conditions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic have introduced significant risk of a prolonged recession, which could have an adverse impact on our return to wellness efforts and the ability of injured workers to return to work, resulting in a potential reduction in favorable claim trends in future periods.
Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance Segment. The factors that affect the ultimate losses incurred for the workers' compensation and HCPL coverages assumed by the SPCs at Inova Re and Eastern Re (4% of our consolidated gross reserve for losses and loss adjustment expenses as of December 31, 2020) are consistent with that of our Workers’ Compensation Insurance and Specialty P&C segments, respectively.
Lloyd's Syndicates Segment. Initial reserves for Syndicate 1729 and Syndicate 6131 are primarily recorded using the loss assumptions by risk category incorporated into each Syndicate's business plan submitted to Lloyd's with consideration given to loss experience incurred to date (5% of our consolidated gross reserve for losses and loss adjustment expenses as of December 31, 2020). The assumptions used in each business plan are consistent with loss results reflected in Lloyd's historical data for similar risks. The loss ratios may also fluctuate due to the mix of earned premium from different open underwriting years which we participate in to varying degrees, as well as the timing of earned premium adjustments. Such adjustments may be the result of premiums for certain policies and assumed reinsurance contracts being reported subsequent to the coverage period and may be subject to adjustment based on loss experience. Premium and exposure for some of Syndicate 1729's insurance policies and reinsurance contracts are initially estimated and subsequently recorded over an extended period of time as reports are received under delegated underwriting authority programs. When reports are received, the premium, exposure and corresponding loss estimates are revised accordingly. Changes in loss estimates due to premium or exposure fluctuations are incurred in the accident year in which the premium is earned.
For significant property catastrophe exposures, Syndicate 1729 uses third-party catastrophe models to accumulate a listing of potentially affected policies. Each identified policy is given an estimate of loss severity based upon a combination of factors including the probable maximum loss of each policy, market share analytics, underwriting judgment, client/broker estimates and historical loss trends for similar events. These models are inherently uncertain, reliant upon key assumptions and management judgment and are not always a representation of actual events and ensuing potential loss exposure. Determination of actual losses may take an extended period of time until claims are reported and resolved, including coverage litigation.
Development of Prior Accident Years
In addition to setting the initial reserve for the current accident year, each period we reassess the amount of reserve required for prior accident years.
The foundation of our reserve re-estimation process is an actuarial analysis that is performed by both our internal and consulting actuaries. This very detailed analysis projects ultimate losses based on partitions which include line of business, geography, coverage layer and accident year. The procedure uses the most representative data for each partition, capturing its unique patterns of development and trends. We believe that the use of consulting actuaries provides an independent view of our loss data as well as a broader perspective on industry loss trends.
For the Specialty P&C, Workers' Compensation Insurance and Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance segments, the analysis performed by the consulting actuaries analyzes each partition of our business in a variety of ways and uses multiple actuarial methodologies in performing these analyses, including:
•Bornhuetter-Ferguson (Paid and Reported) Method
•Paid Development Method
•Reported (Incurred) Development Method
•Average Paid Value Method
•Average Reported Value Method
A brief description of each method follows.
Bornhuetter-Ferguson Method. We use both the Paid and the Reported Bornhuetter-Ferguson Methods. The Paid Method assigns partial weight to initial expected losses for each accident year (initial expected losses being the first established case and IBNR reserves for a specific accident year) and partial weight to paid to date losses. The Reported Method assigns partial weight to the initial expected losses and partial weight to current expected losses. The weights assigned to the initial expected losses decrease as the accident year matures.
Paid Development and Reported (Incurred) Development Methods. These methods use historical, cumulative losses (paid losses for the Paid Development Method, reported losses for the Reported (Incurred) Development Method) by accident year and develop those actual losses to estimated ultimate losses based upon the assumption that each accident year will develop to estimated ultimate cost in a manner that is analogous to prior years, adjusted as deemed appropriate for the expected effects of known changes in the claim payment environment (and case reserving environment for the Reported (Incurred) Development Method); and to the extent necessary, supplemented by analyses of the development of broader industry data.
Average Paid Value and Average Reported Value Methods. In these methods, average claim cost data (paid claim cost for the Average Paid Value Method and reported claim cost for the Reported Value Method) is developed to an ultimate average cost level by report year based on historical data. Claim counts are similarly developed to an ultimate count level. The average claim cost (after rounding and adjustment, if necessary, to accommodate report year data that is not considered to be predictive) is then multiplied by the ultimate claim counts by report year to derive ultimate loss and ALAE.
Generally, methods such as the Bornhuetter-Ferguson Method are used on more recent accident years where we have less data on which to base our analysis. As time progresses and we have an increased amount of data for a given accident year, we begin to give more confidence to the development and average methods, as these methods typically rely more heavily on our own historical data. These methods emphasize different aspects of loss reserve estimation and provide a variety of perspectives for our decisions.
Certain of the methodologies utilized to estimate the ultimate losses for each partition of our reserves consider the actual amounts paid. Paid data is particularly influential when a large portion of known claims have been closed, as is the case for older accident years. In selecting a point estimate for each partition, management considers the extent to which trends are emerging consistently for all partitions and known industry trends. Thus, actual, rather than estimated severity trends are given more consideration. If actual severity trends are lower than those estimated at the time that reserves were previously established, the recognition of favorable development is indicated. This is particularly true for older accident years where our actuarial methodologies give more weight to actual loss costs (severity).
The various actuarial methods discussed above are applied in a consistent manner from period to period. In addition, we perform statistical reviews of claims data such as claim counts, average settlement costs and severity trends when establishing our reserves.
We utilize the selected point estimates of ultimate losses to develop estimates of ultimate losses recoverable from reinsurers, based on the terms and conditions of our reinsurance agreements. An overall estimate of the amount receivable from reinsurers is determined by combining the individual estimates. Our net reserve estimate is the gross reserve point estimate less the estimated reinsurance recovery.
For our Workers’ Compensation Insurance segment and for the workers' compensation exposures in our Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance segment, we utilize the Reported (Incurred) Development Method, Paid Development Method and Bornhuetter-Ferguson Method, to develop our reserve for each accident year. The actuarial review includes the stratification of claims data (lost time claims, medical only claims) using different variations that allow us to identify trends that may not be readily identifiable if the data was evaluated only in the aggregate. Reported and paid loss development factors are key assumptions in the reserve estimation process and are based on our historical reported and paid loss development patterns. As accident years mature, the various actuarial methodologies produce more consistent loss estimates.
For our Lloyd's Syndicates segment we rely on the analysis of actual loss experience on the book of business written by Syndicate 1729 to determine loss development by accident year.
Acquired Reserve
The acquisition of Eastern on January 1, 2014 increased our loss reserve by $153.2 million which represented the fair value of Eastern's loss reserve at the time of the acquisition. The fair value of the reserve for losses and loss adjustment expenses and related reinsurance recoverables was based on an actuarial estimate of the expected future net cash flows, a reduction of those cash flows for the time value of money determined utilizing the U.S. Treasury Yield Curve, and a risk adjustment to reflect the net present value of profit that an investor would demand in return for the assumption of the associated risks. Expected net cash flows were derived from the expected loss payment patterns included in an actuarial analysis of Eastern's reserve performed as of December 31, 2013. The fair value of the reserve, including the risk margin discussed above, exceeded the undiscounted loss reserve previously established by Eastern by $9.3 million; this fair value adjustment was
amortized over the average expected life of the reserve of 6 years. The fair value adjustment was fully amortized as of December 31, 2019.
Use of Judgment
The process of estimating reserves involves a high degree of judgment and is subject to a number of variables. These variables can be affected by both views of internal and external events, such as changes in views of economic inflation, legal trends and legislative changes, as well as differentiating views of individuals involved in the reserve estimation process, among others. We continually refine our estimates in a regular, ongoing process as historical loss experience develops and additional claims are reported and settled. Our objective is to consider all significant facts and circumstances known at the time.
Changes in economic conditions and steps taken by the federal government and the Federal Reserve in response to COVID-19 could lead to inflation trends that are different from those we anticipated when establishing our reserves, which could in turn lead to an increase or decrease in our loss costs and the need to strengthen or reduce reserves. These impacts of inflation on loss costs and reserves could be more pronounced for our HCPL line of business as that business generally requires a longer period of time to settle claims for a given accident year and, accordingly, is relatively more inflation sensitive.
We use various actuarial methods in the process of setting reserves. Each actuarial method generally returns a different value, and for the more recent accident years the variations among the various methodologies can be significant. In order to project ultimate losses, we partition our reserves for analysis such as by line of business, geography, coverage layer or accident year. For each partition of our reserves, we evaluate the results of the various methods, along with the supplementary statistical data regarding such factors as closed with and without indemnity ratios, claim severity trends, the expected duration of such trends, changes in the legal and legislative environment and the current economic environment to develop a point estimate based upon management's judgment and past experience. The series of selected point estimates is then combined to produce an overall point estimate for ultimate losses.
HCPL. Over the past several years the most influential factor affecting the analysis of our HCPL reserves and the related development recognized has been an observed increase in claim severity for the broader medical professional liability industry as well as higher initial loss expectations on incurred claims. The severity trend is an explicit component of our pricing models and directly impacts the reserving process. Our estimate of this trend and our expectations about changes in this trend impact a variety of factors, from the selection of expected loss ratios to the ultimate point estimates established by management.
Because of the implicit and wide-ranging nature of severity trend assumptions on the loss reserving process, it is not practical to specifically isolate the impact of changing severity trends. However, because severity is an explicit component of our HCPL pricing process we can better isolate the impact that changing severity can have on our loss costs and loss ratios in regards to our pricing models for this business component. Our current HCPL pricing models assume severity trends in the range of 2% to 5% depending on state, territory and specialty. In some portions of our HCPL business we have observed and reflected higher severity trends in our estimates of losses and loss adjustment expenses.
Due to the long-tailed nature of our claims and the previously discussed historical volatility of loss costs, selection of a severity trend assumption is a subjective process that is inherently likely to prove inaccurate over time. Given the long tail and volatility, we are generally cautious in making changes to the severity assumptions within our pricing models. All open claims and accident years are generally impacted by a change in the severity trend, which compounds the effect of such a change.
Although the future degree and impact of the ultimate severity trend remains uncertain due to the long-tailed nature of our business, we have given consideration to observed loss costs in setting our rates. For our HCPL business, this practice had generally resulted in rate reductions as claim frequency declined and remained at historically low levels. However, from early 2017 to the current period, the average pricing on renewed business has steadily increased reflective of the rising loss cost environment, and we anticipate further renewal pricing increases due to increasing loss severity.
Workers' Compensation. The projection of changes in claim severity trend has not historically been an influential factor affecting our analysis of workers' compensation reserves, as claims are typically resolved more quickly than the industry norm. As previously mentioned, the determination and calculation of loss development factors, in particular, the selection of tail factors which are used to extend the projection of losses beyond historical data, requires considerable judgment.
Loss Development by Line of Business
Professional Liability
Our professional liability line of business includes both our HCPL and Small Business Unit lines, with our HCPL line representing the largest component of our reserve. In support of our concern that the decline in frequency will result in a higher severity trend for our HCPL claims, we saw our closed-with-indemnity-payment ratio (i.e., the number of claims closed with an indemnity or loss payment as compared to the total number of closed claims) for our claims increase from 10% in 2005 to 18% in 2020.
The following table presents additional information about the loss development for our professional liability line of business, excluding loss development for HCPL coverages assumed by the SPCs at Inova Re and Eastern Re:
During 2020, we have also observed a significant reduction in claims frequency as compared to 2019, some of which is likely associated with the COVID-19 pandemic and the disruption of the court systems; however, we have remained cautious in recognizing these favorable frequency trends in our current accident year reserve due to the long-tailed nature of HCPL claims as well as the uncertainty surrounding the length and severity of the pandemic. Development recognized during 2020 principally related to accident years 2014 through 2017. Not included in the above table, as previously discussed, is $4.4 million of favorable development recognized during 2020 in our Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance segment related to the HCPL coverages assumed by the SPCs at Inova Re and Eastern Re. During 2019 the loss experience in our Specialty line of business deteriorated further, particularly in regard to the reserves we established for a large national healthcare account, as previously discussed. This deterioration is the primary driver of the unfavorable development we recognized in 2019 for accident years 2016 through 2018. During the year ended December 31, 2018, reflection of higher severity trends in the Specialty line of business also resulted in increases of estimated ultimate losses for open claims for earlier accident years, which resulted in a lower amount of favorable development recognized in 2018 as compared to earlier years.
This can also be seen in looking at both the absolute amount of reserve development recognized for the less developed accident years as well as the size of such development when compared to established ultimates for those same accident years at the end of the preceding calendar year. The following table provides this information for years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 with respect to the three then most recent prior accident years:
Medical Technology Liability
Our Medical Technology Liability line of business has not experienced the change in claims frequency previously described for HCPL. However, the nature of the risks insured and volatility of the loss experience in this line of business has produced more variable loss development, as presented in the following table:
Approximately $5.3 million of the $8.6 million total net favorable development recognized in 2020 related to the 2017 through 2019 accident years. The development for the 2017 through 2019 accident years represents a 13.7% reduction to the ultimates established for those reserves at December 31, 2019. Approximately $6.8 million of the $12.8 million total net favorable development recognized in 2019 related to the 2014 through 2017 accident years. The development for the 2014 through 2017 accident years represents a 13.7% reduction to the ultimates established for those reserves at December 31, 2018. Approximately $5.7 million of the $13.3 million total net favorable development recognized in 2018 related to the 2013 through 2016 accident years. The development for the 2013 through 2016 accident years represents a 12.3% reduction to the ultimates established for those reserves at December 31, 2017.
In 2020, 2019 and 2018 the development was largely attributable to favorable results from claims closed during the year. As time has elapsed we have recognized that actual loss experience has on average been better than estimated. We have been cautious in recognizing the improvement, but as claims have matured and claims are closed or have become more certain for the remaining open claims, we have revised reserve estimates. We believe the need for a cautious approach is required as outcomes are uncertain and results can be significantly affected by outcomes for a small number of cases.
Workers' Compensation
Claims in our workers’ compensation line of business have historically closed at a faster rate than in our HCPL or Medical Technology Liability lines of business. This faster disposition rate, along with a lower net retention after the application of reinsurance, has resulted in less volatility in loss estimates on a net basis. However, a change in the number of individually-severe claims can create volatility in a given accident year. The following table presents additional information about the loss development for our workers' compensation line of business:
In 2020, we recognized $12.1 million of net favorable development in our Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance segment related to workers' compensation business and $7.0 million of net favorable development in our Workers' Compensation Insurance segment. In 2019, we recognized $10.1 million of net favorable development in our Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance segment, all related to workers' compensation business, and $7.8 million of net favorable development in our Workers' Compensation Insurance segment. In 2018, we recognized $9.0 million of net favorable development in our Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance segment, all related to workers' compensation business, and $8.0 million of net favorable development in our Workers' Compensation Insurance segment. During the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, net favorable development in our Workers' Compensation Insurance segment included $1.6 million related to the amortization of the purchase accounting fair value adjustment. As previously discussed, this fair value adjustment has been fully amortized as of December 31, 2019.
Variability of Loss Reserves
As previously noted, the number of data points and variables considered and the subjective process followed in establishing our loss reserve makes it impractical to isolate individual variables and demonstrate their impact on our estimate of loss reserves. However, to provide a better understanding of the potential variability in our reserves, we have modeled implied reserve ranges around our single point net reserve estimates for our various lines of business assuming different confidence levels. The ranges have been developed by aggregating the expected volatility of losses across partitions of our business to obtain a consolidated distribution of potential reserve outcomes. The aggregation of this data takes into consideration correlations among our geographic and specialty mix of business. The result of the correlation approach to aggregation is that the ranges are narrower than the sum of the ranges determined for each partition.
We have used this modeled statistical distribution to calculate an 80% and 60% confidence interval for the potential outcome of our consolidated net reserve for losses. The high and low end points of the distributions are as follows:
Any change in our estimate of net ultimate losses for prior years is reflected in net income (loss) in the period in which such changes are made.
Due to the size of our consolidated reserve for losses and the large number of claims outstanding at any point in time, even a small percentage adjustment to our total reserve estimate could have a material effect on our results of operations for the period in which the adjustment is made, as was the case in 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Reinsurance
We use insurance and reinsurance (collectively, “reinsurance”) to provide capacity to write larger limits of liability, to provide reimbursement for losses incurred under the higher limit coverages we offer, to provide protection against losses in excess of policy limits and, in the case of risk sharing arrangements, to align our objectives with those of our strategic business partners and to provide custom insurance solutions for large customer groups. The purchase of reinsurance does not relieve us from the ultimate risk on our policies; however, it does provide reimbursement for certain losses we pay.
We make a determination of the amount of insurance risk we choose to retain based upon numerous factors, including our risk tolerance and the capital we have to support it, the price and availability of reinsurance, the volume of business, our level of experience with a particular set of exposures and our analysis of the potential underwriting results. We purchase excess of loss reinsurance to limit the amount of risk we retain and we do so from a number of companies to mitigate concentrations of credit risk. As of December 31, 2020, there is no reinsurer, on an individual basis, for which our recoverables for both paid and unpaid claims (net of amounts due to the reinsurer) and our prepaid balances are aggregately $51 million or more. We utilize reinsurance brokers to assist us in the placement of these reinsurance programs and in the analysis of the credit quality of our reinsurers. The determination of which reinsurers we choose to do business with is based upon an evaluation of their then current financial strength, rating, stability and claims payment practices.
We evaluate each of our ceded reinsurance contracts at inception to confirm that there is sufficient risk transfer to allow the contract to be accounted for as reinsurance under current accounting guidance. At December 31, 2020, all ceded contracts were accounted for as risk transferring contracts.
Our receivable from reinsurers on unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses represents our estimate of the amount of our reserve for losses that will be recoverable under our reinsurance programs. We base our estimate of funds recoverable upon our expectation of ultimate losses and the portion of those losses that we estimate to be allocable to reinsurers based upon the terms and conditions of our reinsurance agreements. Our assessment of the collectability of the recorded amounts receivable from reinsurers considers the payment history of the reinsurer, publicly available financial and rating agency data, our interpretation of the underlying contracts and policies and responses by reinsurers.
Given the uncertainty inherent in our estimates of losses and related amounts recoverable from reinsurers, these estimates may vary significantly from the ultimate outcome.
Under the terms of certain of our reinsurance agreements, the amount of premium that we cede to our reinsurers is based in part on the losses we recover under the agreements. Therefore, we make an estimate of premiums ceded under these reinsurance agreements subject to certain minimums and maximums. Any adjustments to our estimates of losses recoverable under our reinsurance agreements or the premiums owed under our agreements are reflected in current operations. Due to the size of our reinsurance balances, an adjustment to these estimates could have a material effect on our results of operations for the period in which the adjustment is made.
Our reinsurance receivables are exposed to credit losses but to-date have not experienced any significant amount of credit losses. To partially mitigate our exposure to credit losses, reinsurance receivables totaling approximately $96.1 million were collateralized by letters of credit or funds withheld as of December 31, 2020. We measure expected credit losses on our reinsurance receivables on a collective basis when similar risk characteristics exist or on an individual basis if we determine a receivable does not share similar risk characteristics. We measure expected credit losses associated with our reinsurance receivables (related to both paid and unpaid losses) at the consolidated level as our reinsurance receivables share similar risk characteristics including type of financial asset, type of industry and similar historical and expected credit loss patterns. We measure expected credit losses over the average contractual term of our reinsurance receivables utilizing a loss rate method. Historical internal credit loss experience is the basis for our assessment of expected credit losses; however, we may also consider historical credit loss information from external sources. We also consider reasonable and supportable forecasts of future economic conditions in our estimate of expected credit losses. Expected credit losses associated with our reinsurance receivables (related to both paid and unpaid losses) were nominal in amount as of December 31, 2020. We had no allowance for expected credit losses related to our reinsurance receivables at December 31, 2019. No reinsurance balances were written off for credit reasons during the years ended December 31, 2020 or 2019. Should our expected credit loss analysis or other facts or circumstances lead us to believe that any reinsurer may not meet its obligations to us, adjustments to the allowance for expected credit losses or to reinsurance receivables would be reflected in current operations. Such an adjustment has the potential to be material to the results of operations in the period in which it is recorded; however, we would not expect such an adjustment to have a material effect on our capital position or our liquidity. For further information on our allowance for expected credit losses related to our receivables from reinsurers see Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Investment Valuations
We record the majority of our investments at fair value as shown in the table below. At December 31, 2020, the distribution of our investments based on GAAP fair value hierarchies (levels) was as follows:
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. All of our fixed maturity and equity investments are carried at fair value. The fair value of our short-term securities approximates the cost of the securities due to their short-term nature.
Because of the number of securities we own and the complexity of developing accurate fair values, we utilize multiple independent pricing services to assist us in establishing the fair value of individual securities. The pricing services provide fair values based on exchange-traded prices, if available. If an exchange-traded price is not available, the pricing services, if possible, provide a fair value that is based on multiple broker/dealer quotes or that has been developed using pricing models. Pricing models vary by asset class and utilize currently available market data for securities comparable to ours to estimate a fair value for our securities. The pricing services scrutinize market data for consistency with other relevant market information before including the data in the pricing models. The pricing services disclose the types of pricing models used and the inputs used for each asset class. Determining fair values using these pricing models requires the use of judgment to identify appropriate comparable securities and to choose a valuation methodology that is appropriate for the asset class and available data.
The pricing services provide a single value per instrument quoted. We review the values provided for reasonableness each quarter by comparing market yields generated by the supplied value versus market yields observed in the marketplace. We also compare yields indicated by the provided values to appropriate benchmark yields and review for values that are unchanged or that reflect an unanticipated variation as compared to prior period values. We utilize a primary pricing service for each security type and compare provided information for consistency with alternate pricing services, known market data and information from our own trades, considering both values and valuation trends. We also review weekly trades versus the prices supplied by the services. If a supplied value appears unreasonable, we discuss the valuation in question with the pricing service and make adjustments if deemed necessary. Historically our review has not resulted in any material changes to the values supplied by the pricing services. The pricing services do not provide a fair value unless an exchange-traded price or multiple observable inputs are available. As a result, the pricing services may provide a fair value for a security in some periods but not others, depending upon the level of recent market activity for the security or comparable securities.
Level 1 Investments
Fair values for a majority of our equity securities and portions of our short-term and convertible securities are determined using exchange-traded prices. There is little judgment involved when fair value is determined using an exchange-traded price. In accordance with GAAP, we classify securities valued using an exchange-traded price as Level 1 securities.
Level 2 Investments
Most fixed income securities do not trade daily; thus, exchange-traded prices are generally not available for these securities. However, market information (often referred to as observable inputs or market data, including but not limited to, last reported trade, non-binding broker quotes, bids, benchmark yield curves, issuer spreads, two-sided markets, benchmark securities, offers and recent data regarding assumed prepayment speeds, cash flow and loan performance data) is available for most of our fixed income securities. We determine fair value for a large portion of our fixed income securities using available market information. In accordance with GAAP, we classify securities valued based on multiple market observable inputs as Level 2 securities.
Level 3 Investments
When a pricing service does not provide a value for one of our fixed maturity securities, management estimates fair value using either a single non-binding broker quote or pricing models that utilize market based assumptions which have limited observable inputs. The process involves significant judgment in selecting the appropriate data and modeling techniques to use in the valuation process. In accordance with GAAP, we classify securities valued using limited observable inputs as Level 3 securities.
Fair Values Not Categorized
We hold interests in certain investment funds, primarily LPs/LLCs, which measure fund assets at fair value on a recurring basis and provide us with a NAV for our interest. As a practical expedient, we consider the NAV provided to approximate the fair value of the interest. In accordance with GAAP, we do not categorize these investments within the fair value hierarchy.
Nonrecurring Fair Value Measurements
We measure the fair value of certain assets on a nonrecurring basis when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable. These assets include investments carried principally at cost, investments in tax credit partnerships, fixed assets, goodwill and other intangible assets. These assets would also include any equity method investments that do not provide a NAV. During the third quarter of 2020, we recognized a nonrecurring fair value measurement related to the goodwill in our Specialty P&C reporting unit with a carrying value of $161.1 million prior to the fair value measurement. This nonrecurring fair value measurement resulted in the goodwill being written down to its implied fair value of zero resulting in an impairment of the goodwill of $161.1 million (see following discussion under the heading "Goodwill / Intangibles"). The inputs used in the fair value measurement were non-observable and, as such, were categorized as a Level 3 valuation. We did not have any other assets or liabilities that were measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis at December 31, 2020 or December 31, 2019.
Investments - Other Valuation Methodologies
Certain of our investments, in accordance with GAAP for the type of investment, are measured using methodologies other than fair value. At December 31, 2020, these investments represented approximately 4% of total investments, and are detailed in the following table. Additional information about these investments is provided in Notes 2 and 3 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Impairments
We evaluate our available-for-sale investment securities, which at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 consisted entirely of fixed maturity securities, on at least a quarterly basis for the purpose of determining whether declines in fair value below recorded cost basis represent an impairment loss. We consider a credit-related impairment loss to have occurred:
•if there is intent to sell the security;
•if it is more likely than not that the security will be required to be sold before full recovery of its amortized cost basis; or
•if the entire amortized basis of the security is not expected to be recovered.
The assessment of whether the amortized cost basis of a security is expected to be recovered requires management to make assumptions regarding various matters affecting future cash flows. The choice of assumptions is subjective and requires the use of judgment. Actual credit losses experienced in future periods may differ from management’s estimates of those credit losses. Methodologies used to estimate the present value of expected cash flows are:
The estimate of expected cash flows is determined by projecting a recovery value and a recovery time frame and assessing whether further principal and interest will be received. We consider various factors in projecting recovery values and recovery time frames, including the following:
•third-party research and credit rating reports;
•the current credit standing of the issuer, including credit rating downgrades, whether before or after the balance sheet date;
•the extent to which the decline in fair value is attributable to credit risk specifically associated with the security or its issuer;
•internal assessments and the assessments of external portfolio managers regarding specific circumstances surrounding an investment, which indicate the investment is more or less likely to recover its amortized cost than other investments with a similar structure;
•for asset-backed securities, the origination date of the underlying loans, the remaining average life, the probability that credit performance of the underlying loans will deteriorate in the future and our assessment of the quality of the collateral underlying the loan;
•failure of the issuer of the security to make scheduled interest or principal payments;
•any changes to the rating of the security by a rating agency;
•recoveries or additional declines in fair value subsequent to the balance sheet date;
•adverse legal or regulatory events;
•significant deterioration in the market environment that may affect the value of collateral (e.g. decline in real estate prices);
•significant deterioration in economic conditions; and
•disruption in the business model resulting from changes in technology or new entrants to the industry.
If deemed appropriate and necessary, a discounted cash flow analysis is performed to confirm whether a credit loss exists and, if so, the amount of the credit loss. We use the single best estimate approach for available-for-sale debt securities and consider all reasonably available data points, including industry analyses, credit ratings, expected defaults and the remaining payment terms of the debt security. For fixed rate available-for-sale debt securities, cash flows are discounted at the security's effective interest rate implicit in the security at the date of acquisition. If the available-for-sale debt security’s contractual interest rate varies based on subsequent changes in an independent factor, such as an index or rate, for example, the prime rate, the LIBOR, or the U.S. Treasury bill weekly average, that security’s effective interest rate is calculated based on the factor as it changes over the life of the security. If we intend to sell a debt security or believe we will more likely than not be required to sell a debt security before the amortized cost basis is recovered, any existing allowance will be written off against the security's amortized cost basis, with any remaining difference between the debt security's amortized cost basis and fair value recognized as an impairment loss in earnings.
Exclusive of securities where there is an intent to sell or where it is not more likely than not that the security will be required to be sold before recovery of its amortized cost basis, impairment for debt securities is separated into a credit component and a non-credit component. The credit component of an impairment is the difference between the security’s amortized cost basis and the present value of its expected future cash flows, while the non-credit component is the remaining difference between the security’s fair value and the present value of expected future cash flows. An allowance for expected credit losses will be recorded for the expected credit losses through income and the non-credit component is recognized in OCI. The amount of impairment recognized is limited to the excess of the amortized cost over the fair value of the available-for-sale debt security.
Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs
Policy acquisition costs (primarily commissions, premium taxes and underwriting salaries) which are directly related to the successful acquisition of new and renewal premiums are capitalized as DPAC and charged to expense, net of ceding commissions earned, as the related premium revenue is recognized. We evaluate the recoverability of our DPAC typically at the segment level each reporting period or in a manner that is consistent with the way we manage our business. Any amounts estimated to be unrecoverable are charged to expense in the current period.
As part of our evaluation of the recoverability of DPAC, we also evaluate our unearned premiums for premium deficiencies. A premium deficiency is recognized if the sum of anticipated losses and loss adjustment expenses, unamortized DPAC and maintenance costs, net of anticipated investment income, exceeds the related unearned premium. If a premium deficiency is identified, the associated DPAC is written off, and a PDR is recorded for the excess deficiency as a component of net losses and loss adjustment expenses in our Consolidated Statement of Income and Comprehensive Income and as a component of the reserve for losses on our Consolidated Balance Sheet. For the year ended December 31, 2020 we did not determine any DPAC to be unrecoverable. For the year ended December 31, 2019, a nominal amount of DPAC was charged to expense as it was determined to be unrecoverable, and a $9.2 million PDR was established in our Specialty P&C segment related to a large national healthcare account. The $9.2 million PDR was fully amortized during 2020. See further discussion on the PDR in the Segment Results - Specialty Property & Casualty section that follows.
Deferred Taxes
Deferred federal income taxes arise from the recognition of temporary differences between the basis of assets and liabilities determined for financial reporting purposes and the basis determined for income tax purposes. Our temporary differences principally relate to our loss reserves, unearned and advanced premiums, DPAC, tax credit carryforwards, compensation related items, unrealized investment gains (losses) and basis differences on fixed assets, intangible assets and operating leases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the enacted tax rates expected to be in effect when such benefits are realized. We review our deferred tax assets quarterly for impairment. If we determine that it is more likely than not that some or all of a deferred tax asset will not be realized, a valuation allowance is recorded to reduce the carrying value of the asset. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, management is required to make certain judgments and assumptions about our future operations based on historical experience and information as of the measurement period regarding reversal of existing temporary differences, carryback capacity, future taxable income of the appropriate character (including its capital and operating characteristics) and tax planning strategies.
A valuation allowance was established in a prior year against the deferred tax asset related to the NOL carryforwards for the U.K. operations. In addition, a valuation allowance was established in 2020 against a portion of the deferred tax asset related to the U.S. state NOL carryforwards. Management concluded that it was more likely than not that these deferred tax assets will not be realized. We also established a valuation allowance in a prior year against the deferred tax assets of certain SPCs at our wholly owned Cayman Islands reinsurance subsidiary, Inova Re. Due to the limited operations of these SPCs, management concluded that a valuation allowance was required. As of December 31, 2020, management concluded that a valuation allowance was still required against the deferred tax assets related to the NOL carryforwards for the U.K. operations and against the deferred tax assets of certain SPCs at Inova Re. See further discussion in Note 5 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Tax Cuts and Jobs Act
The TCJA introduced a minimum tax on payments made to related foreign entities referred to as the BEAT. The BEAT is imposed by adding back into the U.S. tax base any base erosion payment made by the U.S. taxpayer to a related foreign entity and applying a minimum tax rate to this newly calculated modified taxable income. Base erosion payments represent any amount paid or accrued by the U.S. taxpayer to a related foreign entity for which a deduction is allowed. Premiums we cede to the SPCs at Inova Re, one of our wholly owned Cayman Islands reinsurance subsidiaries, do not fall within the scope of base erosion payments as the SPCs at Inova Re have elected to be taxed as U.S. taxpayers. However, premiums that we cede to any active SPC at our other wholly owned Cayman Islands reinsurance subsidiary, Eastern Re, fall within the scope of base erosion payments and therefore could be significantly impacted by the BEAT. We have evaluated our exposure to the BEAT and have concluded that our expected outbound deductible payments to related foreign entities are below the threshold for application of the BEAT; therefore, we have not recognized any incremental tax expense for the BEAT provision of the TCJA during the years ended December 31, 2020 or December 31, 2019. See further discussion on our Cayman Islands SPC operations in the Segment Results - Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance section that follows. See discussion in Note 5 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
The TCJA also requires a U.S. shareholder of a controlled foreign corporation to include its GILTI in U.S. taxable income. The GILTI amount is based on the U.S. shareholder’s aggregate share of the gross income of the controlled foreign corporation reduced by certain exceptions and a net deemed tangible income return. The net deemed tangible income return is based on the controlled foreign corporation’s basis in the tangible depreciable business property. Cell rental fee income earned by Inova Re and Eastern Re fall within the scope of the GILTI provisions of the TCJA. We have evaluated the new GILTI provisions of the TCJA, and we have made an accounting policy election to treat the taxes due on the inclusion of GILTI in U.S. taxable income as a current period expense when incurred. We recognized a nominal amount of tax expense for the GILTI provision of the TCJA during each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019. See discussion in Note 5 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act
In response to COVID-19, the CARES Act was signed into law on March 27, 2020 and contains several provisions for corporations and eases certain deduction limitations originally imposed by the TCJA. The CARES Act, among other things, includes temporary changes regarding the prior and future utilization of NOLs, temporary changes to the prior and future limitations on interest deductions, temporary suspension of certain payment requirements for the employer portion of Social Security taxes and the creation of certain refundable employee retention credits. We anticipate the temporary changes regarding NOL carryback provisions will have a favorable impact on our liquidity (see discussion that follows in the Liquidity and Capital Resources and Financial Condition section under the heading "Taxes"). We have evaluated the other provisions of the CARES Act and concluded that they will not have a material impact on our financial position or results of operations. See discussion in Note 5 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Unrecognized Tax Benefits
We evaluate tax positions taken on tax returns and recognize positions in our financial statements when it is more likely than not that we will sustain the position upon resolution with a taxing authority. If recognized, the benefit is measured as the largest amount of benefit that has a greater than 50% probability of being realized. We review uncertain tax positions each quarter, considering changes in facts and circumstances, such as changes in tax law, interactions with taxing authorities and developments in case law, and make adjustments as we consider necessary. Adjustments to our unrecognized tax benefits may affect our income tax expense, and settlement of uncertain tax positions may require the use of cash. Other than differences related to timing, no significant adjustments were considered necessary during 2020 or 2019. At December 31, 2020, our liability for unrecognized tax benefits approximated $5.2 million.
Goodwill / Intangibles
Goodwill is tested for impairment annually or more frequently if circumstances indicate an impairment may have occurred. The date of our annual goodwill impairment testing is October 1.
Impairment of goodwill is tested at the reporting unit level, which is consistent with our reportable segments identified in Note 16 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
During the third quarter of 2020, the Company recorded a goodwill impairment charge of $161.1 million, and the facts and circumstances that led to this impairment and how the fair value of each reporting unit was estimated, including the significant assumptions used and other details are outlined in the following section.
Interim Impairment Assessments
As disclosed in our June 30, 2020 report on Form 10-Q, COVID-19 has caused significant market volatility impacting our actual and projected results along with a decline in our stock price; and we performed a quantitative assessment on the Specialty P&C and Workers' Compensation Insurance reporting units. As a result of the interim goodwill impairment assessment in the second quarter of 2020, management concluded that the fair value of each of the Specialty P&C and Workers' Compensation Insurance reporting units were greater than their carrying value as of the testing date; therefore, goodwill was not impaired and no further impairment testing was required at that time.
As the impacts persisted into the third quarter, management performed new quantitative assessments of goodwill on our Specialty P&C and Workers' Compensation Insurance reporting units using updated marketplace data. The updated data, which was significantly influenced by our continued depressed stock price relative to both our own book value and the comparable stock prices of our peers, impacted a number of key variables in our analysis including the determination of a higher discount rate and lower valuation multiples. In addition, new guidance given by the Federal Reserve during the period regarding the expectation of a prolonged low interest rate environment impacted our analysis. This analysis during the third quarter of 2020 indicated an impairment of the goodwill associated with our Specialty P&C reporting unit and accordingly we recorded a $161.1 million charge to goodwill during the third quarter of 2020.
For each of the interim impairment assessments performed in the second and third quarters of 2020, management estimated the fair value of the reporting units using both an income approach and a market approach using marketplace data that was current at the time of each respective analysis. The estimate of fair value derived from the income approach was based on the present value of expected future cash flows, including terminal value, utilizing a market-based weighted average cost of capital determined separately for each reporting unit. The estimate of fair value derived from the market approach was based on price to book multiple data. The determination of fair value involved the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including revenue growth rates, operating margins, capital requirements, tax rates, terminal growth rates, discount rates, comparable public companies and synergistic benefits available to market participants. In addition, management made certain judgments and assumptions in allocating shared assets and liabilities to individual reporting units to determine the carrying amount of each reporting unit.
Management also performed impairment tests of certain of our definite and indefinite lived intangible assets for which a triggering event was deemed to have occurred. Based upon these impairment tests, no impairment of our definite or indefinite lived intangible assets was identified at September 30, 2020.
Annual Impairment Assessment
Subsequent to performing the interim impairment assessments previously discussed, we performed our annual goodwill impairment assessment as of October 1, 2020.
When testing goodwill for impairment on our annual test date, we have the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that it is more likely than not that the estimated fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If we elect to perform a qualitative assessment and determine that an impairment is more likely than not, we are then required to perform a quantitative impairment test; otherwise,
no further analysis is required. We also may elect not to perform the qualitative assessment and, instead, proceed directly to the quantitative impairment test.
Performance of the qualitative goodwill impairment assessment requires judgment in identifying and considering the significance of relevant key factors, events, and circumstances that affect the fair values of our reporting units. This requires consideration and assessment of external factors such as macroeconomic, industry, and market conditions, as well as entity-specific factors, such as our actual and planned financial performance. We also give consideration to the difference between each reporting unit's fair value and carrying value as of the most recent date that a fair value measurement was performed. If the results of the qualitative assessment conclude that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, additional quantitative impairment testing is performed.
The quantitative goodwill impairment test involves comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying value including goodwill. If the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, the reporting unit's goodwill is considered not to be impaired. However, if the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recorded in an amount equal to that excess. Any impairment charge recognized is limited to the amount of the respective reporting unit's allocated goodwill.
Determining the fair value of a reporting unit under the quantitative goodwill impairment test requires judgment and often involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including an assessment of external factors such as macroeconomic, industry, and market conditions, as well as entity-specific factors, such as actual and planned financial performance. These estimates and assumptions could have a significant impact on whether or not an impairment charge is recognized and the magnitude of any such charge. To assist management in the process of determining any potential goodwill impairment, we may review and consider appraisals from accredited independent valuation firms. Estimates of fair value are primarily determined using discounted cash flows and market comparisons. These approaches involve significant estimates and assumptions, including projected future cash flows (including timing), discount rates reflecting the risks inherent in those future cash flows, perpetual growth rates, and selection of appropriate market comparable metrics and transactions.
For the most recent goodwill impairment test performed on October 1, 2020, we elected to perform a qualitative goodwill impairment test for our Workers' Compensation Insurance and Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance reporting units. These reporting units have historically had an excess of fair value over book value and based on current operations are expected to continue to do so; therefore, our annual impairment test for these reporting units was performed qualitatively. In applying the qualitative approach, management considered macroeconomic factors, industry and market conditions, cost factors that could have a negative impact on the reporting units, actual financial performance of the reporting units versus expectations and management's future business expectations. As a result of the qualitative assessments, management concluded that it was not more likely than not that the fair value of each of our two reporting units that have net goodwill was less than the carrying value of each reporting unit as of the testing date; therefore, no further impairment testing was required. No goodwill impairment was recorded during the years ended December 31, 2019 or 2018. See Note 6 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information about our goodwill.
Leases
We are involved in a number of leases, primarily for office facilities. We determine if an arrangement is a lease at the inception date of the contract and classify all leases as either financing or operating. As of December 31, 2020, all of our leases were classified as operating. Operating lease ROU assets and operating lease liabilities are recognized as of the lease commencement date based on the present value of the remaining lease payments, discounted over the term of the lease using a discount rate determined based on information available as of the commencement date. The ROU asset represents the right to use the underlying asset (office space) for the lease term. As the majority of our lessors do not provide an implicit discount rate, we use our collateralized incremental borrowing rate in determining the present value of remaining lease payments. For leases entered into or reassessed after the adoption of ASU 2016-02 on January 1, 2019, we account for lease and non-lease components of a contract as a single lease component.
We evaluate our operating lease ROU assets for impairment at the asset group level whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the asset group may not be recoverable. The carrying amount of an asset group, which includes the operating lease ROU asset and the related operating lease liability, is not recoverable if the carrying amount exceeds the sum of the undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset group over the life of the primary asset in the asset group. That assessment is based on the carrying amount of the asset group, including the operating lease ROU asset and the related operating lease liability, at the date it is tested for recoverability, and an impairment loss is measured and recognized as the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset group exceeds its fair value. Any impairment loss is allocated to each asset in the asset group, including the operating ROU asset.
When a lease of an office facility is to be abandoned and will not be subleased, we first evaluate whether or not the operating lease ROU asset’s inclusion in an existing asset group continues to be appropriate and if the commitment to abandon
the lease constitutes a change in circumstances requiring the operating lease ROU asset, or the larger asset group, to be tested for impairment. If an impairment test is required, it is performed in the same manner as discussed above. Any remaining carrying value of the operating lease ROU asset is amortized from the date we commit to a plan to abandon the lease to the expected date that we will cease to use the leased property. Leases to be abandoned in which we have the intent or practical ability to sublease continue to be accounted for under a held and use model, with no change to the amortization period of the operating lease ROU asset, and are evaluated for impairment as a separate asset group at the date the sublease is executed.
Additional information regarding our leases is included in Note 1 and Note 10 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Audit Premium
Workers’ compensation premiums are determined based upon the payroll of the insured, respective premium rates and, where applicable, an experience-based modification factor. An audit of the policyholders’ records is conducted after policy expiration to make a final determination of applicable premiums. Audit premium due from or due to a policyholder as a result of an audit is reflected in net premiums written and earned when billed. We track, by policy, the amount of additional premium billed in final audit invoices as a percentage of payroll exposure and use this information to estimate the probable additional amount of EBUB as of the balance sheet date. We include changes to the EBUB estimate in net premiums written and earned in the period recognized. We reduced our EBUB estimate by $1.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 which primarily reflected a reduction in earned payroll exposure. As a result of the economic impact of COVID-19, we expect future reductions in payroll exposure related to in-force policies that could result in a significant decrease in audit premium and our EBUB estimate. We will continue to monitor and adjust the estimate, if necessary, based on changes in insured payrolls and economic conditions, as experience develops or new information becomes known; however, the length and magnitude of such changes depends on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted.
Lloyd’s Premium Estimates
For certain insurance policies and reinsurance contracts written in our Lloyd’s Syndicates segment, premiums are initially recognized based upon estimates of ultimate premium. Estimated ultimate premium consists primarily of premium written under delegated underwriting authority arrangements, which consist primarily of binding authorities, and certain assumed reinsurance agreements. These estimates of ultimate premium are judgmental and are dependent upon certain assumptions, including historical premium trends for similar agreements. As reports are received from programs, ultimate premium estimates are revised, if necessary, with changes reflected in current operations.
Accounting Changes
During the second quarter of 2020, we early adopted ASU 2019-12 which is intended to simplify various aspects related to accounting for income taxes. The most impactful provision of the new guidance on the Company is the removal of the limitation on the tax benefit recognized on pre-tax losses during interim periods in which the year-to-date loss exceeds the expected loss for the fiscal year.
We did not have any other change in accounting estimate or policy that had a material effect on our results of operations or financial position during 2020. We are not aware of any accounting changes not yet adopted as of December 31, 2020 that would have a material effect on our results of operations, financial position or cash flows. Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements provides additional detail regarding accounting changes not yet adopted.
Liquidity and Capital Resources and Financial Condition
Overview
ProAssurance Corporation is a holding company and is a legal entity separate and distinct from its subsidiaries. As a holding company, our principal source of external revenue is our investment revenues. In addition, dividends from our operating subsidiaries represent another source of funds for our obligations, including debt service and shareholder dividends. We also charge our operating subsidiaries within our Specialty P&C and Workers' Compensation Insurance segments a management fee based on the extent to which services are provided to the subsidiary and the amount of gross premium written by the subsidiary. At December 31, 2020, we held cash and liquid investments of approximately $260 million outside our insurance subsidiaries that were available for use without regulatory approval or other restriction. We also have $250 million in permitted borrowings available under our Revolving Credit Agreement as well as the possibility of a $50 million accordion feature if successfully subscribed. As of February 19, 2021, no borrowings were outstanding under our Revolving Credit Agreement.
During 2020, our operating subsidiaries paid dividends to us of approximately $118 million, which included extraordinary dividends of approximately $64 million. In the aggregate, our insurance subsidiaries are permitted to pay dividends of approximately $87 million over the course of 2021 without prior approval of state insurance regulators. However, the payment of any dividend requires prior notice to the insurance regulator in the state of domicile, and the regulator may reduce or prevent the dividend if, in its judgment, payment of the dividend would have an adverse effect on the surplus of the insurance subsidiary. We make the decision to pay dividends from an insurance subsidiary based on the capital needs of that subsidiary and may pay less than the permitted dividend or may also request permission to pay an additional amount (an extraordinary dividend).
Cash Flows
Cash flows between periods compare as follows:
The principal components of our operating cash flows are the excess of premiums collected and net investment income over losses paid and operating costs, including income taxes. Timing delays exist between the collection of premiums and the payment of losses associated with the premiums. Premiums are generally collected within the twelve-month period after the policy is written, while our claim payments are generally paid over a more extended period of time. Likewise, timing delays exist between the payment of claims and the collection of any associated reinsurance recoveries.
The decrease in operating cash flows in 2020 as compared to 2019 of $55.8 million was primarily due to an increase in paid losses of $89.1 million driven by our Specialty P&C and Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance segments. The increase in paid losses in our Specialty P&C segment was primarily due to higher average claim payments which we believe is an indication that the higher severity trends that we are experiencing in our HCPL case reserve estimates are emerging in actual claim payments. The increase in paid losses in our Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance segment reflected the payment of a $10 million claim during the first quarter of 2020 by an SPC at Eastern Re in which we do not participate. The payment related to a reserve established by the SPC in 2019 related to an errors and omissions liability policy. Furthermore, the decrease in operating cash flows reflected a decrease in net cash received of $7.4 million associated with the cash settlement of the 2017 calendar year quota share reinsurance agreement between our Specialty P&C segment and Syndicate 1729 due to the reduction
in premiums ceded to Syndicate 1729. The decrease in operating cash flows also reflected one-time expenses of $5.4 million primarily related to employee severance and early retirement benefits paid to certain employees in 2020. Additionally, the decrease in operating cash flows reflected a decrease in cash received from investment income of $3.5 million primarily due to a reduction in dividends received on our equity portfolio resulting from a decrease in our allocation to this asset category. The decrease in operating cash flows was somewhat offset by an increase in net premium receipts of $28.1 million and a decrease in 2020 net tax payments as compared to 2019 of $9.8 million. The increase in net premium receipts was driven by our Specialty P&C segment due to $14.3 million of tail premium received from a large national healthcare account during the second quarter of 2020 (see further discussion in our Segment Results - Specialty Property & Casualty section that follows). The decrease in net tax payments was primarily due to refunds received in 2020. Furthermore, the decrease in operating cash flows was partially offset by an increase in net cash received of $6.8 million associated with the cash settlement of a quota share reinsurance agreement between our Specialty P&C segment and one of its reinsurers. The remaining variance in operating cash flows in 2020 as compared to 2019 was comprised of individually insignificant components.
The decrease in operating cash flows in 2019 as compared to 2018 of $29.1 million was primarily due to an increase in paid losses of $30.2 million, a decrease in cash received from investment income of $9.8 million and an increase in cash paid for operating expenses of $8.1 million. The increase in paid losses was driven by our Specialty P&C and Workers' Compensation Insurance segments. The increase in paid losses in our Specialty P&C segment primarily reflected higher average claims payments in 2019 as compared to 2018 and the increase in paid losses in our Workers' Compensation Insurance segment primarily reflected the timing of loss payments between periods. The decrease in cash received from investment income was primarily due to a decline in distributed earnings from our unconsolidated subsidiaries. The increase in cash paid for operating expenses was driven by an increase in brokerage expenses in our Lloyd's Syndicates segment from the continuing growth of Syndicate 6131 as well as an increase in fees associated with a data analytics services agreement entered into during the fourth quarter of 2018 in our Specialty P&C segment. In addition, the decrease in operating cash flows reflected a decrease in net cash received of $3.0 million associated with the cash settlement from the commutation of the 2017 and 2016 calendar year quota share reinsurance agreements between our Specialty P&C segment and Syndicate 1729 due to the reduction in premiums ceded to Syndicate 1729. The decrease in operating cash flows was partially offset by an increase in net premium receipts of $19.0 million and a decrease in estimated tax payments of $3.0 million. The increase in net premium receipts was primarily due to the growth in written premium in our Lloyd's Syndicates and Specialty P&C segments.
We manage our investing cash flows to ensure that we will have sufficient liquidity to meet our obligations, taking into consideration the timing of cash flows from our investments, including interest payments, dividends and principal payments, as well as the expected cash flows to be generated by our operations as discussed in this section under the heading "Investing Activities and Related Cash Flows."
Our financing cash flows are primarily composed of dividend payments and borrowings and repayments under our Revolving Credit Agreement. See further discussion of our financing activities in this section under the heading "Financing Activities and Related Cash Flows."
Operating Activities and Related Cash Flows
Losses
The following table, known as the Analysis of Reserve Development, presents information over the preceding ten years regarding the payment of our losses as well as changes to (the development of) our estimates of losses during that time period. As noted in the table, we have completed various acquisitions over the ten year period which have affected original and re-estimated gross and net reserve balances as well as loss payments.
The table includes losses on both a direct and an assumed basis and is net of anticipated reinsurance recoverables. The gross liability for losses before reinsurance, as shown on the balance sheet, and the reconciliation of that gross liability to amounts net of reinsurance are reflected below the table. We do not discount our reserve for losses to present value. Information presented in the table is cumulative and, accordingly, each amount includes the effects of all changes in amounts for prior years. The table presents the development of our balance sheet reserve for losses; it does not present accident year or policy year development data. Conditions and trends that have affected the development of liabilities in the past may not necessarily occur in the future. Accordingly, it is not appropriate to extrapolate future redundancies or deficiencies based on this table.
The following may be helpful in understanding the Analysis of Reserve Development:
•The line entitled “Reserve for losses, undiscounted and net of reinsurance recoverables” reflects our reserve for losses and loss adjustment expense, less the receivables from reinsurers, each as reported in our Consolidated Balance Sheets at the end of each year (the Balance Sheet Reserves).
•The section entitled “Cumulative net paid, as of” reflects the cumulative amounts paid as of the end of each succeeding year with respect to the previously recorded Balance Sheet Reserves.
•The section entitled “Re-estimated net liability as of” reflects the re-estimated amount of the liability previously recorded as Balance Sheet Reserves that includes the cumulative amounts paid and an estimate of the remaining net liability based upon claims experience as of the end of each succeeding year (the Net Re-estimated Liability).
•The line entitled “Net cumulative redundancy (deficiency)” reflects the difference between the previously recorded Balance Sheet Reserve for each applicable year and the Net Re-estimated Liability relating thereto as of the end of the most recent fiscal year.
See table notes on following page.
Table Notes
•Reserves for 2010 and thereafter include gross and net reserves acquired in 2010 business combinations of $88.1 million and $82.2 million, respectively.
•Reserves for 2012 and thereafter include gross and net reserves acquired in 2012 business combinations of $21.8 million and $19.2 million, respectively, which considers reductions of $3.6 million and $3.3 million, respectively, recorded in 2013 due to the re-estimation of the fair value of the acquired reserves.
•Reserves for 2013 include gross and net reserves acquired in 2013 business combinations of $201.1 million and $126.0 million, respectively.
•Reserves for 2014 include gross and net reserves acquired in 2014 business combinations of $153.2 million and $139.5 million, respectively.
In each year reflected in the table, we have estimated our reserve for losses utilizing the management and actuarial processes discussed under the heading "Reserve for Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses" in the Critical Accounting Estimates section. Factors that have contributed to the variation in loss development are primarily related to the extended period of time required to resolve professional liability claims and include the following:
•The HCPL legal environment deteriorated in the late 1990’s and severity began to increase at a greater pace than anticipated in our rates and reserve estimates. We addressed the adverse severity trends through increased rates, stricter underwriting and modifications to claims handling procedures, and reflected this adverse severity trend when we established our initial reserves for subsequent years.
•These adverse severity trends later moderated, with that moderation becoming more pronounced beginning in 2009. We were cautious in giving full recognition to indications that the pace of severity increase had slowed, however we gave measured recognition of the improved trend in our reserve estimates. The favorable development was most pronounced for years 2004 to 2008, as the initial reserves for these accident years were established prior to substantial indication that severity trends were moderating. We gave stronger recognition to the lower severity trend as time elapsed and a greater percentage of claims were closed.
•A general decline in claims frequency has also been a contributor to favorable loss development. A significant portion of our policies through 2003 were issued on an occurrence basis, and a smaller portion of our ongoing business results from the issuance of extended reporting endorsements which have occurrence-like exposure. As claims frequency declined, the number of reported claims related to these coverages was less than originally expected.
•Beginning in 2017, we identified potential higher severity trends in the broader HCPL industry. These trends were also reflected in increases in estimates of ultimate losses for open HCPL claims for earlier accident years, which resulted in a lower amount of favorable development recognized in 2018 and 2017 as compared to prior years.
•During 2019 the loss experience in our Specialty line of business deteriorated further, particularly in regard to the reserves we established for a large national healthcare account that has experienced losses far exceeding the assumptions we made when underwriting the account, beginning in 2016. As a result, we strengthened our Specialty reserves through the recognition of net unfavorable development on prior accident years and a higher current accident year net loss ratio in our Specialty P&C segment in 2019 as discussed more fully in our Segment Results - Specialty Property and Casualty section that follows.
Activity in our net reserve for losses during 2020, 2019 and 2018 is summarized below:
(1) Current year net losses for the year ended December 31, 2019 included incurred losses of $2.1 million related to a loss portfolio transfer entered into during 2019 in the Specialty P&C segment. Current year net losses in 2018 included incurred losses of $25.4 million related to a loss portfolio transfer entered into during the second quarter of 2018 (see Note 8 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements).
(2) Current year net losses for the year ended December 31, 2019 included a PDR of $9.2 million associated with the unearned premium of a large national healthcare account's claims-made policy in the Specialty P&C segment. Current year net losses for the year ended December 31, 2020 included the amortization of the aforementioned $9.2 million PDR which offsets the impact of the losses incurred associated with the premium earned related to the large national healthcare account's claims-made policy. For additional information regarding the PDR see Note 7 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
(3) During 2020, the aforementioned large national healthcare account did not renew on terms offered by us and exercised its contractual option to purchase extended reporting endorsement or "tail" coverage. As a result, we recognized total current year losses of $60.0 million (assumes a full limit loss) within the Specialty P&C segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 (see Note 8 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements).
At December 31, 2020 our gross reserve for losses included case reserves of approximately $1.4 billion and IBNR reserves of approximately $1.0 billion. Our consolidated gross reserve for losses on a GAAP basis exceeds the combined gross reserves of our insurance subsidiaries on a statutory basis by approximately $0.2 billion, which is principally due to the portion of the GAAP reserve for losses that is reflected for statutory accounting purposes as unearned premiums. These unearned premiums are applicable to extended reporting endorsements (“tail” coverage) issued without a premium charge upon death, disability or retirement of an insured who meets certain qualifications.
Reinsurance
Within our Specialty P&C segment, we use insurance and reinsurance (collectively, “reinsurance”) to provide capacity to write larger limits of liability, to provide reimbursement for losses incurred under the higher limit coverages we offer and to provide protection against losses in excess of policy limits. Within our Workers' Compensation Insurance segment, we use reinsurance to reduce our net liability on individual risks, to mitigate the effect of significant loss occurrences (including catastrophic events), to stabilize underwriting results and to increase underwriting capacity by decreasing leverage. In both our Specialty P&C and Workers' Compensation Insurance segments, we use reinsurance in risk sharing arrangements to align our objectives with those of our strategic business partners and to provide custom insurance solutions for large customer groups. The purchase of reinsurance does not relieve us from the ultimate risk on our policies; however, it does provide reimbursement for certain losses we pay. We pay our reinsurers a premium in exchange for reinsurance of the risk. In certain of our excess of loss arrangements, the premium due to the reinsurer is determined by the loss experience of the business reinsured, subject to certain minimum and maximum amounts. Until all loss amounts are known, we estimate the premium due to the reinsurer.
Changes to the estimate of premium owed under reinsurance agreements related to prior periods are recorded in the period in which the change in estimate occurs and can have a significant effect on net premiums earned.
We offer alternative market solutions whereby we cede certain premiums from our Workers' Compensation Insurance and Specialty P&C segments to either the SPCs at Inova Re or Eastern Re, our Cayman Islands reinsurance subsidiaries which are reported in our Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance segment, or, to a limited extent, an unaffiliated captive insurer for one program. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we wrote total alternative market premium of approximately $76.6 million and $90.0 million, respectively. The majority of these policies ($72.8 million and $86.7 million of premium in 2020 and 2019, respectively) are reinsured to the SPCs at Inova Re or Eastern Re, net of a ceding commission. Each SPC at Inova Re and Eastern Re is owned, fully or in part, by an agency, group or association, and the results of the SPCs are due to the participants of that cell. We participate to a varying degree in the results of selected SPCs and, for the SPCs in which we participate, our participation interest ranges from a low of 20% to a high of 85%. SPC results attributable to external cell participants are reflected as an SPC dividend expense (income) in our Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance segment. See further discussion on our SPC operations in the Segment Results - Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance section that follows. The alternative market workers' compensation policies are ceded from our Workers' Compensation Insurance segment to the SPCs under 100% quota share reinsurance agreements. The alternative market healthcare professional liability policies are ceded from our Specialty P&C segment to the SPCs under either excess of loss or quota share reinsurance agreements, depending on the structure of the individual program. The nominal portion of the risk that is not ceded to an SPC is retained in our Specialty P&C segment and may also be reinsured under our standard healthcare professional liability reinsurance program, depending on the policy limits provided. The remaining premium written in our alternative market business of $2.8 million and $2.4 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively, was 100% ceded to an unaffiliated captive insurer.
Excess of Loss Reinsurance Agreements
We generally reinsure risks under treaties (our excess of loss reinsurance agreements) pursuant to which the reinsurers agree to assume all or a portion of all risks that we insure above our individual risk retention levels, up to the maximum individual limits offered. Generally, these agreements are negotiated and renewed annually. Our HCPL treaty renews annually on October 1 and, for the October 1, 2020 renewal, we increased our retention to $2 million from $1 million and added provisions for reinstatement premiums which resulted in a reduction to the gross rate paid under the renewed treaty. Historically, our Medical Technology Liability treaty renewed annually on January 1; however, the treaty that renewed on January 1, 2020 renewed on a short-term basis and was renewed again for a full year term on October 1, 2020 along with our HCPL treaty. Our Medical Technology Liability treaty which renewed on October 1, 2020 renewed at a lower rate than the previous agreement, with an increase in retention to $2 million from $1 million. Our Workers' Compensation treaty renews annually on May 1. Our traditional workers' compensation treaty renewed May 1, 2020 at a higher rate than the previous agreement, with an increase in the AAD to 3.16% from 2.1% of subject earned premium, in excess of the $0.5 million retention per loss occurrence; all other material treaty terms were consistent with the expiring agreement. The significant coverages provided by our current excess of loss reinsurance agreements are detailed in the following table.
Excess of Loss Reinsurance Agreements
Healthcare
Professional Liability Medical Technology &
Life Sciences Products Workers'
Compensation - Traditional
(1) Effective October 1, 2020, one prepaid limit reinstatement of $21M and a second limit reinstatement of up to $21M for the second layer, subject to reinstatement premium, which attaches after the first reinstatement has been completely exhausted. All limit reinstatements thereafter require no additional premium.
(2) Prior to October 1, 2020, retention has been $1M.
(3) Historically, retention has ranged from 5% to 32.5%.
(4) Historically, retention has ranged from $1M to $2M.
(5) Includes an AAD where retention is 3.16% of subject earned premium in annual losses otherwise recoverable in excess of the $500K retention per loss occurrence.
Large HCPL risks that are above the limits of our basic reinsurance treaties are reinsured on a facultative basis, whereby the reinsurer agrees to insure a particular risk up to a designated limit. We also have in place a number of risk sharing arrangements that apply to the first $2 million of losses for certain large healthcare systems and other insurance entities, as well as with certain insurance agencies that produce business for us.
Other Reinsurance Arrangements
For the workers' compensation business ceded to Inova Re and Eastern Re, each SPC has in place its own reinsurance arrangements; which are illustrated in the following table.
Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance
Per Occurrence Coverage Aggregate Coverage
(1) The attachment point is based on a percentage of written premium within individual cells (average is 89%) and varies by cell.
Each SPC has participants and the profit or loss of each cell accrues fully to these cell participants. As previously discussed, we participate in certain SPCs to a varying degree. Each SPC maintains a loss fund initially equal to the difference between premium assumed by the cell and the ceding commission. The external participants of each cell provide collateral to us, typically in the form of a letter of credit, that is initially equal to the difference between the loss fund of the SPC (amount of funds available to pay losses after deduction of ceding commission) and the aggregate attachment point of the reinsurance. Over time, an SPC's retained profits are considered in the determination of the collateral amount required to be provided by the cell's external participants.
Within our Lloyd's Syndicates segment, Syndicate 1729 utilizes reinsurance to provide capacity to write larger limits of liability on individual risks, to provide protection against catastrophic loss and to provide protection against losses in excess of policy limits. The level of reinsurance that Syndicate 1729 purchases is dependent on a number of factors, including its underwriting risk appetite for catastrophic exposure, the specific risks inherent in each line or class of business written and the pricing, coverage and terms and conditions available from the reinsurance market. Reinsurance protection by line of business is as follows:
•Reinsurance is utilized on a per risk basis for the property insurance and casualty coverages in order to mitigate risk volatility.
•Catastrophic protection is utilized on both our property insurance and casualty coverages to protect against losses in excess of policy limits as well as natural catastrophes.
•Both quota share reinsurance and excess of loss reinsurance are utilized to manage the net loss exposure on our property reinsurance coverages.
•Property umbrella excess of loss reinsurance is utilized for peak catastrophe and frequency of catastrophe exposures.
•External excess of loss reinsurance is utilized by Syndicate 1729 to manage the net loss exposure on the specialty property and contingency coverages ceded to Syndicate 6131. For the second half of 2020, external quota share reinsurance was utilized by Syndicate 6131 to manage the net loss exposure on the specialty property and contingency coverages it assumed from Syndicate 1729 by ceding essentially half of the premium assumed to an unaffiliated insurer; this agreement was non-renewed on January 1, 2021 (see further discussion in the Segment Results - Lloyd's Syndicates section that follows).
Syndicate 1729 may still be exposed to losses that exceed the level of reinsurance purchased as well as to reinstatement premiums triggered by losses exceeding specified levels. Cash demands on Syndicate 1729 can vary significantly depending on the nature and intensity of a loss event. For significant reinsured catastrophe losses, the inability or unwillingness of the reinsurer to make timely payments under the terms of the reinsurance agreement could have an adverse effect on Syndicate 1729's liquidity.
Taxes
We are subject to the tax laws and regulations of the U.S., Cayman Islands and U.K. We file a consolidated U.S. federal income tax return that includes the parent company and its U.S. subsidiaries. Our filing obligations include a requirement to make quarterly payments of estimated taxes to the IRS using the corporate tax rate effective for the tax year. We did not make any quarterly estimated tax payments during the year ended December 31, 2020.
As a result of the CARES Act that was signed into law on March 27, 2020, as previously discussed, we now have the ability to carryback NOLs generated in tax years 2018, 2019 and 2020 for up to five years. We have an NOL of approximately $45.3 million from the 2020 tax year that will be carried back to the 2015 tax year and is expected to generate a tax refund of approximately $15.9 million. Additionally, we had an NOL of approximately $25.6 million from the 2019 tax year which was carried back to the 2014 tax year and generated a tax refund of approximately $9.0 million which we received in February 2021. Furthermore, our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was affected by the tax rate differential on the carryback of the 2020 and 2019 NOLs to the 2015 and 2014 tax years, respectively, when the federal statutory tax rate was 35% as compared to the current tax rate of 21%. See further discussion on our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 in the Segment Results - Corporate section that follows under the heading "Taxes." We have evaluated the other provisions of the CARES Act and concluded that they will not have a material impact on our financial position or results of operations. See further discussion in Note 5 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Litigation
We are involved in various legal actions related to insurance policies and claims handling including, but not limited to, claims asserted against us by policyholders. These types of legal actions arise in the ordinary course of business and, in accordance with GAAP for insurance entities, are generally considered as a part of our loss reserving process, which is described in detail in our Critical Accounting Estimates section under the heading "Reserve for Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses." We also have other direct actions against the Company unrelated to our claims activity which we evaluate and account for as a part of our other liabilities. For these corporate legal actions, we evaluate each case separately and establish what we believe is an appropriate reserve based on GAAP guidance related to contingent liabilities. As of December 31, 2020 there were no material reserves established for corporate legal actions.
Investing Activities and Related Cash Flows
Our investments at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 are comprised as follows:
At December 31, 2020, 99% of our investments in available-for-sale fixed maturity securities were rated and the average rating was A+. The distribution of our investments in available-for-sale fixed maturity securities by rating were as follows:
A detailed listing of our investment holdings as of December 31, 2020 is located under the Financial Information heading on the Investor Relations page of our website which can be reached directly at www.proassurance.com/investmentholdings or through links from the Investor Relations section of our website, investor.proassurance.com.
We manage our investments to ensure that we will have sufficient liquidity to meet our obligations, taking into consideration the timing of cash flows from our investments, including interest payments, dividends and principal payments, as well as the expected cash flows to be generated by our operations. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received and granted requests for premium relief for certain insureds that have been adversely impacted by the recent COVID-19 pandemic in the form of either premium credits or premium deferrals. While premium credits and deferrals granted during the year ended December 31, 2020 did not have a significant impact on our liquidity, additional premium relief efforts could have an impact on our cash flows to be generated from our operations in future quarters and could result in an increase to our allowance for expected credit losses related to our premiums receivable. In addition to the interest and dividends we will receive from our investments, we anticipate that between $50 million and $110 million of our portfolio will mature (or be paid down) each quarter over the next twelve months and become available, if needed, to meet our cash flow requirements. The primary outflow of cash at our insurance subsidiaries is related to paid losses and operating costs, including income taxes. The payment of individual claims cannot be predicted with certainty; therefore, we rely upon the history of paid claims in estimating the timing of future claims payments with consideration to current and anticipated industry trends and macroeconomic conditions, including the impacts of COVID-19. To the extent that we may have an unanticipated shortfall in cash, we may either liquidate securities or borrow funds under existing borrowing arrangements through our Revolving Credit Agreement and the FHLB system. Permitted borrowings under our Revolving Credit Agreement are $250 million with the possibility of an additional $50 million accordion feature, if successfully subscribed. Given the duration of our investments, we do not foresee a shortfall that would require us to meet operating cash needs through additional borrowings. Additional information regarding our Revolving Credit Agreement is detailed in Note 11 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
At December 31, 2020, our FAL was comprised of fixed maturity securities with a fair value of $95.0 million and cash and cash equivalents of $11.2 million deposited with Lloyd's. See further discussion in Note 3 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. During the third quarter of 2020, we received a return of approximately $32.3 million of FAL given the reduction in our participation in the results of Syndicate 1729 for the 2020 underwriting year to 29% from 61%.
Our investment portfolio continues to be primarily composed of high quality fixed income securities with approximately 94% of our fixed maturities being investment grade securities as determined by national rating agencies. The weighted average effective duration of our fixed maturity securities at December 31, 2020 was 3.16 years; the weighted average effective duration of our fixed maturity securities combined with our short-term securities was 2.78 years.
The carrying value and unfunded commitments for certain of our investments were as follows:
Investment fund LPs/LLCs are by nature less liquid and may involve more risk than other investments. We manage our risk through diversification of asset class and geographic location. At December 31, 2020, we had investments in 31 separate investment funds with a total carrying value of $282.8 million which represented approximately 8% of our total investments. Our investment fund LPs/LLCs generate earnings from trading portfolios, secured debt, debt securities, multi-strategy funds and private equity investments, and the performance of these LPs/LLCs is affected by the volatility of equity and credit markets. For our investments in LPs/LLCs, we record our allocable portion of the partnership operating income or loss as the results of the LPs/LLCs become available, typically following the end of a reporting period.
Acquisitions
We have entered into a definitive agreement to acquire NORCAL, an underwriter of medical professional liability insurance, subject to the demutualization of NORCAL Mutual, NORCAL's ultimate controlling party. Upon satisfaction of the various remaining regulatory approvals required, we are anticipating to close the transaction in the second quarter of 2021. Subject to NORCAL’s conversion from a mutual company to a stock company, we have agreed to acquire 100% of the converted company stock in exchange for base consideration of $450 million and contingent consideration of up to an additional $150 million depending on the development of NORCAL’s ultimate losses over a three-year period following the acquisition date. The actual final cost of the transaction could vary due to the ability of NORCAL’s policyholders to elect forms of consideration other than stock in the demutualization transaction as provided by California law. Those alternative consideration options are tied to an appraised value of NORCAL as determined by the California insurance regulator rather than the price per share we have agreed to pay for 100% of NORCAL assuming that all policyholders elect to receive stock. Further, the transaction is subject to a number of closing conditions, including a maximum threshold for one of the alternative forms of consideration in the demutualization, a minimum threshold for the number of NORCAL shares tendered to us, and various required regulatory approvals, as previously mentioned. The Agreement and Plan of Acquisition is included as Exhibit 10.19 of this report. We plan to utilize our Revolving Credit Agreement to partially finance the acquisition (see further discussion on our Revolving Credit Agreement in this section under the heading "Debt"). The COVID-19 pandemic’s potential disruption to our business operations may require us to access our Revolving Credit Agreement for other purposes including working capital, capital expenditures or other general corporate requirements. If needed, we may be required to obtain additional financing and our ability to arrange such financing or refinancing will depend on, among other factors, our financial position and performance, as well as prevailing market conditions and other factors beyond our control. As a result, we may be compelled to take additional measures to preserve our cash flow, including the reduction of operating expenses or reduction or suspension of dividend payments, at least until the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic improve. We believe that funds available under the Revolving Credit Agreement, along with cash generated from our operations and investment portfolio, will be sufficient to meet our liquidity needs.
Business Combinations and Ventures
There were no business combinations during the years ended December 31, 2020 or 2019.
Financing Activities and Related Cash Flows
Treasury Shares
Treasury share activity for 2020, 2019 and 2018 was as follows:
We did not repurchase any common shares subsequent to December 31, 2020 and as of February 19, 2021 our remaining Board authorization was approximately $110 million.
ProAssurance Shareholder Dividends
Our Board declared cash dividends during 2020, 2019 and 2018 as follows:
Each dividend was paid in the month following the quarter in which it was declared. Cash dividends totaling $39 million, $93 million and $316 million were paid during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Given our current earnings profile, the effects that underlying conditions in the broader insurance marketplace continue to have on our results and the uncertainties introduced by the COVID-19 pandemic, our Board made the decision to reduce our quarterly cash dividend from $0.31 per share to $0.05 per share, beginning with the dividend that was declared during the second quarter of 2020. Any decision to pay future cash dividends is subject to the Board’s final determination after a comprehensive review of financial performance, future expectations and other factors deemed relevant by the Board.
Debt
At December 31, 2020, our debt included $250 million of outstanding unsecured senior notes. The notes bear interest at 5.3% annually and are due in 2023 although they may be redeemed in whole or part prior to maturity. There are no financial covenants associated with these notes.
We have a Revolving Credit Agreement, which expires in November 2024, that may be used for general corporate purposes, including, but not limited to, short-term working capital, share repurchases as authorized by the Board and support for other activities, such as the planned acquisition of NORCAL, as previously discussed under the heading "Acquisitions." Our Revolving Credit Agreement permits borrowings of up to $250 million as well as the possibility of a $50 million accordion feature, if successfully subscribed. At December 31, 2020, there were no outstanding borrowings on our Revolving Credit Agreement; we are in compliance with the financial covenants of the Revolving Credit Agreement.
We have Mortgage Loans with one lender in connection with the recapitalization of two office buildings, which mature in December 2027. The Mortgage Loans accrue interest at three-month LIBOR plus 1.325% with principal and interest payable on a quarterly basis. At December 31, 2020, the outstanding balance of the Mortgage Loans was approximately $36 million; we are in compliance with the financial covenant of the Mortgage Loans.
Additional information regarding our debt is provided in Note 11 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
We utilize an interest rate cap agreement with a notional amount of $35 million to manage our exposure to increases in LIBOR on our Mortgage Loans. Per the interest rate cap agreement, we are entitled to receive cash payments if and when the three-month LIBOR exceeds 2.35%. Additional information on our interest rate cap agreement is provided in Note 11 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Two of our insurance subsidiaries are members of an FHLB. Through membership, those subsidiaries have access to secured cash advances which can be used for liquidity purposes or other operational needs. In order for us to use FHLB proceeds, regulatory approvals may be required depending on the nature of the transaction. To date, those subsidiaries have not materially utilized their membership for borrowing purposes.
Results of Operations - Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Selected consolidated financial data for each period is summarized in the table below:
Executive Summary of Operations
The following sections provide an overview of our consolidated and segment results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. See the Segment Results sections that follow for additional information regarding each segment's results. For a full discussion of the changes in the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, please refer to Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" section of ProAssurance's December 31, 2019 report on Form 10-K. Any significant retrospective revisions in the presentation of the changes in the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 as reported in ProAssurance's December 31, 2019 report on Form 10-K are located in this report under the section that follows titled "Results of Operations - Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018."
Revenues
The following table shows our consolidated and segment net premiums earned:
For the year ended December 31, 2020, consolidated net premiums earned included $14.3 million of tail premium written and fully earned during the second quarter of 2020 in connection with a large national healthcare account in our Specialty P&C segment (see further discussion under the heading "Expenses" in this section and in our Segment Results - Specialty Property & Casualty section that follows). Consolidated net premiums earned for the year ended December 31, 2019 included $2.7 million of premium written and fully earned from a loss portfolio transfer entered into during the third quarter of 2019 in our Specialty P&C segment (see further discussion in our Segment Results - Specialty Property & Casualty section that follows). Excluding the impact of the large national healthcare account's tail policy premium and the 2019 loss portfolio transfer, consolidated net premiums earned decreased $66.4 million during 2020 as compared to 2019. All of our operating segments contributed to the remaining decrease in consolidated net premiums earned, particularly our Specialty P&C segment due to our re-underwriting efforts as we continue to emphasize careful risk selection, rate adequacy and a willingness to walk away from business that does not fit our goal of achieving a long-term underwriting profit. For our Workers' Compensation Insurance and Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance segments, the decrease in net premiums earned primarily reflected the competitive workers' compensation market conditions and, for the Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance segment, the reduction in premium funding for a large workers' compensation alternative market program. The decrease in net premiums earned in our Lloyd's Syndicates segment was driven by our decreased participation in the results of Syndicate 1729 for the 2020 underwriting year to 29% from 61%.
The following table shows our consolidated net investment result:
The decrease in our consolidated net investment result for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 was driven by a decrease in our allocation to equities and lower yields on our short-term investments and corporate debt securities given the actions taken by the Federal Reserve to aggressively reduce interest rates in response to COVID-19. Equity in earnings (loss) of unconsolidated subsidiaries includes our share of the operating results of interests we hold in certain LPs/LLCs as well as operating losses associated with our tax credit partnership investments, which are designed to generate returns in the form of tax credits and tax-deductible project operating losses. The decrease in our equity in earnings (loss) of unconsolidated subsidiaries in 2020 as compared to 2019 was due to lower reported earnings from several LPs/LLCs driven by
the volatility in the global financial markets related to COVID-19, partially offset by lower tax credit partnership operating losses.
The following table shows our total consolidated net realized investment gains (losses):
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $1.5 million of credit-related impairment losses in earnings and a nominal amount of non-credit impairment losses in OCI. The credit-related impairment losses recognized in 2020 primarily related to corporate bonds in the energy and consumer sectors. Additionally, 2020 included credit-related impairment losses related to four corporate bonds in various sectors, which were sold in 2020. The non-credit impairment losses recognized during 2020 related to three corporate bonds in the energy and consumer sectors. We recognized credit-related impairment losses in earnings of $0.8 million and nominal amount of non-credit impairment losses in OCI during 2019, both of which related to three corporate bonds in the energy and consumer sectors.
We recognized $17.2 million of consolidated other net realized investment gains in 2020, driven by realized gains on the sale of our available-for-sale fixed maturities and equity investments which were partially offset by unrealized holding losses resulting from decreases in the fair value on our equity portfolio due to the volatility in the global financial markets related to COVID-19. Consolidated other net realized investment gains recognized in 2019 reflected both realized gains from the sale of equity investments and unrealized holdings gains on our equity portfolio due to the improvement in the market since December 31, 2018, which caused our equity securities to increase in value. See further discussion in our Segment Results - Corporate section that follows.
Expenses
The following table shows our consolidated and segment net loss ratios and net loss development:
The primary drivers of the change in our consolidated current accident year net loss ratio for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 were as follows:
Our consolidated current accident year net loss ratio in 2020 and 2019 was impacted by a large national healthcare account. In 2019, we increased our reserve estimates in our Specialty P&C segment for this account's claims-made policy based on our in-depth review of our current accident year reserve which we believed best reflected emerging data at that time. In addition, we recognized a PDR of $9.2 million during the fourth quarter of 2019 related to this account which increased current accident year net losses. The PDR represented an estimated premium deficiency associated with the unearned premium of this account's claims-made policy as of the end of 2019. During 2020, this PDR was amortized back into current accident year net losses which offset the impact of the losses incurred in 2020 associated with the earned premium related to this account's claims-made policy. During the second quarter of 2020, the policy term associated with this account's claims-made policy expired. This account did not renew on terms offered by us and the insured exercised its contractual option to purchase the extended reporting endorsement or "tail" coverage resulting in a net underwriting loss of $45.7 million in our Specialty P&C segment during the second quarter of 2020. The net impact of this large national healthcare account resulted in a 2.0 percentage point increase in our consolidated current accident year net loss ratio in 2020 as compared to 2019. See further discussion on the large national healthcare account in our Segment Results - Specialty Property & Casualty section that follows. Also during the second quarter of 2020, we established a $10 million reserve in our Specialty P&C segment for COVID-19 which increased our current accident year net loss ratio by 1.3 percentage points in 2020 (see further discussion in our Segment Results - Specialty Property & Casualty section that follows). In addition, our consolidated current accident year net loss ratio in 2019 included the impact of an increase to our reserve in our Specialty P&C segment related to DDR coverage endorsements which accounted for 0.8 percentage points of the decrease in the 2020 ratio as compared to 2019. Furthermore, our consolidated current accident year net loss ratio in 2019 was affected by a $10 million reserve established by an SPC at Eastern Re associated with an assumed E&O liability policy which accounted for 1.2 percentage points of the decrease in our consolidated current accident year net loss ratio in 2020 as compared to 2019 (see further discussion in our Segment Results - Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance section that follows). Excluding the impacts of the previously discussed items, our consolidated current accident year net loss ratio decreased 1.8 percentage points in 2020 as compared to 2019. This remaining decrease was driven by a lower current accident year net loss ratio in our Specialty P&C segment primarily due to decreases in certain loss ratios in 2020 in our Standard Physician, Specialty and Small Business Unit lines as a result of our re-underwriting efforts and focus on rate adequacy (see further discussion in our Segment Results - Specialty P&C section that follows).
In both 2020 and 2019, our consolidated calendar year net loss ratio was lower than our consolidated current accident year net loss ratio due to the recognition of consolidated net favorable prior year reserve development, as shown in the previous table. Consolidated net favorable prior year reserve development recognized in 2019 included $51.5 million of unfavorable prior year reserve development in our Specialty P&C segment related to the previously mentioned large national healthcare account that has experienced losses far exceeding the assumptions we made when underwriting the account, beginning in 2016. Excluding the unfavorable development related to the large national healthcare account in 2019, our consolidated net favorable prior year reserve development was $12.9 million lower as compared to 2019 driven by our Specialty P&C segment given our concerns around elevated loss severity in the broader medical professional liability industry, including our Specialty line of business, and the possibility of delays in reporting and uncertainty surrounding the length and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic. In both our Specialty P&C and Workers' Compensation Insurance segments, we have observed a reduction in claims frequency as compared to 2019, some of which is likely associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. As it relates to our Workers' Compensation Insurance segment, legislative and regulatory bodies in certain states have changed or are attempting to change compensability requirements and presumptions for certain types of workers related to COVID-19 claims. These endeavors could have an adverse impact on the frequency and severity related to COVID-19 claims. Furthermore, as it relates to both our Workers' Compensation Insurance and Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance segments, the current economic conditions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic have introduced significant risk of a prolonged recession, which could have an adverse impact on our return to wellness efforts and the ability of injured workers to return to work, resulting in a potential reduction in favorable claim trends in future periods.
Our consolidated and segment underwriting expense ratios were as follows:
The change in our consolidated underwriting expense ratio for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily attributable to the following:
Our consolidated underwriting expense ratio in 2020 was impacted by a decline in consolidated net premiums earned which outpaced the decline in consolidated DPAC amortization, accounting for 2.0 percentage points of the increase in the ratio, driven by lower earned premium in our Specialty P&C and Workers' Compensation Insurance segments. Our consolidated underwriting expense ratio also reflected one-time expenses of $5.4 million in 2020 mainly comprised of early retirement benefits granted to certain employees and expenses associated with the restructuring of our HCPL field office organization. In addition, our consolidated underwriting expense ratio was impacted by an increase in professional fees in our Corporate segment associated with our planned acquisition of NORCAL as well as corporate legal expenses. The remaining decrease in our consolidated underwriting expense ratio in 2020 of 2.2 percentage points primarily reflected the impact of a decrease in various operational expenses resulting from incremental improvements over the past year in our Specialty P&C segment including organizational structure enhancements and improved operating efficiencies. In addition, the remaining decrease in our consolidated underwriting expense ratio reflected lower operating expenses in our Lloyd's Syndicates segment due to our reduced participation in Syndicate 1729, lower consolidated travel-related costs due to COVID-19 and, to a lesser extent, a reduction of $1.7 million in employer contributions to the ProAssurance Savings Plan (see further discussion in Note 17 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements).
Taxes
Our effective tax rates for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
We recognized an income tax benefit in both 2020 and 2019. Our effective tax rates for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were different from the statutory federal income tax rate of 21% primarily due to the benefit recognized from the tax credits transferred to us from our tax credit partnership investments. In addition, our effective tax rate in 2020 was also impacted by the non-deductible portion of the goodwill impairment related to the Specialty P&C reporting unit recognized during the third quarter of 2020. See further discussion of the goodwill impairment under the heading "Goodwill / Intangibles" in the Critical Accounting Estimates section and Notes 1 and 6 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements and further information on other notable items impacting our effective tax rate in the Segment Results - Corporate section that follows under the heading "Taxes."
Operating Ratio
Our operating ratio is our combined ratio, less our investment income ratio. This ratio provides the combined effect of underwriting profitability and investment income. Our operating ratio for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was as follows:
Our operating ratio for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 decreased approximately 3.5 percentage points driven by a lower net loss ratio in our Specialty P&C segment. The decrease in our net loss ratio in our Specialty P&C segment was driven by the change in prior year reserve development and, to a lesser extent, an improvement in our current accident year net loss ratio primarily the result of our re-underwriting efforts and focus on rate adequacy. See previous discussion in this section under the heading "Expenses" and further discussion in our Segment Operating Results - Specialty Property & Casualty section that follows under the heading "Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses." The decrease in our operating ratio in 2020 as compared to 2019 was partially offset by a lower investment income ratio primarily due to a decrease in our allocation to equities and lower yields on our short-term investments and corporate debt securities given the recent actions taken by the Federal Reserve in response to COVID-19.
ROE
ROE is calculated as net income (loss) divided by the average of beginning and ending shareholders’ equity. This ratio measures our overall after-tax profitability and shows how efficiently capital is being used. ROE for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was as follows:
Our ROE for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily reflected a $161.1 million pre-tax goodwill impairment recognized related to the Specialty P&C reporting unit during the third quarter of 2020, which decreased our ROE by approximately 11.2 percentage points. See further discussion of the goodwill impairment under the heading "Goodwill / Intangibles" in the Critical Accounting Estimates section and Notes 1 and 6 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Additionally, the decrease in our ROE in 2020 as compared to 2019 reflected lower consolidated net realized investment gains
and, to a lesser extent, a decrease in our consolidated net investment income (see previous discussion in this section under the heading "Revenues").
Book Value per Share
Book value per share is calculated as total shareholders' equity at the balance sheet date divided by the total number of common shares outstanding. This ratio measures the net worth of the Company to shareholders on a per share basis. Our book value per share at December 31, 2020 as compared to December 31, 2019 is shown in the following table.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Non-GAAP operating income (loss) is a financial measure that is widely used to evaluate performance within the insurance sector. In calculating Non-GAAP operating income (loss), we have excluded the effects of the items listed in the following table that do not reflect normal results. We believe Non-GAAP operating income (loss) presents a useful view of the performance of our insurance operations, however it should be considered in conjunction with net income (loss) computed in accordance with GAAP.
The following table is a reconciliation of net income (loss) to Non-GAAP operating income (loss):
(1) Net realized investment gains (losses) on investments related to SPCs are recognized in our Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance segment. SPC results, including any realized gain or loss, that are attributable to external cell participants are reflected in the SPC dividend expense (income). To be consistent with our exclusion of net realized investment gains (losses) recognized in earnings, we are excluding the portion of net realized investment gains (losses) that is included in the SPC dividend expense (income) which is attributable to the external cell participants.
(2) The 21% rate is the statutory tax rate associated with the taxable or tax deductible items listed above. The taxes associated with the net realized investment gains (losses) related to SPCs in our Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance segment are paid by the individual SPCs and are not included in our consolidated tax provision or net income (loss); therefore, both the net realized investment gains (losses) from our Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance segment and the adjustment to exclude the portion of net realized investment gains (losses) included in the SPC dividend expense (income) in the table above are not tax effected. The portion of the 2020 goodwill impairment loss that is tax deductible was tax affected at the statutory tax rate (21%). The remaining portion of the 2020 goodwill impairment loss is not tax deductible and therefore had no associated income tax benefit.
Segment Results - Specialty Property & Casualty
Our Specialty P&C segment focuses on professional liability insurance and medical technology liability insurance as discussed in Note 16 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Segment results reflected pre-tax underwriting profit or loss from these insurance lines. Segment results included the following:
Premiums Written
Changes in our premium volume within our Specialty P&C segment are driven by four primary factors: (1) the amount of new business written, (2) our retention of existing business, (3) the premium charged for business that is renewed, which is affected by rates charged and by the amount and type of coverage an insured chooses to purchase and (4) the timing of premium written through multi-period policies. In addition, premium volume may periodically be affected by shifts in the timing of renewals between periods. The professional liability market, which accounts for a majority of the revenues in this segment, remains challenging as physicians continue joining hospitals or larger group practices and are thus no longer purchasing individual or group policies in the standard market. In addition, some competitors have chosen to compete primarily on price; both factors may impact our ability to write new business and retain existing business. Furthermore, the insurance and reinsurance markets have historically been cyclical, characterized by extended periods of intense price competition and other periods of reduced competition. The professional liability area has been particularly affected by these cycles. Underwriting cycles are generally driven by an excess of capacity available and actively pursuing business that is deemed profitable. Changes in the frequency and severity of losses may affect the cycles of the insurance and reinsurance markets significantly. During “soft markets” where price competition is high and underwriting profits are poor, growth and retention of business become challenging which may result in reduced premium volumes.
As a result of COVID-19, we continue to experience downward pressure on our premium volume resulting from new business disruptions. We have also experienced reductions in exposure due to insureds moving to part-time as a result of a general reduction in non-COVID-19 healthcare consumption and suspension of elective medical procedures. However, the length and magnitude of such changes depends on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. In an effort to provide premium relief for insureds adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and to adjust for changes in exposures we granted premium credits totaling $4.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Gross, ceded and net premiums written were as follows:
Gross Premiums Written
During the second quarter of 2020, we reorganized our presentation of gross premiums written by component and related metrics below to better align with the current internal management reporting structure within the segment. All prior period information has been recast to conform to the current period presentation.
Gross premiums written by component were as follows:
(1)Standard Physician premium was our greatest source of premium revenues in both 2020 and 2019 and is predominately comprised of twelve month term policies. The decrease in twelve month term policies in 2020 was driven by retention losses and, to a lesser extent, premium credits granted as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by an increase in renewal pricing, conversion of twenty-four month term policies and, to a lesser extent, new business written. In addition, twelve month term policies in 2020 included adjustments related to loss sensitive policies which increased written and earned premium. Renewal pricing increases in 2020 reflect the rising loss cost environment and new business written reflects the impact of lower submissions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic as well as general market conditions. The lower retention for 2020 is largely attributable to our focus on underwriting discipline as we continue to emphasize careful risk selection, rate adequacy, improved contract terms and a willingness to walk away from business that does not fit our goal of achieving a long-term underwriting profit. In addition, we have implemented a targeted state strategy to reassess our underwriting appetite in certain unprofitable states which impacted our retention rate in the current period. We will continue to perform a detailed evaluation of venues, specialties and other areas to improve our underwriting results. These strategies resulted in our non-renewal of several large policies totaling $8.7 million in 2020. We anticipate a lower than average level of retention to persist as we continue to reevaluate certain states and books of business and set our rates to reflect our observations of higher severity trends. Standard Physician premium also includes twenty-four month term premiums that were offered to physician insureds in one selected jurisdiction. The decrease in twenty-four month term premiums in 2020 primarily reflected the normal cycle of renewals (policies subject to renewal in 2020 were previously written in 2018, rather than in 2019). In addition, the decrease in twenty-four month term premiums also reflected our re-underwriting of the majority of renewed policies to twelve month term policies, as we ceased offering twenty-four month term policies beginning in the second quarter of 2020.
(2)Custom Physician premium includes large complex physician groups, multi-state physician groups and non-standard physicians and is written primarily on an excess and surplus lines basis. The decrease in premium in 2020 was driven by retention losses due to our focus on underwriting discipline as we continue to emphasize careful risk selection, rate adequacy, improved contract terms and a willingness to walk away from business that does not fit our goal of achieving a
long-term underwriting profit. Included in these retention losses is a large national healthcare account that did not renew on terms offered by us during the second quarter of 2020 which resulted in a $9.0 million decrease in Custom Physician premium and, as a result, a decrease to our Specialty retention rate of 4 percentage points; this account exercised its contractual option to purchase extended reporting endorsement or "tail" coverage (see further discussion in footnote 7 that follows). We anticipate retention rates to begin to normalize going forward as we substantially completed our re-underwriting efforts as of the end of 2020, except for a few large accounts that were renewed on a two-year term in 2019 that will be carefully evaluated in 2021. The decrease in Custom Physician premium in 2020 as compared to 2019 also reflects net timing differences of $1.9 million related to the prior year renewal of two policies, partially offset by an increase in renewal pricing and, to a lesser extent, new business written. Renewal pricing increases in 2020 reflect the rising loss cost environment and new business written reflects the impact of lower submissions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic as well as general market conditions.
(3)Hospitals and Facilities premium (which includes hospitals, surgery centers and miscellaneous medical facilities) increased in 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily due to an increase in renewal pricing and, to a lesser extent, new business written, including the addition of two policies totaling $3.2 million, partially offset by retention losses. Renewal pricing increases in 2020 reflect rate increases and contract modifications that we believe are appropriate given the current loss environment and new business written reflects lower submissions as a result of COVID-19 as well as general market conditions. Retention losses in 2020 were driven by our decision not to renew certain products and the loss of two large policies totaling $4.3 million. As we have substantially completed our re-underwriting efforts on certain books of business as of the end of the third quarter of 2020, we anticipate retention rates to begin to normalize going forward.
(4)Senior Care premium includes facilities specializing in long term residential care primarily for the elderly ranging from independent living through skilled nursing. Our Senior Care premium decreased in 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily due to retention losses, partially offset by new business written. Retention losses in 2020 were driven by our decision not to renew certain classes of Senior Care business based on our expectations of poor loss performance, including our non-renewal of two large policies totaling $7.2 million. As of the end of the third quarter of 2020, we have completed our re-underwriting efforts on certain books of business and anticipate retention rates to begin to normalize going forward.
(5)We offer custom alternative risk solutions including loss portfolio transfers for healthcare entities who, most commonly, are exiting a line of business, changing an insurance approach or simply preferring to transfer risk. In the third quarter of 2019, we entered into a loss portfolio transfer with a regional hospital group which resulted in $0.9 million of retroactive premium written and fully earned in 2019 (see further discussion in footnote 7 that follows).
(6)Our Small Business Unit is primarily comprised of premium associated with podiatrists, legal professionals, dentists and chiropractors. Our Small Business Unit premium decreased in 2020 as compared to 2019 driven by retention losses and, to a lesser extent, reductions in exposure of $2.0 million primarily due to our insureds moving to part-time as a result of a general reduction in non-COVID-19 healthcare consumption, partially offset by new business written and, to a lesser extent, an increase in renewal pricing. The increase in renewal pricing in 2020 was primarily the result of an increase in the rate charged for certain renewed policies in select states.
(7)We offer extended reporting endorsement or "tail" coverage to insureds who discontinue their claims-made coverage with us, and we also periodically offer tail coverage through stand-alone policies. Tail coverage premiums are generally 100% earned in the period written because the policies insure only incidents that occurred in prior periods and are not cancellable. The amount of tail coverage premium written can vary significantly from period to period. The increase in 2020 as compared to 2019 was due to a large national healthcare account that exercised its contractual option to purchase tail coverage which resulted in $14.3 million of one-time premium written and fully earned in the second quarter of 2020, somewhat offset by the tail coverage provided in connection with the aforementioned third quarter 2019 loss portfolio transfer.
(8)Our Medical Technology Liability business is marketed throughout the U.S.; coverage is typically offered on a primary basis, within specified limits, to manufacturers and distributors of medical technology and life sciences products including entities conducting human clinical trials. In addition to the previously listed factors that affect our premium volume, our Medical Technology Liability premium is impacted by the sales volume of insureds. Our Medical Technology Liability premium remained relatively unchanged in 2020 as compared to 2019 as retention losses and renewal pricing decreases were offset by new business written. New business written in 2020 reflects the addition of a few COVID-19 related policies. Retention losses in 2020 are primarily attributable to an increase in competition on terms and pricing. Renewal pricing decreases in 2020 are primarily due to changes in the sales volume of certain insureds, including changes in COVID-19 related exposure on several renewing policies.
(9)This component of gross premiums written includes all other product lines within our Specialty P&C segment. The decrease in 2020 was due to the effect of our non-renewal of a $1.5 million specialty contractual liability policy.
(10)Certain components of our gross premiums written include alternative market premiums. We currently cede either all or a portion of the alternative market premium, net of reinsurance, to three SPCs of our wholly owned Cayman Islands reinsurance subsidiaries, Inova Re and Eastern Re, which are reported in our Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance segment (see further discussion in the Ceded Premiums Written section that follows). The portion not ceded to the SPCs is retained within our Specialty P&C segment.
The decrease in alternative market gross premiums written in 2020 as compared to 2019 was due to retention losses driven by the loss of a $1.4 million Senior Care policy that chose to utilize self-insurance, slightly offset by policy endorsements.
We are committed to a rate structure that will allow us to fulfill our obligations to our insureds, while generating competitive long-term returns for our shareholders. Our pricing continues to be based on expected losses as indicated by our historical loss data and available industry loss data. In recent years, this practice has resulted in gradual rate increases and we anticipate further rate increases due to indications of increasing loss severity. Additionally, the pricing of our business includes the effects of filed rates, surcharges and discounts. Renewal pricing also reflects changes in our exposure base, deductibles, self-insurance retention limits and other policy terms and conditions.
The change in renewal pricing for our Specialty P&C segment, including by major component, was as follows:
New business written by major component on a direct basis was as follows:
For our Specialty P&C segment, we calculate retention as annualized renewed premium divided by all annualized premium subject to renewal. Retention is affected by a number of factors. We may lose insureds to competitors or to alternative insurance mechanisms such as risk retention groups or self-insurance entities (often when physicians join hospitals or large group practices) or due to pricing or other issues. We may choose not to renew an insured as a result of our underwriting evaluation. Insureds may also terminate coverage because they have left the practice of medicine for various reasons, principally for retirement, death or disability, but also for personal reasons.
Retention for our Specialty P&C segment, including by major component, was as follows:
Ceded Premiums Written
Ceded premiums represent the amounts owed to our reinsurers for their assumption of a portion of our losses. For our HCPL and Medical Technology Liability excess of loss reinsurance arrangements in effect prior to October 1, 2020, we generally retained the first $1 million in risk insured by us and ceded coverages in excess of this amount. Effective October 1, 2020, we generally retain the first $2 million in risk insured by us and cede coverages in excess of this amount. For our HCPL coverages, we will also retain from 0% to 14.5% of the next $24 million of risk for coverages in excess of $2 million. For our Medical Technology Liability treaty which also renewed effective October 1, 2020, we also retain 2.5% of the next $8 million of risk for coverages in excess of $2 million. These changes in terms for both our HCPL and Medical Technology Liability treaties resulted in a reduction to the gross rate paid for the treaty year effective October 1, 2020. We pay our reinsurers a ceding premium in exchange for their accepting the risk, and in certain of our excess of loss arrangements, the ultimate amount of which is determined by the loss experience of the business ceded, subject to certain minimum and maximum amounts.
Ceded premiums written were as follows:
(1)We generally reinsure risks under our excess of loss reinsurance arrangements pursuant to which the reinsurers agree to assume all or a portion of all risks that we insure above our individual risk retention levels, up to the maximum individual limits offered. Premium due to reinsurers also fluctuates with the volume of written premium subject to cession under the arrangement. In certain of our excess of loss reinsurance arrangements, the premium due to the reinsurer is determined by the loss experience of that business reinsured, subject to certain minimum and maximum amounts. The decrease in ceded premiums written under our excess of loss reinsurance arrangements in 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily reflected a decrease in the overall volume of gross premiums written subject to cession and, to a lesser extent, certain of our reinsurance arrangements reaching maximum limits eligible for cession on treaty years effective October 1, 2017 and 2018. The decrease in ceded premiums written in 2020 also reflected the reduced rate on the treaty year effective October 1, 2020, partially offset by the effect of changes to both minimum and maximum limits for the treaty year effective October 1, 2019.
(2)We have entered into various shared risk arrangements, including quota share, fronting and captive arrangements, with certain large healthcare systems and other insurance entities. These arrangements include our Ascension Health and CAPAssurance programs. While we cede a large portion of the premium written under these arrangements, they provide us an opportunity to grow net premium through strategic partnerships. Effective October 1, 2020, our arrangement with CAPAssurance was mutually dissolved as a result of our pending acquisition with NORCAL and their concentration in the state of California. The decrease in ceded premiums written under our shared risk arrangements in 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily due to a decrease in premium ceded to our Ascension Health program, our non-renewal of two large policies in certain of our other shared risk arrangements and, to a lesser extent, the aforementioned dissolution of our arrangement with CAPAssurance.
(3)As previously discussed, as a part of our alternative market solutions, all or a portion of certain healthcare premium written is ceded to SPCs in our Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance segment under either excess of loss or quota share reinsurance agreements, depending on the structure of the individual program. See the Segment Results - Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance section for further discussion on the cession to the SPCs from our Specialty P&C segment. The decrease in premiums ceded to SPCs during 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily due to the loss of one large Senior Care policy (see discussion in footnote 10 under the heading "Gross Premiums Written").
(4)Given the length of time that it takes to resolve our claims, many years may elapse before all losses recoverable under a reinsurance arrangement are known. As a part of the process of estimating our loss reserve we also make estimates regarding the amounts recoverable under our reinsurance arrangements. As previously discussed, the premiums ultimately ceded under certain of our excess of loss reinsurance arrangements are subject to the losses ceded under the arrangements. As part of the review of our reserves during 2020 and 2019, we increased our estimate of expected losses and associated recoveries for prior year ceded losses, as well as our estimate of ceded premiums owed to reinsurers; however, this increase was lower in 2020 as compared to 2019 due to reaching the maximum level of premium due under certain prior year excess of loss arrangements. Changes to estimates of premiums ceded related to prior accident years are fully earned in the period the changes in estimates occur.
Ceded Premiums Ratio
As shown in the table below, our ceded premiums ratio was affected in both 2020 and 2019 by revisions to our estimate of premiums owed to reinsurers related to coverages provided in prior accident years.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 the ceded premiums ratio was relatively unchanged as compared to 2019.
Net Premiums Earned
Net premiums earned consist of gross premiums earned less the portion of earned premiums that we cede to our reinsurers for their assumption of a portion of our losses. Because premiums are generally earned pro rata over the entire policy period, fluctuations in premiums earned tend to lag those of premiums written. Generally, our policies carry a term of one year; however, prior to the third quarter of 2020, we wrote certain Standard Physician policies with a twenty-four month term, and a few of our Medical Technology Liability policies have a multi-year term. Tail coverage premiums are generally 100% earned in the period written because the policies insure only incidents that occurred in prior periods and are not cancellable. Retroactive coverage premiums are 100% earned at the inception of the contract, as all of the associated underlying loss events occurred in the past. Additionally, any ceded premium changes due to changes to estimates of premiums owed under reinsurance agreements for prior accident years are fully earned in the period of change.
Net premiums earned were as follows:
The decrease in gross premiums earned in 2020 as compared to 2019 was driven by the pro rata effect of a decrease in the volume of written premium during the preceding twelve months, predominantly in our Specialty line of business, due to our re-underwriting efforts. The decrease in gross premiums earned also reflects the effect of a prior year loss portfolio transfer which resulted in $2.7 million of one-time premium written and fully earned in 2019 (see previous discussion in footnotes 5 and 7 under the heading "Gross Premiums Written"). The decrease in gross premiums earned in 2020 was somewhat offset by premium adjustments related to loss sensitive policies which increased earned premium by $2.9 million and decreased earned premium by $1.6 million in 2019. In addition, the decrease in gross premiums earned was largely offset by $14.3 million of one-time premium written and fully earned in the second quarter of 2020 associated with the tail coverage purchased by a large national healthcare account (see previous discussion in footnote 7 under the heading "Gross Premiums Written").
The decrease in ceded premiums earned during 2020 as compared to 2019 reflected the effect of adjustments made during 2020 and 2019 to ceded premiums owed under reinsurance agreements related to prior accident year losses. After removing the effect of prior accident year ceded premium adjustments from both years, ceded premiums earned decreased $5.2 million in 2020 as compared to 2019. The remaining decrease was driven by the pro rata effect of a decrease in premium ceded under our shared risk and excess of loss arrangements during the preceding twelve months.
Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses
The determination of calendar year losses involves the actuarial evaluation of incurred losses for the current accident year and the actuarial re-evaluation of incurred losses for prior accident years, including an evaluation of the reserve amounts required for ECO/XPL losses.
Accident year refers to the accounting period in which the insured event becomes a liability of the insurer. For claims-made policies, which represent the majority of the premiums written in our Specialty P&C segment, the insured event generally becomes a liability when the event is first reported to us. For occurrence policies, the insured event becomes a liability when the event takes place. For retroactive coverages, the insured event becomes a liability at inception of the underlying contract. We believe that measuring losses on an accident year basis is the best measure of the underlying profitability of the premiums earned in that period, since it associates policy premiums earned with the estimate of the losses incurred related to those policy premiums.
The following table summarizes calendar year net loss ratios by separating losses between the current accident year and all prior accident years. Additionally, the table shows our current accident year net loss ratios were affected by revisions to our estimate of premiums owed to reinsurers related to coverages provided in prior accident years. The net loss ratios for our Specialty P&C segment were as follows:
(1)Net losses, as specified, divided by net premiums earned.
(2)During 2020 and 2019, we increased the premiums owed under reinsurance agreements for prior accident years which decreased net premiums earned (the denominator of the current accident year ratio). See the discussion in the Premiums section for our Specialty P&C segment under the heading "Ceded Premiums Written" for additional information.
(3)The current accident year net loss ratio, excluding the effect of prior year ceded premium adjustments (as shown in the table above), decreased 0.9 percentage points as compared to 2019. The change in the current accident year net loss ratio was primarily attributable to the following:
Our current accident year net loss ratio in 2020 and 2019 was impacted by a large national healthcare account. In 2019, we increased our reserve estimates for this account's claims-made policy during the fourth quarter of 2019 based on our in-depth review of our current accident year reserve which we believed best reflected emerging data at that time. In addition, we recognized a PDR of $9.2 million during the fourth quarter of 2019 related to this account which increased current accident year net losses. The PDR represented an estimated premium deficiency associated with the unearned premium of this account's claims-made policy as of the end of 2019. During 2020, this PDR was amortized back into current accident year net losses which offset the impact of the losses incurred in 2020 associated with the earned premium related to this account's claims-made policy. During the second quarter of 2020, the policy
term associated with this account's claims-made policy expired. This account did not renew on terms offered by us and the insured exercised its contractual option to purchase the extended reporting endorsement or "tail" coverage resulting in a net underwriting loss of $45.7 million in 2020. The net impact of this large national healthcare account resulted in a 2.9 percentage point increase in our current accident year net loss ratio in 2020 as compared to 2019. Also during the second quarter of 2020, we established a $10 million reserve for COVID-19; no adjustment has been made to this reserve since the second quarter of 2020. This reserve represents our best estimate of ultimate COVID-19 related losses based on currently available information and reported incidents, and accounted for a 2.2 percentage point increase in our current accident year net loss ratio in 2020. As a result of our actuarial analysis performed at the end of 2019, we increased our reserves related to DDR coverage endorsements which accounted for approximately 1.5 percentage points of the decrease in the current accident year net loss ratio in 2020 as compared to 2019; no adjustment was made to these reserves in 2020. After removing the impact of the large national healthcare account in both 2020 and 2019, the 2020 COVID-19 reserve and actuarial adjustment to our DDR reserves in 2019, our current accident year net loss ratio in 2020 improved 4.5 percentage points primarily reflecting the impact of decreases in certain loss ratios during 2020 and, to a lesser extent, the effect of changes in premium adjustments related to loss sensitive policies (see previous discussion under the heading "Net Premiums Earned"). The decreases in loss ratios during 2020 were primarily in our Standard Physician, Specialty and Small Business Unit lines of business as a result of our re-underwriting efforts and focus on rate adequacy.
We re-evaluate our previously established reserve each quarter based upon the most recently completed actuarial analysis supplemented by any new analysis, information or trends that have emerged since the date of that study. We also take into account currently available industry trend information. We continue to see elevated loss severity in the broader medical professional liability industry and are observing indications of these increased severity trends in our paid loss data. While we have established a reserve for COVID-19 related losses, we have also observed a significant reduction in claims frequency as compared to 2019, some of which is likely associated with the COVID-19 pandemic and the disruption of the court systems; however, we have remained cautious in recognizing these favorable frequency trends in our current accident year reserve due to the possibility of delays in reporting and uncertainty surrounding the length and severity of the pandemic.
We recognized net favorable prior year reserve development of $27.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to net unfavorable prior year reserve development of $5.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Favorable development recognized during 2020 principally related to accident years 2014 through 2017. Net unfavorable prior year reserve development in 2019 included $51.5 million of unfavorable reserve development related to our reserves for the previously mentioned large national healthcare account that has experienced losses far exceeding the assumptions we made when underwriting the account, beginning in 2016; unfavorable development recognized during 2019 related to accident years 2016 through 2018. Excluding the unfavorable development related to this account, the Specialty P&C segment recognized favorable prior year reserve development totaling $45.8 million in 2019. Prior accident year development recognized for years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 included a reduction in our reserve for potential ECO/XPL claims of $4.0 million and $0.3 million, respectively. Development recognized in both 2020 and 2019 also included favorable prior year reserve development attributable to our medical technology liability line of business of $8.6 million and $13.3 million, respectively.
A detailed discussion of factors influencing our recognition of loss development is included in our Critical Accounting Estimates section under the heading "Reserve for Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses." Assumptions used in establishing our reserve are regularly reviewed and updated by management as new data becomes available. Any adjustments necessary are reflected in the then current operations. Due to the size of our reserve, even a small percentage adjustment to the assumptions can have a material effect on our results of operations for the period in which the change is made, as was the case in both 2020 and 2019.
Underwriting, Policy Acquisition and Operating Expenses
Our Specialty P&C segment underwriting, policy acquisition and operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were comprised as follows:
DPAC amortization decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 driven by a decrease in earned premium, excluding the effect of the premium earned from the tail coverage associated with a large national healthcare account from the second quarter of 2020 as there were no deferred acquisition costs associated with the tail premium (see discussion under the heading "Gross Premiums Written"). In addition, the decrease in DPAC amortization reflected a decrease in brokerage expenses due to our non-renewal of certain products written on an excess and surplus lines basis in our Specialty line of business (see discussion under the heading "Gross Premiums Written") as well as a decrease in agent commissions and premium taxes due to a lower volume of premium written. Partially offsetting the decrease in DPAC amortization in 2020 was an increase in medical costs associated with employee health plans, one-time employee severance charges of $0.6 million and, to a lesser extent, a decrease in ceding commission income, which is an offset to expense, from certain of our shared risk arrangements.
Management fees are charged pursuant to a management agreement by the Corporate segment to the operating subsidiaries within our Specialty P&C segment for services provided based on the extent to which services are provided to the subsidiary and the amount of premium written by the subsidiary. While the terms of the management agreement were consistent between 2020 and 2019, fluctuations in the amount of premium written by each subsidiary can result in corresponding variations in the management fee charged to each subsidiary during a particular period.
Other underwriting and operating expenses decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily driven by a decrease in various operational expenses resulting from incremental improvements over the past year including organizational structure enhancements and improved operating efficiencies. The decrease in operating expenses also reflected a reduction in travel-related costs of $3.3 million in 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and, to a lesser extent, a reduction in employer contributions to the ProAssurance Savings Plan (see further discussion in Note 17 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements). Furthermore, the decrease in operating expenses in 2020 as compared to 2019 also included a reduction in fees associated with a data analytics services agreement of $0.6 million driven by an amendment to the agreement executed during the fourth quarter of 2020 (see further discussion in Note 9 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements). The decrease in 2020 was largely offset by one-time expenses of $3.4 million mainly comprised of early retirement benefits granted to certain employees in 2020 as well as expenses associated with the restructuring of our HCPL field office organization, consisting of employee severance charges and lease exit costs due to a reduction in physical office locations. The decrease in operating expenses in 2020 was also somewhat offset by an increase of $0.4 million in accrued paid time off due to lower employee utilization of vacation time likely associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.
Underwriting Expense Ratio (the Expense Ratio)
Our expense ratio for the Specialty P&C segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 was as follows:
The change in our expense ratio in 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily attributable to the following:
The remaining decrease in our expense ratio during 2020 as compared to 2019 of 1.7 percentage points primarily reflected the impact of a decrease in various operational expenses resulting from incremental improvements over the past year including organizational structure enhancements and improved operating efficiencies and, to a lesser extent, the reduction in employer contributions to the ProAssurance Savings Plan.
Segment Results - Workers' Compensation Insurance
Our Workers' Compensation Insurance segment includes workers' compensation products provided to employers generally with 1,000 or fewer employees, as discussed in Note 16 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Workers' compensation products offered include guaranteed cost policies, policyholder dividend policies, retrospectively-rated policies, deductible policies and alternative market programs. Alternative market programs include program design, fronting, claims administration, risk management, SPC rental, asset management and SPC management services. Alternative market program premiums are 100% ceded to either the SPCs within our Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance segment or, to a limited extent, an unaffiliated captive insurer for one program. Our Workers' Compensation Insurance segment results reflected pre-tax underwriting profit or loss from these workers' compensation products, exclusive of investment results, which are included in our Corporate segment. Segment results included the following:
Premiums Written
Our workers’ compensation premium volume is driven by five primary factors: (1) the amount of new business written, (2) retention of our existing book of business, (3) premium rates charged on our renewal book of business, (4) changes in payroll exposure and (5) audit premium.
Gross, ceded and net premiums written were as follows:
Gross Premiums Written
Gross premiums written by product were as follows:
*The change in retrospectively-related policies included adjustments that decreased premium by $2.5 million and $2.1 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Gross premiums written in our traditional business decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019, which primarily reflected renewal rate decreases, retention losses and a reduction in audit premium and new business written. The reduction in audit premium included a reduction in our EBUB estimate of $1.3 million in 2020. Renewal rate decreases were 4% in 2020, which were unchanged as compared to 2019. Renewal retention for our traditional business was 84% during 2020 as compared to 79% during 2019. New business written totaled $23.7 million in 2020 as compared to $27.0 million in 2019.
Gross premiums written in our alternative market business decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019, which primarily reflected renewal rate decreases, retention losses and a decrease in audit premium. In addition, the decline in alternative market business in 2020 also reflected the reduction in premium funding for one of our large alternative market programs (see further discussion in our Segment Results - Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance section that follows). Renewal rate decreases were 4% in 2020 as compared to 5% in 2019. Retention in our alternative market business was 84% in 2020 which reflected the impact of the aforementioned reduction in premium funding for a large alternative market program. A decrease in renewal rate and retention losses were partially offset by new business of $3.7 million in 2020. We retained 100% of the 23 workers' compensation alternative market programs up for renewal during the year ended December 31, 2020. During the second quarter of 2020, we added one new workers' compensation alternative market program at Inova Re with $1.1 million in premiums written during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Our traditional and alternative market premiums written were impacted by reductions in payroll exposure and policy cancellations related to the economic impact of COVID-19. Reductions in payroll exposure and policy cancellations related to the economic impact of COVID-19 reduced premiums written by approximately $3.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. We expect continued downward pressure in future quarters on our workers' compensation premium resulting from further reductions in insured payroll exposure; however, the length and magnitude of such changes depends on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted.
New business, audit premium, retention and renewal price changes for both the traditional business and the alternative market business are shown in the table below:
Ceded Premiums Written
Ceded premiums written were as follows:
Our Workers' Compensation Insurance segment cedes alternative market business under a 100% quota share reinsurance agreement, net of a ceding commission, to SPCs in our Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance segment and, to a limited extent, to an unaffiliated captive insurer. The decrease in premiums ceded to SPCs during the year ended December 31, 2020 reflects the reduction in alternative market gross premiums written as discussed above under the heading "Gross Premiums Written".
Under our external reinsurance agreement for traditional business, we retain the first $0.5 million in risk insured by us and cede losses in excess of this amount on each loss occurrence under our primary external reinsurance treaty, subject to an AAD. The AAD for the contract year effective May 1, 2019 was $3.9 million of incurred losses in excess of the $0.5 million per occurrence retention, or approximately 2.1% of subject earned premium. Effective May 1, 2020, our primary reinsurance layer was renewed at a slightly higher rate than the expiring year, with an increase in the AAD to 3.16% of subject earned premium for incurred losses in excess of the per occurrence retention. Per our reinsurance agreements, we cede premiums related to our traditional business on an earned premium basis. The decrease in premiums ceded to external reinsurers during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily reflected the decrease in traditional earned premium.
Changes in the return premium estimate reflected the loss experience under the reinsurance contract for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The change in estimated return premium for the year ended December 31, 2020 reflected prior year loss development on previously reported reinsured claims.
Ceded Premiums Ratio
Ceded premiums ratio was as follows:
The above table reflects ceded premiums earned as a percent of gross premiums earned. As discussed above, we cede premiums related to our traditional business to external reinsurers on an earned premium basis. The ceded premiums ratio in 2020 primarily reflects the reinsurance rates in effect for the contract period beginning May 1, 2020.
Net Premiums Earned
Net premiums earned consist of gross premiums earned less the portion of earned premiums that we cede to SPCs in our Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance segment, external reinsurers and the unaffiliated captive insurer. Because premiums are generally earned pro rata over the entire policy period, fluctuations in premiums earned tend to lag those of premiums written. Our workers’ compensation policies are twelve month term policies, and premiums are earned on a pro rata basis over the policy period. Net premiums earned also include premium adjustments related to the audit of our insureds' payrolls, changes in our EBUB estimate and premium adjustments related to retrospectively-rated policies. Payroll audits are conducted subsequent to the end of the policy period and any related adjustments are recorded as fully earned in the current period. In addition, we record an estimate for EBUB and evaluate the estimate on a quarterly basis.
Net premiums earned were as follows:
The decrease in net premiums earned during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily reflected the pro rata effect of a reduction in net premiums written during the preceding twelve months and, to a lesser extent, the reduction in our EBUB estimate and the impact of retrospectively-rated policy adjustments. We reduced our EBUB estimate by $1.3 million during 2020 which primarily reflected a reduction in earned payroll exposure. As a result of the economic impact of COVID-19, we expect future reductions in payroll exposure related to in-force policies that could result in a significant decrease in audit premium and our EBUB estimate. We will continue to monitor and adjust the estimate, if necessary, based on changes in insured payrolls and economic conditions, as experience develops or new information becomes known; however, the length and magnitude of such changes depends on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. There was no adjustment to our EBUB estimate during the year ended December 31, 2019. Premium adjustments related to retrospectively-rated policies decreased premiums by 2.5 million and $2.1 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses
We estimate our current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses based on an expected loss ratio. Incurred losses and loss adjustment expenses for the current accident year are determined by applying the expected loss ratio to net premiums earned for the respective period. The following table summarizes calendar year net loss ratios by separating losses between the current accident year and all prior accident years. Calendar year and current accident year net loss ratios by component were as follows:
The increase in the current accident year loss ratio for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily reflected the continuation of intense price competition and the resulting renewal rate decreases, partially offset by favorable claim trends, including lower claims frequency and severity. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, legislative and regulatory bodies in certain states have changed or are considering changes to compensability requirements and presumptions for certain types of workers related to COVID-19 claims. These endeavors could have an adverse impact on the frequency and severity related to COVID-19 claims. Furthermore, the current economic conditions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic have introduced significant risk of a prolonged recession, which could have an adverse impact on our return to wellness efforts and the ability of injured workers to return to work, resulting in a potential reduction in favorable claim trends in future periods.
Calendar year incurred losses (excluding IBNR) ceded to our external reinsurers decreased $11.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019. Current accident year ceded incurred losses (excluding IBNR) decreased $8.2 million as compared to 2019. The decrease in ceded incurred losses reflects lower severity-related claim activity during 2020 and, on a calendar year basis, favorable development on prior year reinsured claims.
We recognized net favorable prior year development related to our previously established reserve of $7.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $7.8 million for 2019. The net favorable prior year reserve development for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 reflected overall favorable trends in claim closing patterns. Net favorable development for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily related to the 2014 through 2017 accident years. Net favorable development for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily related to the 2015 and 2016 accident years and included a fair value adjustment of $1.6 million related to the amortization of purchase accounting. The fair value adjustment was fully amortized as of December 31, 2019.
Underwriting, Policy Acquisition and Operating Expenses
Underwriting, policy acquisition and operating expenses includes the amortization of commissions, premium taxes and underwriting salaries, which are capitalized and deferred over the related workers’ compensation policy period, net of ceding commissions earned. The capitalization of underwriting salaries can vary as they are subject to the success rate of our contract acquisition efforts. These expenses also include a management fee charged by our Corporate segment, which represents intercompany charges pursuant to a management agreement, and the amortization of intangible assets, primarily related to the acquisition of Eastern by ProAssurance. The management fee is based on the extent to which services are provided to the subsidiary and the amount of premium written by the subsidiary.
Our Workers' Compensation Insurance segment underwriting, policy acquisition and operating expenses were comprised as follows:
The decrease in DPAC amortization for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily reflects the decrease in net premiums earned. The decrease in other underwriting and operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily reflected a decrease in travel-related costs and a reduction in employer contributions to the
ProAssurance Savings Plan (see Note 17 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements). The decrease in travel-related costs in 2020 are directly attributable to COVID-19, as company business travel has been substantially reduced. The decrease in other underwriting and operating expenses in 2020 was largely offset by costs related to the implementation of a new policy administration and claims system and one-time costs of $0.9 million primarily comprised of employee severance costs associated with the restructuring of our workers' compensation business in 2020.
As previously discussed, alternative market premiums written through our Workers' Compensation Insurance segment's alternative market business unit are 100% ceded, less a ceding commission, to either the SPCs in our Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance segment or, to a limited extent, an unaffiliated captive insurer. The ceding commission consists of an amount for fronting fees, cell rental fees, commissions, premium taxes and risk management fees. The fronting fees, commissions, premium taxes and risk management fees are recorded as an offset to underwriting, policy acquisition and operating expenses. Cell rental fees are recorded as a component of other income and claims administration fees are recorded as ceded ULAE. The decrease in SPC ceding commissions earned for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily reflects the decrease in alternative market ceded earned premium.
Underwriting Expense Ratio (the Expense Ratio)
The underwriting expense ratio included the impact of the following:
Excluding the items noted in the table above, the increase in the expense ratio for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily reflected the decrease in net premiums earned and costs related to the implementation of a new policy administration and claims system.
Segment Results - Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance
The Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance segment includes the results (underwriting profit or loss, plus investment results, net of U.S. federal income taxes) of SPCs at Inova Re and Eastern Re, our Cayman Islands SPC operations, as discussed in Note 16 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. SPCs are segregated pools of assets and liabilities that provide an insurance facility for a defined set of risks. Assets of each SPC are solely for the benefit of that individual cell and each SPC is solely responsible for the liabilities of that individual cell. Assets of one SPC are statutorily protected from the creditors of the others. Each SPC is owned, fully or in part, by an agency, group or association and the results of the SPCs are attributable to the participants of that cell. We participate to a varying degree in the results of selected SPCs and, for the SPCs in which we participate, our participation interest ranges from a low of 20% to a high of 85%. SPC results attributable to external cell participants are reflected as an SPC dividend (expense) income in our Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance segment. In addition, our Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance segment includes the investment results of the SPCs as the investments are solely for the benefit of the cell participants and investment results attributable to external cell participants are reflected in the SPC dividend (expense) income. As of December 31, 2020, there were 27 (24 active) SPCs. The SPCs assume workers' compensation insurance, healthcare professional liability insurance or a combination of the two from our Workers' Compensation Insurance and Specialty P&C segments. As of December 31, 2020, there were two SPCs that assumed both workers' compensation insurance and healthcare professional liability insurance and one SPC that assumed only healthcare professional liability insurance.
Segment results reflects our share of the underwriting and investment results of the SPCs in which we participate, and included the following:
Premiums Written
Premiums in our Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance segment are assumed from either our Workers' Compensation Insurance or Specialty P&C segments. Premium volume is driven by five primary factors: (1) the amount of new business written, (2) retention of the existing book of business, (3) premium rates charged on the renewal book of business and, for workers' compensation business, (4) changes in payroll exposure and (5) audit premium.
Gross, ceded and net premiums written were as follows:
Gross Premiums Written
Gross premiums written reflected reinsurance premiums assumed by component as follows:
Gross premiums written for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were primarily comprised of workers' compensation coverages assumed from our Workers' Compensation Insurance segment. The decrease in gross premiums written in 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily reflected the competitive workers’ compensation market conditions and the resulting renewal rate decreases of 4%, retention losses and a decrease in audit premium. The decrease in the retention rate during 2020 includes the impact of a reduction in premium funding for a large workers' compensation alternative market program. We do not participate in this program; therefore, the reduction in premium funding had no effect on the segment results for the year ended December 31, 2020. Healthcare professional liability gross premiums written decreased during 2020 as compared to 2019 due to retention losses driven by the loss of a large Senior Care policy that chose to utilize self-insurance, partially offset by new business (see previous discussion under the heading "Gross Premiums Written" in our Segment Results - Specialty Property & Casualty section). We retained 100% of the 22 workers' compensation programs and 3 healthcare professional liability programs up for renewal during 2020. During the second quarter of 2020, we added one new alternative market program at Inova Re with $1.1 million in premiums written during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Our workers’ compensation premiums written were impacted by reductions in payroll exposure and policy cancellations related to the economic impact of COVID-19, and we expect continued downward pressure in future quarters on our workers' compensation premium resulting from further reductions in insured payroll exposure; however, the length and magnitude of such changes depends on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted.
New business, audit premium, retention and renewal price changes for the assumed workers' compensation premium is shown in the table below:
Ceded Premiums Written
Ceded premiums written were as follows:
For the workers' compensation business, each SPC has in place its own external reinsurance arrangements. The healthcare professional liability business is assumed net of reinsurance from our Specialty P&C segment; therefore, there are no ceded premiums related to the healthcare professional liability business reflected in the table above. The risk retention for each loss occurrence for the workers' compensation business ranges from $0.3 million to $0.4 million based on the program, with limits up to $119.7 million. In addition, each program has aggregate reinsurance coverage between $1.1 million and $2.1 million on a program year basis. Per the SPC external reinsurance agreements, premiums are ceded on a written premium basis. The decrease in ceded premiums written in 2020, as compared to 2019, primarily reflected the decrease in workers' compensation gross premiums written, partially offset by an increase in reinsurance rates for programs with renewal dates on or after May 1, 2020. External reinsurance rates vary based on the alternative market program.
Ceded Premiums Ratio
Ceded premiums ratio was as follows:
The above table reflects ceded premiums as a percent of gross premiums written for the workers' compensation business only; healthcare professional liability business is assumed net of reinsurance, as discussed above. The ceded premiums ratio reflects the weighted average reinsurance rates of all SPC programs. The increase in the ceded premiums ratio for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily reflects an increase in reinsurance rates for programs renewing on or after May 1, 2020 and the reduction in premium funding for a large workers' compensation alternative market program (see previous discussion under the heading "Gross Premiums Written"). The reinsurance costs associated with this program are fixed, which resulted in an increase in the ceded ratio.
Net Premiums Earned
Net premiums earned consist of gross premiums earned less the portion of earned premiums that the SPCs cede to external reinsurers. Because premiums are generally earned pro rata over the entire policy period, fluctuations in premiums earned tend to lag those of premiums written. Policies ceded to the SPCs are twelve month term policies and premiums are earned on a pro rata basis over the policy period. Net premiums earned also include premium adjustments related to the audit of workers' compensation insureds' payrolls. Payroll audits are conducted subsequent to the end of the policy period and any related adjustments are recorded as fully earned in the current period.
Gross, ceded and net premiums earned were as follows:
The decrease in net premiums earned during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily reflected the pro rata effect of a reduction in net premiums written during the preceding twelve months, including the reduction in premium funding for the large workers' compensation alternative market program (see previous discussion under the heading "Gross Premiums Written").
Net Investment Income and Net Realized Investment Gains (Losses)
Net investment income for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was primarily attributable to interest earned on available-for-sale fixed maturity investments, which primarily includes investment-grade corporate debt securities. We recognized $3.1 million of net realized investment gains for the year ended December 31, 2020, which primarily reflected an increase in the fair value on our equity portfolio due to an improvement in the global financial markets since the first quarter of 2020, which was depressed due to the onset of COVID-19. We recognized $4.0 million of net realized investment gains for the year ended December 31, 2019 driven by changes in the fair value of our equity portfolio.
Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses
The following table summarizes the calendar year net loss ratios by separating losses between the current accident year and all prior accident years. The current accident year net loss ratio reflected the aggregate loss ratio for all programs. Loss reserves are estimated for each program on a quarterly basis. Due to the size of some of the programs, quarterly loss results can create volatility in the current accident year net loss ratio to fluctuate significantly from period to period.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, our Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance segment net loss ratios were affected by a $10 million reserve that an SPC at Eastern Re established during the second quarter of 2019. This SPC had previously assumed an errors and omissions liability policy that provides coverage for losses up to a lifetime maximum of $10 million from a captive insurer unaffiliated with ProAssurance. During the second quarter of 2019, a claim was filed under this policy that met the lifetime maximum limit and, accordingly, a $10 million reserve was recorded. We do not participate in the SPC that assumed this policy; therefore, these losses were attributable to the external cell participants as reflected in the SPC dividend expense (income) and had no effect on our Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance segment results for the year ended December 31, 2019. Given the significance of this event, we have removed the impact of the policy from each of the ratios below (as shown in the columns labeled "Adjusted") in order to assist in the comparability between periods. Calendar year and current accident year net loss ratios for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was as follows:
Excluding the impact of the errors and omissions liability policy, as previously discussed and as shown in the table above, the current accident year net loss ratio increased 2.3 percentage points in 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily reflecting the continuation of intense price competition and the resulting renewal rate decreases, partially offset by overall favorable claim trends in the 2020 accident year. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, legislative and regulatory bodies in certain states have changed or are considering changes to compensability requirements and presumptions for certain types of workers related to COVID-19 claims. These endeavors could have an adverse impact on the frequency and severity related to COVID-19 claims. Furthermore, the current economic conditions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic have introduced significant risk of a prolonged recession, which could have an adverse impact on our return to wellness efforts and the ability of injured workers to return to work, resulting in a potential reduction in favorable claim trends in future periods.
Calendar year ceded incurred losses (excluding IBNR) decreased $10.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019. Current accident year ceded incurred losses (excluding IBNR) decreased $8.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019. The decrease in ceded incurred losses reflects lower severity-related claim activity during 2020 and, on a calendar year basis, favorable development on prior year reinsured claims.
We recognized net favorable prior year reserve development of $16.5 million and $10.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The net favorable prior year reserve development for 2020 included $12.1 million related to the workers’ compensation business, which primarily reflected overall favorable trends in claim closing patterns in the 2014 through 2019 accident years. In addition, net favorable prior year reserve development in 2020 included $4.4 million related to the healthcare professional liability business.
Underwriting, Policy Acquisition and Operating Expenses
Our Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance segment underwriting, policy acquisition and operating expenses were comprised as follows:
DPAC amortization primarily represents ceding commissions, which vary by program and are paid to our Workers' Compensation Insurance and Specialty P&C segments for premiums assumed. Ceding commissions include an amount for fronting fees, commissions, premium taxes and risk management fees, which are reported as an offset to underwriting, policy acquisition and operating expenses within our Workers' Compensation Insurance and Specialty P&C segments. In addition, ceding commissions paid to our Workers' Compensation Insurance segment include cell rental fees which are recorded as other income within our Workers' Compensation Insurance segment.
Other underwriting and operating expenses primarily include bank fees, professional fees and bad debt expense. The decrease in other underwriting and operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily reflected recoveries of premiums receivables previously written off, which resulted in an adjustment to our allowance for expected credit losses.
Underwriting Expense Ratio (the Expense Ratio)
The underwriting expense ratio included the impact of the following:
Excluding the effect of audit premium, the underwriting expense ratio primarily reflected the weighted average ceding commission percentage of all SPC programs. The increase in the expense ratio for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 was driven by the effect of a reduction in net premiums earned, as previously discussed. Additionally, the increase in the expense ratio in 2020 reflected the impact of the reduction in premium funding for a large workers'
compensation alternative market program as the ceding commissions associated with this program are fixed and do not vary directly with changes in premium (see previous discussion under the heading "Gross Premiums Written").
SPC U.S. Federal Income Tax Expense
The SPCs at Inova Re have made a 953(d) election under the U.S. Internal Revenue Code and are subject to U.S. federal income tax. U.S. federal income taxes incurred totaled $1.7 million and $1.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in the federal income tax provision for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 reflects an increase in taxable income for the Inova Re SPCs.
Segment Results - Lloyd's Syndicates
Our Lloyd's Syndicates segment includes the results from our participation in certain Syndicates at Lloyd's of London. In addition to our participation in Syndicate results, we have investments in and other obligations to our Lloyd's Syndicates consisting of a Syndicate Credit Agreement and FAL requirements. For the 2020 underwriting year, our FAL was comprised of investment securities and cash and cash equivalents deposited with Lloyd's which at December 31, 2020 had a fair value of approximately $106.2 million, as discussed in Note 3 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. During the third quarter of 2020, we received a return of approximately $32.3 million of cash and cash equivalents from our FAL balances given the reduction in our participation in the results of Syndicate 1729 for the 2020 underwriting year to 29% from 61%.
We normally report results from our involvement in Lloyd's Syndicates on a quarter lag, except when information is available that is material to the current period. Furthermore, the investment results associated with our FAL investments and certain U.S. paid administrative expenses are reported concurrently as that information is available on an earlier time frame.
Lloyd's Syndicate 1729. We provide capital to Syndicate 1729, which covers a range of property and casualty insurance and reinsurance lines in both the U.S. and international markets. The remaining capital for Syndicate 1729 is provided by unrelated third parties, including private names and other corporate members. As previously discussed, we decreased our participation in the results of Syndicate 1729 for the 2020 underwriting year to reduce our exposure and the associated earnings volatility. Due to the quarter lag, this reduced participation was not reflected in our results until the second quarter of 2020. Syndicate 1729 had a maximum underwriting capacity of £135 million (approximately $185 million based on December 31, 2020 exchange rates) for the 2020 underwriting year, of which £39 million (approximately $53 million based on December 31, 2020 exchange rates) was our allocated underwriting capacity. To support and grow our core insurance operations, we decreased our participation in the results of Syndicate 1729 for the 2021 underwriting year to 5% from 29% which, due to the quarter lag, will not be reflected in our results until the second quarter of 2021. Syndicate 1729's maximum underwriting capacity for the 2021 underwriting year is £185 million (approximately $253 million based on December 31, 2020 exchange rates), of which £9 million (approximately $13 million based on December 31, 2020 exchange rates) is our allocated underwriting capacity.
Lloyd's Syndicate 6131. We provide capital to an SPA, Syndicate 6131, which focuses on contingency and specialty property business, primarily for risks within the U.S. as well as international markets. For the 2020 underwriting year, we were the sole (100%) capital provider to Syndicate 6131 which had a maximum underwriting capacity of £12 million (approximately $16 million based on December 31, 2020 exchange rates). As an SPA, Syndicate 6131 underwrites on a quota share basis with Syndicate 1729. Effective July 1, 2020, Syndicate 6131 entered into a six-month quota share reinsurance agreement with an unaffiliated insurer. Under this agreement, Syndicate 6131 ceded essentially half of the premium assumed from Syndicate 1729 to the unaffiliated insurer; the agreement was non-renewed on January 1, 2021 and we decreased our participation in the results of Syndicate 6131 to 50% from 100% for the 2021 underwriting year. Due to the quarter lag, this reduced participation will not be reflected in our results until the second quarter of 2021. Syndicate 6131's maximum underwriting capacity for the 2021 underwriting year is £20 million (approximately $27 million based on December 31, 2020 exchange rates), of which £10 million (approximately $14 million based on December 31, 2020 exchange rates) is our allocated underwriting capacity.
In addition to the results of our participation in Lloyd's Syndicates, as discussed above, our Lloyd's Syndicates segment also includes 100% of the results of our wholly owned subsidiaries that support our operations at Lloyd's. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the results of our Lloyd's Syndicates segment were as follows:
Premiums Written
Changes in our premium volume within our Lloyd's Syndicates segment are driven by five primary factors: (1) changes in our participation in the Syndicates, (2) the amount of new business and the channels in which the business is written, (3) our retention of existing business, (4) the premium charged for business that is renewed, which is affected by rates charged and by the amount and type of coverage an insured chooses to purchase and (5) the timing of premium written through multi-period policies.
Gross Premiums Written
Gross premiums written in 2020 consisted of property insurance coverages (39% of total gross premiums written), casualty coverages (30%), catastrophe reinsurance coverages (13%), specialty property coverages (11%), contingency coverages (4%) and property reinsurance coverages (3%). The decrease in gross premiums written in 2020 as compared to 2019 was driven by our decreased participation in the results of Syndicate 1729, partially offset by volume increases on renewal business and renewal pricing increases, primarily on property insurance and casualty coverages, as well as new business written, also primarily property insurance and casualty coverages. In addition, gross premiums written in 2020 included a binder adjustment on a prior year of account, which reduced written and earned premium in the current period. See further discussion on these binder adjustments in our Critical Accounting Estimates section under the heading "Lloyd's Premium Estimates."
Ceded Premiums Written
Syndicate 1729 utilizes reinsurance to provide the capacity to write larger limits of liability on individual risks, to provide protection against catastrophic loss and to provide protection against losses in excess of policy limits. As previously discussed, for the second half of 2020 Syndicate 6131 utilized external quota share reinsurance to manage the net loss exposure on the specialty property and contingency coverages it assumed from Syndicate 1729 by ceding essentially half of the premium assumed to an unaffiliated insurer; this agreement was non-renewed on January 1, 2021. Due to the quarter lag, the effect of this reinsurance arrangement was not reflected in our results until the fourth quarter of 2020. Ceded premiums written decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily driven by our decreased participation in the results of Syndicate 1729 and, to a lesser extent, the effect of a revision to the Syndicates' estimates of premiums due to reinsurers during the first quarter of 2019. The decrease in ceded premiums written in 2020 as compared to 2019 was partially offset by the impact of premiums ceded under Syndicate 6131's six-month quota share agreement and, to a lesser extent, an increase in estimated reinsurance reinstatement premiums of $1.2 million during the fourth quarter of 2020 triggered by certain property and catastrophe related losses exceeding specified levels in the reinsurance agreement.
Net Premiums Earned
Net premiums earned consist of gross premiums earned less the portion of earned premiums that the Syndicates cede to reinsurers for their assumption of a portion of losses. Premiums written through open-market channels are generally earned pro rata over the entire policy period, which is predominately twelve months, whereas premiums written through delegated underwriting authority arrangements are earned over twenty-four months. Therefore, net premiums earned is affected by shifts in the mix of policies written between the open-market and delegated underwriting authority arrangements. Additionally, net premiums earned consists of a mix of policies earned from different open underwriting years. As previously discussed, we participate to a varying degree in each open underwriting year which may cause fluctuations in premiums earned. Furthermore, fluctuations in premiums earned tend to lag those of premiums written. Premiums for certain policies and assumed reinsurance contracts are reported subsequent to the coverage period and/or may be subject to adjustment based on loss experience. These premium adjustments are earned when reported, which can result in further fluctuation in earned premium.
Gross, ceded and net premiums earned were as follows:
The decrease in gross premiums earned for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 was driven by our decreased participation in Syndicate 1729, which was not reflected in our results until the second quarter of 2020 and, to a lesser extent, a binder adjustment which reduced both written and earned premium in the current period (see previous discussion under the heading "Gross Premiums Written"). The decrease in gross premiums earned in 2020 was partially offset by the pro rata effect of higher premiums written at the Syndicates during the preceding twelve months, primarily property insurance and casualty coverages.
The increase in ceded premiums earned during 2020 as compared to 2019 was driven by the aforementioned reinstatement premiums earned of $1.2 million during the fourth quarter of 2020 and, to a lesser extent, the pro rata effect of an increase in written premiums ceded under reinsurance arrangements during the preceding twelve months, partially offset by our decreased participation in Syndicate 1729.
Net Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses
Losses for the year were primarily recorded using the loss assumptions by risk category incorporated into the business plans submitted to Lloyd's for Syndicate 1729 and Syndicate 6131 with consideration given to loss experience incurred to date. The assumptions used in each business plan were consistent with loss results reflected in Lloyd's historical data for similar risks. The loss ratios may fluctuate due to the mix of earned premium and the timing of earned premium adjustments (see discussion in this section under the heading "Net Premiums Earned"). Premium and exposure for some of Syndicate 1729's insurance policies and reinsurance contracts are initially estimated and subsequently adjusted over an extended period of time as underlying premium reports are received from cedants and insureds. When reports are received, the premium, exposure and corresponding loss estimates are revised accordingly. Changes in loss estimates due to premium or exposure fluctuations are incurred in the accident year in which the premium is earned.
The following table summarizes calendar year net loss ratios by separating losses between the current accident year and all prior accident years. Net loss ratios for the period were as follows:
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the current accident year net loss ratio increased 6.0 percentage points as compared to 2019. The increase in the current accident year net loss ratio was driven by certain property and catastrophe related losses and, to a lesser extent, contingency related losses incurred during 2020.
We recognized $0.6 million and $0.4 million of unfavorable prior year development for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The unfavorable prior year development for the year ended December 31, 2020 was driven by higher than expected losses and development on certain large claims, primarily catastrophe related losses, which resulted in unfavorable development with respect to a previous year of account.
We have exposures to potential COVID-19 claims through our participation in Syndicates 1729 and 6131. During 2020, we recognized losses related to COVID-19 of approximately $3.6 million, net of reinsurance, primarily in Syndicate 6131's contingency and Syndicate 1729's casualty books of business. We are closely monitoring potential amendments in legislation and court decisions that could impact the claims position; however, to date, legislative attempts have been unsuccessful in most territories in which the Syndicates write the majority of their business. See previous discussion in Part I under the heading "Insurance Regulatory Matters- COVID-19."
Underwriting, Policy Acquisition and Operating Expenses
Underwriting, policy acquisition and operating expenses decreased by $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 and reflected our decreased participation in Syndicate 1729 and, to a lesser extent, the effect of higher operational expenses incurred associated with establishing Syndicate 6131 during 2019.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the underwriting expense ratio decreased by 4.0 percentage points as compared to 2019 driven by lower operating expenses due to our reduced participation in Syndicate 1729, partially offset by a decrease in net premiums earned, as previously discussed. Operating expenses incurred during 2020 primarily were related to the 2020 underwriting year for which our participation is 29%, whereas the net premiums earned during the same period also includes premium from other open underwriting years in which we participate at a higher degree.
Investments
The change in net investment income in 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily attributable to interest earned on our FAL investments, which primarily includes investment-grade corporate debt securities. During the second quarter of 2020, certain corporate debt securities included in our FAL investments were liquidated. During the third quarter of 2020, approximately $32.3 million of cash and cash equivalents was returned to ProAssurance, as previously discussed, which will continue to impact the segment's net investment income in future periods. Syndicate 1729's fixed maturities portfolio includes certain debt securities classified as trading securities. Investment results associated with these fixed maturity trading securities are reported on the same quarter lag.
Taxes
The results of this segment are subject to U.K. income tax law.
Segment Results - Corporate
Our Corporate segment includes our investment operations, other than those reported in our Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance and Lloyd's Syndicates segments, interest expense and U.S. income taxes as discussed in Note 16 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Our Corporate segment also includes non-premium revenues generated outside of our insurance entities and corporate expenses. Segment results for our Corporate segment were net earnings of $71.4 million and $129.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and included the following:
Net Investment Income, Equity in Earnings (Loss) of Unconsolidated Subsidiaries, Net Realized Investment Gains (Losses)
Net Investment Income
Net investment income is primarily derived from the income earned by our fixed maturity securities and also includes dividend income from equity securities, income from our short-term and cash equivalent investments, earnings from other investments and increases in the cash surrender value of BOLI contracts, net of investment fees and expenses.
Net investment income by investment category was as follows:
Fixed Maturities
Income from our fixed maturities decreased during 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily due to lower yields from our corporate debt securities, partially offset by higher average investment balances. Average investment balances were approximately 5% higher for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019.
Average yields for our fixed maturity portfolio were as follows:
Equities
Income from our equity portfolio decreased during 2020 as compared to 2019 which reflected a decrease in our allocation to this asset category.
Short-term Investments and Other Investments
Short-term investments, which have a maturity at purchase of one year or less are carried at fair value, which approximates their cost basis, and are primarily composed of investments in U.S. treasury obligations, commercial paper and money market funds. Income from our short-term and other investments decreased during 2020 primarily attributable to lower yields given the actions taken by the Federal Reserve to aggressively reduce interest rates in response to COVID-19.
Equity in Earnings (Loss) of Unconsolidated Subsidiaries
Equity in earnings (loss) of unconsolidated subsidiaries was comprised as follows:
We hold interests in certain LPs/LLCs that generate earnings from trading portfolios, secured debt, debt securities, multi-strategy funds and private equity investments. The performance of the LPs/LLCs is affected by the volatility of equity and credit markets. For our investments in LPs/LLCs, we record our allocable portion of the partnership operating income or loss as the results of the LPs/LLCs become available, typically following the end of a reporting period. The decrease in our investment results from our portfolio of investments in LPs/LLCs during 2020 as compared to 2019 was due to lower reported earnings from several LPs/LLCs driven by the volatility in the global financial markets related to COVID-19.
Our tax credit partnership investments are designed to generate returns in the form of tax credits and tax-deductible project operating losses and are comprised of qualified affordable housing project tax credit partnerships and a historic tax credit partnership. We account for our tax credit partnership investments under the equity method and record our allocable portion of the operating losses of the underlying properties based on estimates provided by the partnerships. For our qualified affordable housing project tax credit partnerships, we adjust our estimates of our allocable portion of operating losses periodically as actual operating results of the underlying properties become available. Our historic tax credit partnership is short-term in nature and the remaining operating losses, up to our total current funded commitment, were recognized during the second quarter of 2020. The results from our tax credit partnership investments for the year ended December 31, 2020 reflected lower partnership operating losses as compared to 2019. In addition, based on operating results received, we increased our estimate of operating losses by $4.3 million and $3.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The tax benefits received from our tax credit partnerships, which are not reflected in our investment results above, reduced our tax expense in 2020 and 2019 as follows:
Due to the expected NOL for the year ended December 31, 2020 and realized NOL for the year ended December 31, 2019, the tax credits generated from our tax credit partnership investments of $17.9 million and $18.2 million, respectively, were deferred and are expected to be utilized in future periods. See further discussion in Note 5 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Tax credits provided by the underlying projects of our historic tax credit partnership are typically available in the tax year in which the project is put into active service, whereas the tax credits provided by qualified affordable housing project tax credit partnerships are provided over approximately a ten year period.
Non-GAAP Financial Measure - Tax Equivalent Investment Result
We believe that to fully understand our investment returns it is important to consider the current tax benefits associated with certain investments as the tax benefit received represents a portion of the return provided by our tax-exempt bonds, BOLI, common and preferred stocks, and tax credit partnership investments (collectively, our tax-preferred investments). We impute a pro forma tax-equivalent result by estimating the amount of fully-taxable income needed to achieve the same after-tax result as is currently provided by our tax-preferred investments. We believe this better reflects the economics behind our decision to invest in certain asset classes that are either taxed at lower rates and/or result in reductions to our current federal income tax expense. Our pro forma tax-equivalent investment result is shown in the table that follows as well as a reconciliation of our GAAP net investment result to our tax equivalent result.
Net Realized Investment Gains (Losses)
The following table provides detailed information regarding our net realized investment gains (losses).
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $1.5 million of credit-related impairment losses in earnings and a nominal amount of non-credit impairment losses in OCI. The credit-related impairment losses recognized in 2020 primarily related to corporate bonds in the energy and consumer sectors. Additionally, 2020 included credit-related impairment losses related to four corporate bonds in various sectors, which were sold during 2020. The non-credit impairment losses recognized during 2020 related to three corporate bonds in the energy and consumer sectors. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized credit-related impairment losses in earnings of $0.8 million and a nominal amount of non-credit impairment losses in OCI, both of which related to three corporate bonds in the energy and consumer sectors.
We recognized $11.6 million of net realized investment gains for the year ended December 31, 2020, driven primarily by realized gains on the sale of certain available-for-sale fixed maturities and equity investments, partially offset by unrealized holding losses resulting from decreases in the fair value on our equity portfolio due to the volatility in the global financial markets related to COVID-19. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized $55.1 million of net realized investment gains driven by both realized gains from the sale of equity investments and unrealized holding gains on our equity portfolio due to the improvement in the market since December 31, 2018, which caused our equity securities to increase in value. The most significant sectors that benefited from the improvement in the market were the financial and energy sectors.
Operating Expenses
Corporate segment operating expenses were comprised as follows:
Operating expenses increased during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily due to an increase in professional fees and, to a lesser extent, an increase in share-based compensation expenses. The increase in professional fees in 2020 was driven by an increase in transaction-related costs associated with our planned acquisition of NORCAL (see Note 9 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements) and corporate legal expenses. The increase in share-based compensation expenses in 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily attributable to the effect of a decrease in the value of projected awards during 2019 based upon the decline of one of the associated performance metrics. In addition, the increase in operating expenses in 2020 as compared to 2019 included one-time costs of $0.5 million primarily comprised of employee severance and early retirement benefits granted to certain employees in 2020. The increase in operating expenses in 2020 was partially offset by a decrease in various other operational expenses, primarily employer contributions to the ProAssurance Savings Plan (see Note 17 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements) and, to a lesser extent, travel-related costs as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Operating subsidiaries within our Specialty P&C and Workers' Compensation Insurance segments are charged a management fee by the Corporate segment for services provided to these subsidiaries. The management fee is based on the extent to which services are provided to the subsidiary and the amount of premium written by the subsidiary. Under the arrangement, the expenses associated with such services are reported as expenses of the Corporate segment, and the management fees charged are reported as an offset to Corporate operating expenses. While the terms of the arrangement were consistent between 2019 and 2020, fluctuations in the amount of premium written by each subsidiary can result in corresponding variations in the management fee charged to each subsidiary during a particular period.
Interest Expense
Consolidated interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was comprised as follows:
Consolidated interest expense decreased during 2020 as compared to 2019 driven by the change in the fair value of our interest rate cap and lower interest expense on our Mortgage Loans. The interest rate cap is designated as an economic hedge of interest rate risk associated with our variable rate Mortgage Loans. Our Mortgage Loans accrue interest at three-month LIBOR plus 1.325%, and the decrease in interest expense during 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily due to a decrease in the average three-month LIBOR. Interest expense on our Revolving Credit Agreement for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 primarily reflected unused commitment fees as there were no outstanding borrowings during either period. See further discussion of our interest rate cap agreement in Note 2 and further discussion of our outstanding debt in Note 11 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Taxes
Tax expense allocated to our Corporate segment includes U.S. tax only, which would include U.S. tax expense incurred from our corporate membership in Lloyd's of London. The U.K. tax expense incurred by the U.K. based subsidiaries of our Lloyd's Syndicates segment is allocated to that segment. The SPCs at Inova Re, one of our Cayman Islands reinsurance subsidiaries, have each made a 953(d) election under the U.S. Internal Revenue Code and are subject to U.S. federal income tax; therefore, tax expense allocated to our Corporate segment also includes tax expense incurred from any SPC at Inova Re in which we have a participation interest of 80% or greater as those SPCs are required to be included in our consolidated tax return. Consolidated tax expense (benefit) reflects the tax expense (benefit) of both segments, as shown in the table below:
Listed below are the primary factors affecting our consolidated effective tax rate in 2020 and 2019.
(1) Includes tax-exempt interest, dividends received deduction and change in cash surrender value of BOLI.
(2) Represents the tax impact of the impairment of non-deductible goodwill in relation to the Specialty P&C reporting unit during the third quarter of 2020. See further discussion on the impairment charge under the heading "Goodwill / Intangibles" in the Critical Accounting Estimates section.
Our effective tax rates for 2020 and 2019, as shown in the table above, resulted in an income tax benefit in both years and differs from the statutory federal income tax rate of 21% primarily due to the benefit recognized from the tax credits transferred to us from our tax credit partnership investments. Tax credits recognized in 2020 were $17.9 million as compared to $21.9 million for 2019. While projected tax credits for 2020 are less than 2019, they continue to have a significant impact on the effective tax rate for 2020. Additionally, our effective tax rates in both 2020 and 2019 were impacted by provision-to-return differences. For 2020, these differences primarily reflected the additional tax rate differential of 14% on the carryback of the 2019 NOL to the 2014 tax year which was lower than the previously estimated tax benefit. For 2019, these differences primarily reflected a lower amount of tax credits recognized for the 2018 tax year than the previously estimated tax benefit. Furthermore, our pre-tax loss in 2020 included a $161.1 million goodwill impairment recognized in relation to the Specialty P&C reporting unit during the third quarter of 2020. Of the $161.1 million goodwill impairment, $149.6 million was non-deductible for which no tax benefit was recognized, while the remaining $11.5 million was deductible for which a 21% tax benefit was recognized on the related tax amortization. Consequently, the total impact of the goodwill impairment on the effective tax rate in 2020 was approximately 14.5%. See further discussion on this goodwill impairment in Notes 1 and 6 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 also includes the
additional tax rate differential of 14% on the carryback of the 2020 and 2019 NOLs to the 2015 and 2014 tax years, respectively, as a result of changes made by the CARES Act to the NOL provisions of the tax law.
Results of Operations - Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018
Other than as described below, there have been no other significant retrospective revisions in the presentation of the changes in the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 as disclosed in Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" section of ProAssurance's December 31, 2019 report on Form 10-K.
Segment Results - Specialty Property & Casualty
As previously discussed, we reorganized our presentation of gross premiums written by component and related metrics during the second quarter of 2020 to better align with the current internal management reporting structure within the Specialty P&C segment. All below information has been recast to conform to the current period presentation.
Gross Premiums Written
Gross premiums written by component were as follows:
(1)Standard Physician premium was our greatest source of premium revenues in both 2019 and 2018 and is predominately comprised of twelve month term policies. The decrease in twelve month term policies in 2019 was driven by retention losses, partially offset by an increase in renewal pricing and, to a lesser extent, new business written. The lower retention in 2019 is largely attributable to our focus on underwriting discipline as we continue to emphasize careful risk selection, rate adequacy and a willingness to walk away from business that does not fit our goal of achieving a long-term underwriting profit. We anticipate a lower than average level of retention to persist as we continue to reevaluate certain books of business and set our rates to reflect our observations of higher severity trends. Renewal pricing increases in 2019 are reflective of our concern about increases in loss severity. We also offer twenty-four month term policies to our physician insureds in one selected jurisdiction. The increase in twenty-four month term policies in 2019 as compared to 2018 primarily reflected the normal cycle of renewals (policies subject to renewal in 2019 were previously written in 2017 rather than 2018.
(2)Custom Physician premium includes large complex physician groups, multi-state physician groups and non-standard physicians and is written primarily on an excess and surplus lines basis. The increase in premium in 2019 as compared to 2018 included timing differences of $5.6 million primarily related to the prior year renewal of certain policies. Excluding the effect of these timing differences, Custom Physician premium increased $18.7 million as compared to 2018. The remaining increase was primarily due new business written, including the addition of a $7.2 million policy, an increase in
exposure related to three policies totaling $5.2 million and, to a lesser extent, renewal price increases. Renewal pricing increases during 2019 reflect the rising loss cost environment. The increase in premium in 2019 was partially offset by retention losses which reflects our focus on underwriting discipline as we continue to emphasize careful risk selection, rate adequacy and a willingness to walk away from business that does not fit our goal of achieving a long-term underwriting profit. We anticipate a lower than average level of retention to persist as we continue to reevaluate certain books of business and set our rates to reflect our observations of higher severity trends.
(3)Hospitals and Facilities premium (which includes hospitals, surgery centers and miscellaneous medical facilities) increased in 2019 as compared to 2018 primarily due new business written and renewal price increases, largely offset by retention losses. Renewal pricing increases in 2019 reflect rate increases and contract modifications that we believe are appropriate given the current loss environment. Retention losses in 2019 were driven by our decision not to renew certain products and, to a lesser extent, the loss of a $1.4 million policy due to price competition as a result of rate increases. As we continue to reevaluate certain books of business, we anticipate our retention to remain at a lower than historic level.
(4)Senior Care premium includes facilities specializing in long term residential care primarily for the elderly ranging from independent living through skilled nursing. Our Senior Care premium decreased in 2019 as compared to 2018 primarily due to retention losses, partially offset by new business written and, to a lesser extent, renewal pricing increases. Retention losses in 2019 were driven by our decision not to renew certain classes of Senior Care business based on our expectations of poor loss performance and, to a lesser extent, the loss of a $0.3 million policy as a result of rate increases. Renewal price increases in 2019 reflect rate increases where we believe appropriate given the loss environment in this space.
(5)We offer custom alternative risk solutions including loss portfolio transfers for healthcare entities that, most commonly, are exiting a line of business, changing an insurance approach or simply preferring to transfer risk. In the third quarter of 2019, we entered into a loss portfolio transfer with a regional hospital group which resulted in $0.9 million of retroactive premium written and fully earned in 2019. In the second quarter of 2018, we entered into a loss portfolio transfer with a large healthcare organization which resulted in $18.7 million of retroactive premium written and fully earned in 2018. See further discussion in footnote 7 that follows.
(6)Our Small Business Unit is primarily comprised of premium associated with podiatrists, legal professionals, dentists and chiropractors. Our Small Business Unit premium decreased in 2019 as compared to 2018 driven by retention losses, partially offset by an increase in renewal pricing and, to a lesser extent, new business written. The increase in renewal pricing was primarily the result of an increase in the rate charged for certain renewed policies in select states.
(7)We offer extended reporting endorsement or "tail" coverage to insureds who discontinue their claims-made coverage with us, and we also periodically offer tail coverage through custom policies. Tail coverage premiums are generally 100% earned in the period written because the policies insure only incidents that occurred in prior periods and are not cancellable. The amount of tail coverage premium written can vary significantly from period to period. The decrease in tail premiums in 2019 was driven by $7.9 million of tail coverage provided in connection with a loss portfolio transfer entered into during the second quarter of 2018, partially offset by $1.8 million of tail coverage provided in connection with a loss portfolio transfer entered into during the third quarter of 2019.
(8)Our Medical Technology Liability is marketed throughout the U.S.; coverage is typically offered on a primary basis, within specified limits, to manufacturers and distributors of medical technology and life sciences products including entities conducting human clinical trials. In addition to the previously listed factors that affect our premium volume, our medical technology liability premium is impacted by the sales volume of insureds. The increase in 2019 was primarily due to new business written and, to a lesser extent, an increase in renewal pricing, largely offset by retention losses. Renewal pricing increases primarily reflect increases in the sales volume and exposure of certain insureds. Retention losses in 2019 are primarily attributable to an increase in competition on terms and pricing.
(9)This component of gross premiums written includes all other product lines within our Specialty P&C segment. The increase during 2019 was due to a $1.5 million specialty contractual liability policy.
(10)Certain components of our gross premiums written include alternative market premiums. We currently cede either all or a portion of the alternative market premium, net of reinsurance, to three SPCs of our wholly owned Cayman Islands reinsurance subsidiaries, Inova Re and Eastern Re, which are reported in our Segregated Portfolio Cell Reinsurance segment. The portion not ceded to the SPCs is retained within our Specialty P&C segment.
The increase in our alternative market Senior Care premium during 2019 was primarily due to new business written, including the addition of one large policy totaling $1.4 million. The remaining increase was attributable to multiple short-term policies written throughout 2018 that renewed on January 1, 2019 with twelve month terms.
The change in renewal pricing for our Specialty P&C segment, including by major component, was as follows:
New business written by major component on a direct basis was as follows:
Retention for our Specialty P&C segment, including by major component, was as follows:
(1) See Gross Premiums Written section for further explanation of retention decline in 2019.