Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Overview
We are a global financial and business services company with operations in the Americas, Europe and Australia. Our primary business is the purchase, collection and management of portfolios of nonperforming loans.
COVID-19
The COVID-19 outbreak, which was first reported in December 2019 and declared a global pandemic by the World Health Organization in March 2020, has impacted all countries in which we operate. In an effort to address the spread of COVID-19, the countries in which we operate have restricted travel, closed country borders, banned gatherings of unrelated individuals, quarantined and isolated infected individuals, closed schools and non-essential businesses and established criteria that must be met before businesses reopen. The global spread of COVID-19 has disrupted normal business operations and resulted in significant unemployment, recessionary economic trends and overall volatility, uncertainty and economic disruption.
To date, we have continued to operate our business considering governmental, legal and regulatory actions in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. We are able to monitor on a daily basis the impacts of COVID-19 on our business, operations and financial results and to take steps to mitigate adverse effects wherever possible. These include communicating with regulators and government officials concerning legislation and regulations, enabling employees to work remotely and implementing social distancing in the workplaces that remain open.
Specific impacts on our business, results of operations and financial condition during the year ended December 31, 2020 included:
•a reduction in U.S. staffing in mid-March 2020, which returned to almost normal levels by the end of April and remains at these levels;
•an increase in U.S. Core cash collections, which we believe was due to our increased ability to contact customers and customers choosing to use additional discretionary funds to voluntarily resolve their debts;
•a decrease in legal collection costs during the second quarter of 2020, as a result of the following, both of which have returned to normal levels to varying degrees over the remainder of 2020;
-a decrease in the volume of U.S. accounts sent through the legal channel, due to our decision to temporarily pause transitioning U.S. accounts into a legal eligible status; and
-a decrease in the volume of European accounts sent through the legal channel due to the closure of courts in many of the European countries in which we operate;
•a decrease in certain expenses such as communication expenses due to mailing decisions made as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and interruptions in postal mailings and deliveries; and
•a decrease in portfolio purchases due to deferrals by sellers and lower levels of bankruptcy filings and charge-offs.
Funds generated from operations, cash collections on finance receivables, existing cash, available borrowings under our revolving credit facilities (including recent modifications to the terms of those facilities) and the addition of our senior notes, have been sufficient to finance our operations, planned capital expenditures, forward flow purchase commitments, debt maturities and portfolio purchases during the pandemic. We continue to monitor the need to expand our access to credit to fund the aforementioned business activities.
Our analysis of the current and future impact of COVID-19 on our operations is based on management’s constant monitoring of key data and information, including (1) changes in laws, regulations and governmental actions, (2) trends in the macroeconomic environment, consumer behavior and key operational metrics such as cash collections and (3) conditions in the nonperforming loan market. However, we cannot predict the full extent to which COVID-19 will impact our business, results of operations and financial condition due to the numerous evolving factors associated with the pandemic. See the "Risk Factors" in Item 1A of this Form 10-K.
Frequently Used Terms
We may use the following terminology throughout this Form 10-K:
•"Amortization rate" refers to cash collections applied to principal on finance receivables as a percentage of total cash collections (prior to the adoption of Accounting Standards Update ("ASU") ASU 2016-13, "Financial Instruments-Credit Losses" and ASU 2019-19, "Codification Improvements to Topic 326, Financial Instrument Credit Losses, collectively referred to as "ASC 326").
•"Buybacks" refers to purchase price refunded by the seller due to the return of ineligible accounts.
•"Cash collections" refers to collections on our owned finance receivables portfolios.
•"Cash receipts" refers to cash collections on our owned finance receivables portfolios plus fee income.
•"Change in expected recoveries" refers to the differences of actual recoveries received when compared to expected recoveries and the net present value of changes in estimated remaining collections.
•"Core" accounts or portfolios refer to accounts or portfolios that are nonperforming loans and are not in an insolvent status upon acquisition. These accounts are aggregated separately from insolvency accounts.
•"Estimated remaining collections" or "ERC" refers to the sum of all future projected cash collections on our owned finance receivables portfolios.
•"Insolvency" accounts or portfolios refer to accounts or portfolios of receivables that are in an insolvent status when we purchase them and as such are purchased as a pool of insolvent accounts. These accounts include IVAs, Trust Deeds in the UK, Consumer Proposals in Canada and bankruptcy accounts in the U.S., Canada, Germany and the UK.
•"Negative Allowance" refers to the present value of cash flows expected to be collected on our finance receivables, classified as an asset on the balance sheet.
•"Portfolio acquisitions" refers to all portfolios acquired as a result of a purchase, but also includes portfolios added as a result of a business acquisition.
•"Portfolio purchases" refers to all portfolios purchased in the normal course of business and excludes those added as a result of business acquisitions.
•"Portfolio income" reflects revenue recorded due to the passage of time using the effective interest rate calculated based on the purchase price of portfolios and estimated remaining collections.
•"Principal amortization" refers to cash collections applied to principal on finance receivables prior to the adoption of ASC 326.
•"Purchase price" refers to the cash paid to a seller to acquire nonperforming loans. Prior to the adoption of ASC 326 purchase price also included certain capitalized costs and adjustments for buybacks.
•"Purchase price multiple" refers to the total estimated collections (as defined below) on owned finance receivables portfolios divided by purchase price.
•"Recoveries" refers to cash collections plus buybacks and other adjustments.
•"Total estimated collections" or "TEC" refers to actual cash collections plus estimated remaining collections on our finance receivables portfolios.
Unless otherwise specified, references to 2020, 2019 and 2018 are for the years ended December 31, 2020, December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018, respectively.
Results of Operations
The results of operations include the financial results of the Company and all of our subsidiaries. As of January 1, 2020 we adopted ASC 326 on a prospective basis. Prior period amounts were accounted for under ASC Topic 310-30 "Loans and Debt Securities Acquired with Deteriorated Credit Quality" ("ASC 310-30"). For further information refer to Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K. The following table sets forth Consolidated Income Statement amounts as a percentage of total revenues for the periods indicated (dollars in thousands):
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared with year ended December 31, 2019
Cash Collections
Cash collections for the periods indicated were as follows (amounts in millions):
(1) Cash collections adjusted refers to 2019 cash collections translated using 2020 exchange rates.
Cash collections were $2,005.8 million in 2020, an increase of $164.5 million, or 8.9%, compared to $1,841.3 million in 2019. The increase was largely due to our U.S. call center and other collections, including a higher level of collections through our digital platforms, increasing $144.4 million, or 23.3%, primarily due to what we believe to be various economic circumstances that have provided U.S. consumers with additional discretionary funds and a willingness to voluntarily resolve their debts. This was partially offset by a $14.6 million, or 3.8%, decrease in U.S. legal collections due to a shift in collections from the legal channel to the call centers and digital platforms. Additionally, Europe cash collections increased $59.7 million, or 11.5%, reflecting the impact of record 2019 purchases as well as strong 2020 purchases. Furthermore, Americas Insolvency cash collections decreased by $25.6 million, or 14.2%, mainly reflecting investment levels not offsetting the runoff of older portfolios.
Revenues
Revenue for the years indicated were as follows (amounts in thousands):
Total revenues were $1,065.4 million in 2020, an increase of $48.3 million, or 4.7%, compared to $1,017.1 million in 2019. The increase is largely due to record portfolio purchases in 2019 and significant cash collections overperformance primarily in the last three quarters of 2020 recorded as a component of Changes in expected recoveries. This overperformance was partially offset by adjustments to our ERCs to reflect our assumption that the overperformance was primarily due to acceleration in the timing of cash collections rather than an increase to total expected collections. We believe this to be an appropriate assumption as we have continued to generate unprecedented cash collections, primarily in the Americas call centers and digital platforms, with two consecutive record cash collections quarters following the record first quarter of 2020, deviating from typical seasonal patterns. We have assumed that these collections are accelerated due to economic circumstances providing consumers with additional discretionary funds and a willingness to voluntarily repay their debts. If we observe sustained performance over time supporting an increase in our total expected collections, there would be additional revenue in the future. Additionally, we made forecast adjustments deemed appropriate given the current environment.
Net Allowance Charges
In 2019, under ASC 310-30, net allowance charges were recorded for significant decreases in expected cash flows or a change in timing of cash flows which would otherwise require a reduction in the stated yield on a pool of accounts. Effective January 1, 2020, under ASC 326, changes to expected cash flows are recorded in changes in expected recoveries within revenues.
Operating Expenses
Total operating expenses were $715.7 million in 2020, a decrease of $29.7 million, or 4.0%, compared to $745.4 million in 2019.
Compensation and Employee Services
Compensation and employee service expenses were $295.2 million in 2020, a decrease of $15.2 million, or 4.9%, compared to $310.4 million in 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to a reduction in the U.S. call center workforce due to efficiencies. Total full-time equivalents decreased 13.4% to 3,820 as of December 31, 2020 from 4,412 as of December 31, 2019. The decrease was slightly offset by a $3.7 million, or 34.2%, increase in share-based compensation expense due to improved actual performance compared to targets and a lower forfeiture rate.
Legal Collection Fees
Legal collection fees represent contingent fees incurred for the cash collections generated by our independent third-party attorney network. Legal collection fees were $53.8 million in 2020, a decrease of $1.5 million, or 2.7%, compared to $55.3 million in 2019 primarily due to a slight decrease in external legal cash collections in the U.S.
Legal Collection Costs
Legal collection costs primarily consist of costs paid to courts where a lawsuit is filed for the purpose of attempting to collect on an account. Legal collection costs were $101.6 million in 2020, a decrease of $32.6 million, or 24.3%, compared to $134.2 million in 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a reduced number of accounts placed into the U.S. legal channel as a result of a shift in collections from the legal channel to the call centers and digital platforms.
Agency Fees
Agency fees primarily represent third-party collection fees. Agency fees were $56.4 million in 2020 compared to $55.8 million in 2019.
Outside Fees and Services
Outside fees and services expenses were $84.1 million in 2020, an increase of $20.6 million, or 32.4%, compared to $63.5 million in 2019. The increase was primarily the result of higher consulting fees, corporate legal expenses and higher fees associated with processing an increased number of debit card transactions due to the increase in cash collections.
Communication
Communication expenses primarily represent postage and telephone related expenses incurred as a result of our collection efforts. Communication expenses were $40.8 million in 2020, a decrease of $3.3 million, or 7.5%, compared to $44.1 million in 2019. The decrease mainly reflects lower postage costs due to mailing decisions made during the COVID-19 pandemic and, to a lesser extent, telephone expenses as a result of improvements in data and analytics that drove efficiencies. These decreases were slightly offset by an increase in digital spending.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net was $141.7 million in 2020 compared to $141.9 million in 2019 as slightly lower overall levels of outstanding borrowings and lower variable interest rates were offset by the addition of senior notes at higher fixed interest rates.
Interest expense, net consisted of the following in 2020 and 2019 (amounts in thousands):
Net Foreign Currency Transaction Gains/(Losses)
Net foreign currency transaction gains were $2.0 million in 2020 compared to $12.0 million in 2019. The decrease was primarily related to lower foreign currency gains in Europe and U.S. dollar linked investments held in Brazil. In any given period, we may incur foreign currency transaction losses or gains from transactions in currencies other than the functional currency.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense was $41.2 million in 2020, an increase of $21.5 million, or 109.1%, compared to $19.7 million in 2019. The increase was primarily due to higher income before income taxes which increased $91.5 million, or 77.9% and some discrete items. The increase was partially offset by changes in foreign tax rates, return to provision adjustments and the mix of earnings among jurisdictions. In 2020 our effective tax rate was 19.7% compared to 16.8% in 2019.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 compared to year ended December 31, 2018
Refer to "Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" of our 2019 Form 10-K for a discussion of our fiscal 2019 results compared to fiscal 2018.
Supplemental Performance Data
Finance Receivables Portfolio Performance
We purchase nonperforming loans from a variety of credit originators and segregate them into two main portfolio segments: Core or Insolvency, based on the status of the account upon acquisition. In addition, the accounts are further segregated into geographical regions based upon where the account was purchased. The accounts represented in the Insolvency tables below are those portfolios of accounts that were in an insolvency status at the time of purchase. This contrasts with accounts in our Core portfolios that file for bankruptcy/insolvency protection after we purchase them, which continue to be tracked in their corresponding Core portfolio. Core customers sometimes file for bankruptcy/insolvency protection subsequent to our purchase of the related Core portfolio. When this occurs, we adjust our collection practices to comply with bankruptcy/insolvency rules and procedures; however, for accounting purposes, these accounts remain in the original Core pool. Insolvency accounts may be dismissed voluntarily or involuntarily subsequent to our purchase of the Insolvency portfolio. Dismissal occurs when the terms of the bankruptcy are not met by the petitioner. When this occurs, we are typically free to pursue collection outside of bankruptcy procedures; however, for accounting purposes, these accounts remain in the original Insolvency pool.
Purchase price multiples can vary over time due to a variety of factors, including pricing competition, supply levels, age of the receivables acquired and changes in our operational efficiency. Purchase price multiples can also vary among types of finance receivables. For example, we generally incur lower collection costs on our Insolvency portfolio compared with our Core portfolio. This allows us, in general, to pay more for an Insolvency portfolio and experience lower purchase price multiples, while generating similar net income margins when compared with a Core portfolio.
When competition increases and/or supply decreases, pricing often becomes negatively impacted relative to expected collections, and the effective interest rates tend to trend lower. The opposite tends to occur when competition decreases and/or supply increases.
Within a given portfolio type, to the extent that lower purchase price multiples are the result of more competitive pricing and lower net yields, this will generally lead to lower profitability. As portfolio pricing becomes more favorable on a relative basis, our profitability will tend to increase. Profitability within given Core portfolio types may also be impacted by the age and quality of the receivables, which impact the cost to collect those accounts. Fresher accounts, for example, typically carry lower associated collection expenses, while older accounts and lower balance accounts typically carry higher costs and, as a result, require higher purchase price multiples to achieve the same net profitability as fresher paper.
Revenue recognition under ASC 310-10 and ASC 326 is driven by estimates of the amount and timing of collections. We record new portfolio acquisitions at the purchase price which reflects the amount we expect to collect discounted at an effective interest rate. As portfolios are purchased during the year, the annual pool is aggregated and the blended effective interest rate will change to reflect new purchasing and new cash flow estimates until the end of the year. At that time, the effective interest rate is fixed at the amount we expect to collect discounted at the rate to equate purchase price to the recovery estimate. During the first year of purchase, we typically do not reforecast the portfolios' initial recovery estimate. Subsequent to the initial year, as we gain collection experience and confidence with a pool of accounts, we regularly update ERC. As a result, our estimate of total collections has often increased as pools have aged. These processes have tended to cause the ratio of ERC to purchase price for any given year of purchasing to gradually increase over time. Thus, all factors being equal in terms of pricing, one would typically tend to see a higher collection to purchase price ratio from a pool of accounts that was six years from acquisition than a pool that was just two years from acquisition.
The numbers presented in the following tables represent gross cash collections and do not reflect any costs to collect; therefore, they may not represent relative profitability. Due to all the factors described above, readers should be cautious when making comparisons of purchase price multiples among periods and between types of receivables.
(1)Includes the acquisition date finance receivables portfolios that were acquired through our business acquisitions.
(2)For our non-US amounts, purchase price is presented at the exchange rate at the end of the year in which the portfolio was purchased. In addition, any purchase price adjustments that occur throughout the life of the portfolio are presented at the year-end exchange rate for the respective year of purchase.
(3)For our non-US amounts, TEC is presented at the year-end exchange rate for the respective year of purchase.
(4)For our non-U.S. amounts, ERC is presented at the December 31, 2020 exchange rate.
(5)The Original Estimated Purchase Price Multiple represents the purchase price multiple at the end of the year of acquisition.
(1)For our non-U.S., amounts are presented using the average exchange rates during the current reporting period.
(2)Total Portfolio Revenue refers to Portfolio Income and Changes in Expected Recoveries combined.
(3)For our non-U.S. amounts, Net Finance Receivables are presented at the December 31, 2020 exchange rate.
(1) For our non-U.S. amounts, cash collections are presented using the average exchange rates during the cash collection period.
(2) Includes the finance receivables portfolios that were acquired through our business acquisitions.
(3) For our non-U.S. amounts, Purchase Price is presented at the exchange rate at the end of the year in which the portfolio was purchased. In addition, any purchase price adjustments that occur throughout the life of the pool are presented at the year-end exchange rate for the respective year of purchase.
Estimated Remaining Collections
The following chart shows our ERC of $6,455.4 million at December 31, 2020 by geographical region (amounts in millions).
The following chart shows our ERC by year as of December 31, 2020. The annual forecast amounts reflect our current estimate of how much we expect to collect on our portfolios. These estimates are translated to U.S. dollar at the December 31, 2020 exchange rate (amounts in millions).
Seasonality
Although the year ended December 31, 2020 deviated from usual seasonal patterns due to the impact of COVID-19, typically cash collections in the Americas tend to be higher in the first half of the year due to the high volume of income tax refunds received by individuals in the U.S., and trend lower as the year progresses. Customer payment patterns in all of the countries in which we operate can be affected by seasonal employment trends, income tax refunds, and holiday spending habits.
Cash Collections
The following table displays our quarterly cash collections by geography and portfolio type, for the periods indicated (amounts in thousands).
The following table provides additional details on the composition of our Core cash collections for the periods indicated (amounts in thousands).
Collections Productivity (U.S. Portfolio)
The following table displays a collections productivity measure for our U.S. Portfolios.
(1)Represents total cash collections less internal legal cash collections, external legal cash collections and Insolvency cash collections from trustee-administered accounts.
Cash Efficiency Ratio
The following table displays our cash efficiency for the periods indicated.
(1) Calculated by dividing cash receipts less operating expenses by cash receipts.
Portfolio Acquisitions
The following graph shows the purchase price of our portfolios by year since 2010. It also includes the acquisition date finance receivable portfolios that were acquired through our business acquisitions.
The following table displays our quarterly portfolio acquisitions for the periods indicated (amounts in thousands).
Portfolio Acquisitions by Stratifications (U.S. Only)
The following table categorizes our quarterly U.S. portfolio acquisitions for the periods indicated into major asset type and delinquency category. Since our inception in 1996, we have acquired more than 57 million customer accounts in the U.S. (amounts in thousands).
(1)Fresh accounts are typically past due 120 to 270 days, charged-off by the credit originator and are either being sold prior to any post-charge-off collection activity or placement with a third-party for the first time.
(2)Primary accounts are typically 360 to 450 days past due and charged-off and have been previously placed with one contingent fee servicer.
(3)Secondary and tertiary accounts are typically more than 660 days past due and charged-off and have been placed with two and three contingent fee servicers, respectively.
(4)Other accounts are typically two to three years or more past due and charged-off and have previously been worked by four or more contingent fee servicers.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We report financial results in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP"). However, management uses certain non-GAAP financial measures including adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization ("Adjusted EBITDA") to evaluate our operating and financial performance as well as to set performance goals. We present Adjusted EBITDA because we consider it an important supplemental measure of operations and financial performance. Management believes Adjusted EBITDA helps provide enhanced period-to-period comparability of operations and financial performance, as it excludes certain items whose fluctuations from period to period do not necessarily correspond to changes in the operations of our business, and is useful to investors as other companies in the industry report similar financial measures. Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as an alternative to net income determined in accordance with GAAP. In addition, our calculation of Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to the calculation of similarly titled measures presented by other companies.
Adjusted EBITDA is calculated starting with our GAAP financial measure, net income attributable to PRA Group, Inc. and is adjusted for:
•income tax expense (or less income tax benefit);
•foreign exchange loss (or less foreign exchange gain);
•interest expense, net (or less interest income, net);
•other expense (or less other income);
•depreciation and amortization;
•net income attributable to noncontrolling interests;
•loss on sale of subsidiaries (or less gain on sale of subsidiaries);
•recoveries applied to negative allowance less changes in expected recoveries for the year ended December 31, 2020; and
•collections applied to principal on finance receivables for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018.
The following table is a reconciliation of net income attributable to PRA Group, Inc., as reported in accordance with GAAP, to Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 (amounts in thousands):
(1) Other expense reflects non-operating expenses.
Additionally, we evaluate our business using certain ratios that use Adjusted EBITDA. Debt to Adjusted EBITDA is calculated by dividing borrowings by Adjusted EBITDA. The following table reflects our Debt to Adjusted EBITDA at December 31 (amounts in thousands):
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We actively manage our liquidity to help provide access to sufficient funding to meet our business needs and financial obligations. As of December 31, 2020, cash and cash equivalents totaled $108.6 million. Of the cash and cash equivalent balance as of December 31, 2020, $97.0 million consisted of cash on hand related to international operations with indefinitely reinvested earnings. See the "Undistributed Earnings of International Subsidiaries" section below for more information.
At December 31, 2020, we had the following borrowings outstanding and availability under our credit facilities (amounts in thousands):
(1) Available borrowings after calculation of borrowing base and debt covenants as of December 31, 2020.
(2) Includes North American revolver and the Colombian revolver.
An additional funding source for our Europe operations is interest-bearing deposits. Per the terms of our European credit facility, we are permitted to obtain interest-bearing deposit funding of up to SEK 1.2 billion (approximately $146.3 million as of December 31, 2020). Interest-bearing deposits as of December 31, 2020 were $132.7 million.
We determined that we were in compliance with the covenants of our financing arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
We have the ability to slow the purchase of finance receivables if necessary, with low impact to current year cash collections. For example, we invested $905.1 million in portfolio acquisitions in 2020. The portfolios acquired in 2020 generated $178.1 million of cash collections, representing only 8.9% of 2020 cash collections.
Contractual obligations over the next year are primarily related to purchase commitments. As of December 31, 2020, we have forward flow commitments in place for the purchase of nonperforming loans with a maximum purchase price of $501.9 million, of which $449.5 million is due within the next 12 months. The $501.9 million includes $324.1 million for the Americas and $177.8 million for Europe. We may also enter into new or renewed forward flow commitments and close on spot transactions in addition to the aforementioned forward flow agreements.
Additionally, of our $2.7 billion borrowings at December 31, 2020, estimated interest, unused fees and principal payments for the next 12 months are approximately $119.6 million, of which, $11.1 million relates to principal. Our principal payment obligations related to debt maturities occur within three to five years as our European credit facility expires in February 2023, our Convertible Notes mature in June 2023, our North American credit facility expires in May 2024 and our Senior Notes mature in September 2025.
We continue to monitor the recent outbreak of COVID-19 on our operations and how that may impact our cash flows and our ability to settle debt. As a result of COVID-19, global financial markets have experienced overall volatility and disruptions to capital and credit markets. We believe that funds generated from operations and from cash collections on finance receivables, together with existing cash, available borrowings under our revolving credit facilities, including recent modifications to the terms of those facilities, and access to the capital markets will be sufficient to finance our operations, planned capital expenditures, forward flow purchase commitments, debt maturities and additional portfolio purchases during the next 12 months. We may, however, seek to access the debt or equity capital markets as we deem appropriate, market permitting. Business acquisitions or higher than expected levels of portfolio purchasing could require additional financing from other sources.
For more information, see Note 7 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Cash Flows Analysis
The following table summarizes our cash flow activity for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (amounts in thousands):
Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities mainly reflects cash collections recognized as revenue partially offset by cash paid for operating expenses, interest and income taxes. Key drivers of operating activities were adjusted for (i) non-cash items included in net income such as provisions for unrealized gains and losses, changes in expected recoveries, depreciation and amortization, deferred taxes, fair value changes in equity securities and stock-based compensation as well as (ii) changes in the balances of operating assets and liabilities, which can vary significantly in the normal course of business due to the amount and timing of payments.
Net cash provided by operating activities increased $8.3 million, or 6.2%, during the year ended December 31, 2020 mainly driven by higher cash collections, lower operating expenses and the impact of unrealized foreign currency transactions.
Investing Activities
Cash provided by investing activities mainly reflects recoveries applied to our negative allowance. Cash used in investing activities mainly reflects acquisitions of nonperforming loans.
Net cash provided by investing activities increased $556.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily from a $327.8 million decrease in purchases of nonperforming loans, a $194.8 million increase in recoveries applied to negative allowance in the current year versus collections applied to principal on finance receivables in the prior year and $57.6 million of cash used related to a business acquisition during the first quarter of 2019. These changes were partially offset by $31.2 million of cash received during the first quarter of 2019 related to the sale of a subsidiary in the fourth quarter of 2018.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities is normally provided by draws on our lines of credit and proceeds from debt offerings. Cash used in financing activities is primarily driven by principal payments on our lines of credit, long-term debt and other debt.
Cash used in financing activities increased $591.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily from a $828.9 million increase in payments on our lines of credit, a $287.4 million payment related to the settlement of our 2020 Notes, a $47.0 million increase in distributions paid to noncontrolling interests, net of contributions received and a $17.8 million decrease in cash provided by interest-bearing deposits. These changes were partially offset by a $303.2 million decrease in payments on long-term debt and $300.0 million of proceeds related to our senior notes.
Undistributed Earnings of International Subsidiaries
We intend to use predominantly all of our accumulated and future undistributed earnings of international subsidiaries to expand operations outside the U.S.; therefore, such undistributed earnings of international subsidiaries are considered to be indefinitely reinvested outside the U.S. Accordingly, no provision for income tax or withholding tax has been provided thereon. If management's intentions change and eligible undistributed earnings of international subsidiaries are repatriated, we could be subject to additional income taxes and withholding taxes. This could result in a higher effective tax rate in the period in which such a decision is made to repatriate accumulated or future undistributed international earnings. The amount of cash on hand related to international operations with indefinitely reinvested earnings was $97.0 million and $109.7 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Refer to the Note 14 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further information related to our income taxes and undistributed international earnings.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020 as defined by Item 303(a)(4) of Regulation S-K promulgated under the Exchange Act.
Contractual Obligations
Our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 were as follows (amounts in thousands):
(1)Includes estimated interest and unused line fees due on our revolving credit facilities and assumes that the outstanding balances on the revolving credit facilities remain constant from the December 31, 2020 balances to maturity. See Note 7 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
(2)Includes scheduled interest and principal payments on our term loan, senior notes and convertible senior notes. See Note 7 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
(3)Reflects the maximum remaining amount to be purchased under forward flow and other contracts for the purchase of nonperforming loans.
(4)See Note 10 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further information.
(5)Amounts exclude unrecognized tax benefits, as the timing and amount of future cash payments are not determinable at this time. See Note 14 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our Consolidated Financial Statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. Our significant accounting policies are discussed in Note 1 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. Our significant accounting policies are fundamental to understanding our results of operations and financial condition because they require that we use estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of revenues, expenses, assets and liabilities.
Three of these policies are considered to be critical because they are important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results, and because they require management to make judgments and estimates that are difficult, subjective and complex regarding matters that are inherently uncertain.
We base our estimates on historical experience, current trends and various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. If these estimates differ significantly from actual results, the impact on our Consolidated Financial Statements may be material.
Management has reviewed these critical accounting policies with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors.
Revenue Recognition - Finance Receivables
We account for the majority of our investment in finance receivables under the guidance of ASC Topic 310 "Receivables" ("ASC 310") and ASC Topic 326-20 "Financial Instruments - Credit Losses - Measured at Amortized Cost" ("ASC 326-20"). Revenue recognition for finance receivables involves the use of estimates and the exercise of judgment on the part of management. These estimates include projections of the quantity and timing of future cash flows and economic lives of our pools of finance receivables. Significant changes in such estimates could result in increased or decreased revenue as we immediately recognize the discounted value of such changes using the constant effective interest rate of the pool.
We account for our finance receivables as follows:
We create each annual accounting pool using our projections of estimated cash flows and expected economic life. We then compute a constant effective interest rate based on the net carrying amount of the pool and reasonable projections of estimated cash flows and expectation of its economic life. As actual cash flow results are received we record the time value of
the expected cash as Portfolio income and over and under performance and changes in expected future cash flows from expected cash as Changes in expected recoveries. We review each pool watching for trends, actual performance versus projections and curve shape (a graphical depiction of the timing of cash flows). We then re-forecast future cash flows by applying discounted cash flow methodologies to our ERC and recognize income over the estimated life of the pool at the constant effective interest rate of the pool.
Significant judgment is used in evaluating expected recoveries using the discounted cash flow approach and the estimated life of the pool.
Valuation of Goodwill
In accordance with FASB ASC Topic 350, "Intangibles-Goodwill and Other" ("ASC 350"), we evaluate Goodwill for impairment annually and more frequently if indicators of potential impairment exist. Goodwill is reviewed for potential impairment at the reporting unit level.
Goodwill is evaluated for impairment either under the qualitative assessment option or using a quantitative forecast approach depending on facts and circumstances of a reporting unit, including the excess of fair value over carrying amount in the last valuation, changes in the business environment and changes of the reporting unit or its composition. If upon evaluation of the qualitative factors, we determine it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is greater than its carrying amount, there is no impairment loss to record and a quantitative assessment is not required. If the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value, then we are required to determine the reporting unit’s fair value and record as an impairment loss the amount the carrying value exceeds fair value, not to exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to the respective reporting unit.
We determine the fair value of a reporting unit by applying the approaches prescribed under ASC Topic 820 "Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures": the income approach and the market approach. Depending on the availability of public data and suitable comparables, we may or may not use the market approach or we may emphasize the results from the approach differently. Under the income approach, we estimate the fair value of a reporting unit based on the present value of estimated future cash flows and a residual terminal value. Cash flow projections are based on management's estimates of revenue growth rates, operating margins, necessary working capital and capital expenditure requirements, taking into consideration industry and market conditions. The discount rate used is based on the weighted-average cost of capital adjusted for the relevant risk associated with business-specific characteristics and the uncertainty related to the reporting unit's ability to execute on the projected cash flows. Under the market approach, we estimate fair value based on prices and other relevant market transactions involving comparable publicly-traded companies with operating and investment characteristics similar to the reporting unit.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes throughout the U.S. and in numerous international jurisdictions. These tax laws are complex and are subject to different interpretations by the taxpayer and the relevant government taxing authorities. When determining our domestic and international income tax expense, we make judgments about the application of these inherently complex laws.
We follow the guidance of ASC Topic 740 "Income Taxes" ("ASC 740") as it relates to the provision for income taxes and uncertainty in income taxes. Accordingly, we record a tax provision for the anticipated tax consequences of the reported results of operations. The provision for income taxes is estimated using the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax basis of assets and liabilities, and for operating losses and tax credit carry-forwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the currently enacted tax rates that apply to taxable income in effect for the years in which those tax assets are expected to be realized or settled.
We exercise significant judgment in estimating the potential exposure to unresolved tax matters and apply a more-likely-than-not criteria approach for recording tax benefits related to uncertain tax positions in the application of the complex tax laws. While actual results could vary, we believe we have adequate tax accruals with respect to the ultimate outcome of such unresolved tax matters. We record interest and penalties related to unresolved tax matters as a component of income tax expense when the more-likely-than-not standards are met.
Beginning with the 2017 tax year, we used a revised tax accounting method to recognize net finance receivables income. Under this method, a portion of the annual collections are amortized and the remaining portion is taxable income. The deferred tax liability related to the difference in timing between the new method and the cost recovery method was incorporated evenly into our tax filings over four years, ending in tax year 2020.
In the event that all or part of the deferred tax assets are determined not to be realizable in the future, we would establish a valuation allowance and charge to earnings the impact in the period such a determination is made. If we subsequently realize deferred tax assets that were previously determined to be unrealizable, the respective valuation allowance would be reversed, resulting in a positive adjustment to earnings. The establishment or release of a valuation allowance does not have an impact on cash, nor does such an allowance preclude the use of loss carryforwards or other deferred tax assets in future periods. The calculation of tax liabilities involves significant judgment in estimating the impact of uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws. Resolution of these uncertainties in a manner inconsistent with our expectations could have a material impact on our results of operations and financial position.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a summary of recent accounting pronouncements and the anticipated effects on our Consolidated Financial Statements see Note 1 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.