Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis provides information which Porch’s management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of Porch’s consolidated results of operations and financial condition. This discussion and analysis should be read together with the consolidated financial statements and related notes that are included elsewhere in this Annual Report. In addition to historical financial analysis, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions, as described under the heading “Forward-Looking Statements.” Actual results and timing of selected events may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” or elsewhere in this Annual Report. Unless the context otherwise requires, references in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” to “we”, “us”, “our”, and “the Company” are intended to mean the business and operations of Porch and its consolidated subsidiaries.
Certain figures, such as interest rates and other percentages, included in this section have been rounded for ease of presentation. Percentage figures included in this section have not in all cases been calculated on the basis of such rounded figures but on the basis of such amounts prior to rounding. For this reason, percentage amounts in this section may vary slightly from those obtained by performing the same calculations using the figures in Porch’s financial statements or in the associated text. Certain other amounts that appear in this section may similarly not sum due to rounding.
Business Overview
Porch is a vertical software platform for the home, providing software and services to approximately 11,000 home services companies, such as home inspectors, moving companies, utility companies, warranty companies, and others. Porch helps these service providers grow their business and improve their customer experience.
Porch provides software and services to home services companies and, through these relationships, gains unique and early access to homebuyers and homeowners, assists homebuyers and homeowners with critical services such as insurance and moving, and, in turn, Porch’s platform drives demand for other services from such companies as part of our value proposition. Porch has three types of customers: (1) home services companies, such as home inspectors, for whom Porch provides software and services and who provide introductions to homebuyers and homeowners; (2) consumers, such as homebuyers and homeowners, whom Porch assists with the comparison and provision of various critical home services, such as insurance, moving, security, TV/internet, and home repair and improvement; and (3) service providers, such as insurance carriers, moving companies, security companies and TV/internet providers, who pay Porch for new customer sign-ups.
Throughout the last seven (7) years, Porch has established many partnerships across a number of home-related industries. Porch has also proven effective at selectively acquiring companies which can be efficiently integrated into Porch’s platform. In 2017, we significantly expanded our position in the home inspection industry by acquiring ISN™, a developer of ERP and CRM software for home inspectors. In November 2018, we acquired HireAHelper™, a provider of software and demand for moving companies.
We sell our software and services to companies using a variety of sales and marketing tactics. We have teams of inside sales representatives organized by vertical market who engage directly with companies. We have enterprise sales teams which target the large named accounts in each of our vertical markets. These teams are supported by a variety of typical software marketing tactics, including both digital, in-person (such as trade shows and other events) and content marketing.
For consumers, Porch largely relies on our unique and proprietary relationships with the approximately 11,000 companies using Porch’s software to provide the company with end customer access and introductions. Porch then utilizes technology, lifecycle marketing and teams in lower cost locations to operate as a Moving Concierge to assist these consumers with services. Porch has invested in limited direct-to-consumer (“D2C”) marketing capabilities, but expects to become more advanced over time with capabilities such as digital and social retargeting.
Key Performance Measures and Operating Metrics
In the management of our businesses, we identify, measure and evaluate a variety of operating metrics. The key performance measures and operating metrics we use in managing our businesses are set forth below. These key performance measures and operating metrics are not prepared in accordance with GAAP, and may not be comparable to or calculated in the same way as other similarly titled measures and metrics used by other companies. The key performance measures presented have been adjusted for divested Porch businesses in 2018 through 2020.
● Average Number of Companies in Quarter - Porch provides software and services to home services companies and, through these relationships, gains unique and early access to homebuyers and homeowners, assists homebuyers and homeowners with critical services such as insurance and moving. Porch’s customers include home services companies, such as home inspectors, for whom Porch provides software and services and who provide introductions to homebuyers and homeowners. Porch tracks the average number of home services companies from which it generates revenue each quarter in order to measure our ability to attract, retain and grow our relationships with home services companies. Management defines average companies in a quarter as the number of home services companies across all of Porch’s home services verticals that (i) had revenue contracts with us and (ii) generated revenue each month, averaged across a quarterly period.
● Average Revenue per Account per Month - Management views Porch’s ability to increase revenue generated from existing customers as a key component of Porch’s growth strategy. Average revenue per account per month in quarter is defined as the average revenue per month generated across all our home services company customer accounts in a quarterly period. Average Revenue per Account per Month in Quarter are derived from all customers and total revenue; not only customers and revenues associated with Porch’s referral network,
The following table summarizes our average companies in quarter and average revenue per account per month for each of the quarterly periods indicated:
● Number of Monetized Services in Quarter - Porch connects consumers with home services companies nationwide and offers a full range of products and services where homeowners can, among other things: (i) compare and buy home insurance policies (along with auto, flood and umbrella policies) with competitive rates and coverage; (ii) arrange for a variety of services in connection with their move, from labor to load or unload a truck to full-service, long-distance moving services; (iii) discover and install home automation and security systems; (iv) compare internet and television options for their new home; (v) book small handyman jobs at fixed, upfront prices with guaranteed quality; and (vi) compare bids from home improvement professionals who can complete bigger jobs. Porch tracks the number of monetized services performed through its platform each quarter and the revenue generated per service performed in order to measure to measure market penetration with homebuyers and homeowners and Porch’s ability to deliver high-revenue services within those groups. Monetized services per quarter is defined as the total number of unique services from which we generated revenue, including, but not limited to, new insurance customers, completed moving jobs, security installations, TV/internet installations or other home projects, measured over a quarterly period.
● Average Revenue per Monetized Service - Management believes that shifting the mix of services delivered to homebuyers and home owners toward higher revenue services is a key component of Porch’s growth strategy. Average revenue per monetized services in quarter is the average revenue generated per monetized service performed in a quarterly period. When calculating Average Revenue per Monetized Service in quarter, average revenue is defined as total quarterly service transaction revenues generated from monetized services divided by three months.
The following table summarizes our monetized services and average revenue per monetized service for each of the quarterly periods indicated:
In 2020, the Company shifted insurance monetization from getting paid per quote to earning multiyear insurance commissions, resulting in fewer monetized transactions with higher average revenue.
In March 2020, COVID-19 impacted the service volumes during the period from March until June. The impact on service volumes, largely recovered by June 30, 2020 and after adjusting for insurance monetization remains above prior year volumes.
Recent Developments
Merger and Public Company Costs
Porch Group, Inc. was originally known as PropTech Acquisition Corporation, a special purpose acquisition company, which completed its initial public offering in November 2019. On December 23, 2020, the Company consummated its initial business combination pursuant to that certain Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated July 30, 2020 (as amended by the First Amendment to the Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated as of October 12, 2020) by and among PTAC, PTAC Merger Sub Corporation, a wholly-owned subsidiary of PTAC, Porch.com, Inc., and the representative of all pre-merger shareholders of Porch. The pre-merger Porch entity is considered the Company’s accounting predecessor.
While the legal acquirer in the merger agreement was PTAC, for financial accounting and reporting purposes under generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“GAAP”), Porch was the accounting acquirer and the merger was accounted for as a “reverse recapitalization.” A reverse recapitalization does not result in a new basis of accounting, and the financial statements of the combined entity represent the continuation of the financial statements of Porch in many respects. Under this method of accounting, PTAC was treated as the “acquired” company for financial reporting purposes. For accounting purposes, Porch was deemed to be the accounting acquirer in the transaction and, consequently, the transaction was treated as a recapitalization of Porch (i.e., a capital transaction involving the issuance of stock by PTAC for the stock of Porch). Accordingly, the consolidated assets, liabilities and results of operations of the pre-merger Porch entity became the historical financial statements of Porch Group, Inc., and PTAC’s assets, liabilities and results of operations were consolidated with Porch beginning on the acquisition date. Operations prior to the closing of the merger are presented as those of Porch. The net assets of PTAC were recognized at historical, with no goodwill or other intangible assets recorded. The most significant change in Porch’s reported financial position and results is an increase in cash of approximately $269 million.
As a consequence of the merger, Porch has become the successor to an SEC-registered and NASDAQ-listed company which will require Porch to hire additional personnel and implement procedures and processes to address public company regulatory requirements and customary practices. Porch expects to incur additional annual expenses as a public company for, among other things, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, director fees and additional internal and external accounting and legal and administrative resources, including increased audit and legal fees.
COVID-19 Impact
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared a pandemic related to the global novel coronavirus disease 2019 (“COVID-19”) outbreak. The COVID-19 pandemic has adversely affected Porch’s business operations, which has
impacted revenue primarily in the first half of 2020. In response to the COVID-19 outbreak and government-imposed measures to control its spread, Porch’s ability to conduct ordinary course business activities has been and may continue to be impaired for an indefinite period of time. The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on Porch’s operational and financial performance will depend on various future developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak and impact on the Company’s customers, suppliers, and employees, all of which is uncertain at this time. Porch expects the COVID-19 pandemic to adversely impact revenue and results of operations, but Porch is unable to predict at this time the size and duration of this adverse impact. At the same time, Porch is observing a recovery in home sales to pre-COVID-19 levels in the second half of 2020, and with them, home inspections and related services. For more information on Porch’s operations and risks related to health epidemics, including the coronavirus, please see the section of this Annual Report entitled “Risk Factors - Risks Relating to Porch’s Business and Industry.”
Comparability of Financial Information
Porch’s future results of operations and financial position may not be comparable to historical results as a result of the merger.
Key Factors Affecting Operating Results
The Company has been implementing its strategy as a vertical software platform for the home, providing software and services to approximately 11,000 home services companies, such as home inspectors, moving companies, utility companies, warranty companies and others. The following are key factors affecting our operating results in 2019 and 2020:
● Continued investment in growing and expanding our position in the home inspection industry as a result of the 2017 acquisition of ISN™, a developer of ERP and CRM software for home inspectors.
● Continued investment in growing and expanding our position in providing moving services to consumers as a result of the 2018 acquisition of HireAHelper™, a provider of software and demand for moving companies.
● In 2020 the Company invested $8.3 million in cash and $6.9 million in common stock to acquire four companies to expand the scope and nature of the Company’s product and service offerings, obtain new customer acquisition channels, add additional team members with important skillsets, and realize synergies, in transactions accounted for as a business combination.
● Intentionally building operating leverage in the business by growing operating expenses at a slower rate than the growth in revenue. We are specifically increasing economies of scale related to our variable selling costs, Moving Concierge call center operations and product and technology costs.
● Divesting businesses in 2020 and 2019 that were not core to our strategy as a vertical software platform for the home. Upon divestiture, we recorded a gain of $1.4 million and a loss of $5.0 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
● Complex debt and equity financings provided gross sources of cash of $70.9 million and $34.6 million in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. These financings included complex financial instruments, including convertible debt and equity, with both common stock and preferred stock warrants. The reported results include fair value gains and losses from the remeasurement of debt and warrants.
● During 2020, the Company reduced cash payroll costs by $4.0 million in exchange for a commitment by the Company to provide up to 2,356,045 RSUs subject to certain performance and service. The performance vesting conditions, which were previously considered not probable of achievement were met in December 2020 as a result of the Merger. As a result, a cumulative catch up of $6.5 million of compensation expense was recorded in 2020.
● A significant secondary stock transaction between the Company’s CEO and a significant Porch stockholder at the time resulted in the recognition of a one-time stock-based compensation charge of $33.2 million in 2019.
● In connection with the Merger, the CEO entered into an agreement with another significant shareholder for a payment of $3.2 million in cash and 950,000 of Porch Group, Inc. stock from the CEO to the other significant shareholder to induce the conversion of the shareholder’s preferred stock to common stock immediately prior to the close of the PTAC Merger Agreement. This transfer of $17.3 million in consideration was accounted for as deemed capital contribution from the CEO and increased total net loss in determining net loss available to common shareholders by $17.3 million.
Basis of Presentation
The consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes of Porch include the accounts of the Company and its consolidated subsidiaries and were prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). All significant intercompany accounts and transactions are eliminated in consolidation.
The Company operates in a single segment. Operating segments are identified as components of an enterprise about which separate discrete financial information is available for evaluation by the chief operating decision maker (“CODM”) in making decisions regarding resource allocation and assessing performance. The Company has determined that its Chief Executive Officer is the CODM. To date, the Company’s CODM has made such decisions and assessed performance at the Company level.
Components of Results of Operations
Total Revenue
The Company primarily generates revenue from (1) fees received for connecting homeowners to customers in the Company’s referral network, which consist of individual contractors, small businesses, insurance carriers, and large enterprises (“Referral Network Revenue”); (2) fees received for providing home improvement, maintenance and moving services directly to homeowners (“Managed Services Revenue”); and (3) fees received for providing subscription access to the Company’s inspection software platform (“Software Subscription Revenue”). Revenue is recognized when control of the promised services or goods is transferred to our customers and in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to be entitled to in exchange for those services or goods.
In the Referral Network Revenue stream, the Company connects third party service providers (“Service Providers”) with homeowners that meet pre-defined criteria and may be looking for relevant services. Service Providers include a variety of service providers throughout a homeowner’s lifecycle, including plumbers, electricians and roofers, as well as movers, TV/Internet, warranty, insurance carriers, and security monitoring providers. The Company also sells home and auto insurance policies for insurance carriers.
Managed Services Revenue includes fees earned from homeowners for providing a variety of services directly to the homeowner, including handyman, plumbing, electrical, appliance repair and moving services. The Company generally invoices for managed services projects on a fixed fee or time and materials basis. The transaction price represents the contractually agreed upon price with the end customer for providing the respective service. Revenue is recognized as services are performed based on an output measure or progress, which is generally over a short duration (e.g., same day). Fees earned for providing managed services projects are non-refundable and there is generally no right of return.
In the Software Subscription Revenue stream, the Company’s subscription arrangements, which primarily relates to subscriptions to the Company’s home inspector software, do not provide the customer with the right to take possession of the software supporting the cloud-based application services. The Company’s standard subscription contracts are monthly contracts in which pricing is based on a specified price per inspection completed through the software. Fees earned for providing access to the subscription software are non-refundable and there is no right of return. Revenue is recognized based on the amount which the Company is entitled to for providing access to the subscription software during the monthly contract term.
Total Costs and Expenses
Operating expenses
Operating expenses are categorized into five categories:
● Cost of revenue;
● Selling and marketing;
● Product and technology;
● General and administrative; and
● Gains and losses on divestiture of businesses.
The categories of operating expenses, except gains and losses on divestiture of businesses, include both, cash expenses and non-cash charges, such as stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization are recorded in all operating expense categories, and consist of depreciation from property, equipment and software and intangible assets.
Cost of revenue primarily consist of professional fees and materials under the Managed Services model and credit card processing fees, including merchant fees.
Selling and marketing expenses primarily consist of third-party data leads, affiliate and partner leads, paid search and search engine optimization (“SEO”) costs, payroll, employee benefits and stock-compensation expense and other headcount related costs associated with sales efforts directed toward companies and consumers.
Product and technology development costs primarily consist of payroll, employee benefits, stock-compensation expense, other headcount related costs associated with product development, net of costs capitalized as internally developed software, cloud computing, hosting and other technology costs, software subscriptions, professional services and amortization of internally-development software.
General and administrative expenses primarily consist of expenses associated with functional departments for finance, legal, human resources and executive management expenses. The primary categories of expenses include payroll, employee benefits, stock-compensation expense and other headcount related costs, rent for office space, legal and professional fees, taxes, licenses and regulatory fees, and other administrative costs.
Loss on divestiture of businesses primarily consist of losses on the sale of two businesses in 2019. Gain on divestiture of businesses consists of gain on the sale of a business during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates6
The preparation of Porch’s consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires Porch’s management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported and disclosed in the Porch consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. These estimates and assumptions include, but are not limited to: estimated variable consideration for services transferred, depreciable lives for property and equipment, acquired intangible assets, goodwill, the valuation allowance on deferred tax assets, assumptions used in stock-based compensation, and estimates of fair value of debt and warrants, contingent consideration, and common stock. Actual results could differ materially from those estimates and assumptions, and those differences could be material to the Porch’s consolidated financial statements.
At least quarterly, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions and make changes accordingly. For information on our significant accounting policies, see Note 1 to the accompanying Porch audited consolidated financial statements and Note 1 to our accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Certain accounting policies have a more significant impact on our financial statements due to the size of the financial statement elements and prevalence of their application. The following is a summary of some of the more critical accounting policies and estimates.
Revenue Recognition
Effective January 1, 2019, the Company’s revenue recognition policy is a critical policy due to the adoption of the guidance from ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, and because of the variety of revenue generating transactions.
The Company determines revenue recognition through the following five-step framework:
● identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer;
● identification of the performance obligations in the contract;
● determination of the transaction price;
● allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
● recognition of revenue when, or as, the Company satisfies a performance obligation.
The Company identifies performance obligations in its contracts with customers, which primarily include delivery of homeowner leads or the sale of insurance policies (Referral Network Revenue), performance of home project and moving services (Managed Services Revenue), and providing access to the Company’s software platforms (Software Subscription Revenue). The transaction price is determined based on the amount which the Company expects to be entitled to in exchange for providing the promised services to the customer. The transaction price in the contract is allocated to each distinct performance obligation on a relative standalone selling price basis. Revenue is recognized when performance obligations are satisfied. In certain transactions the transaction price is considered variable and an estimate of the constrained transaction price is recorded by the Company. Changes in variable consideration may result in an increase or a decrease to revenue. Changes to the estimated variable consideration were not material for the periods presented.
Contract payment terms vary from due upon receipt to net 30 days. Collectability is assessed based on a number of factors including collection history and creditworthiness of the customer. If collectability of substantially all consideration to which the Company is entitled under the contract is determined to be not probable, revenue is not recorded until collectability becomes probable at a later date.
Stock-Based Compensation
Accounting for stock-based compensation is a critical accounting policy due to the broad-based equity awards provided to employees at all levels within the Company and the use of equity awards as part of the strategy to retain employees as a result of mergers and acquisitions. The Company issues stock-based compensation to employees and nonemployees in the form of stock options and restricted stock awards. The fair value of stock options is based on the date of the grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The awards are accounted for by recognizing the fair value of the related award over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period. Forfeitures are accounted for when they occur.
There are a variety of estimates in the Black-Scholes opinion pricing model, including the determination of the fair value of the Company’s common stock, expected volatility, term, dividends and risk-free rate. Prior to the close of the Merger, we engaged an independent third-party valuation consultant to make periodic valuations of our class of common and preferred stock. The fair value of restricted stock awards is based on the value of the underlying stock, which is estimated periodically with assistance from the independent third-party valuation specialist using both market and income approaches.
Business Combinations
The Company has engaged in mergers and acquisitions and intends to continue to make acquisitions a significant part of our growth strategy. The Company made acquisitions with cash and non-cash consideration totaling $0.4 million in 2019 and $17.6 million in 2020. The Company accounts for business acquisitions using the acquisition method of accounting and records any identifiable intangible assets separate from goodwill. Intangible assets are recorded at their fair value based on estimates as of the date of acquisition. Goodwill is recorded as the residual amount of the purchase price consideration less the fair value assigned to the individual identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed as of the date of acquisition. The accounting estimates associated with acquisitions are complex due to judgements and assumptions involved in determining (1) the total consideration paid because we have used cash, stock and earnouts and (2) the value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed. The Company allocates the purchase price of the acquisition to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on estimates of the fair value at the dates of the acquisitions. Contingent consideration, which represents an obligation of the Company to make additional payments or equity interests to the former owner as part of the purchase price if specified future events occur or conditions are met, is accounted for at the acquisition date fair value either as a liability or as equity depending on the terms of the acquisition agreement.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2020 to Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2019
The net loss in 2020 of $51.6 million compared with the net loss in 2019 of $103.3 million was impacted by a large, one-time stock-based compensation charge of $33.2 million related to the Company’s CEO 2019 secondary stock sale transaction, 2019 losses on the remeasurement or extinguishment of debt and warrants that totaled $9.0 million, and a $5.0 million gain on a divestiture of a businesses in 2019.
The following table sets forth our historical operating results for the periods indicated, with fiscal year 2019 incorporating operating results of since-divested businesses:
NM - percentage calculated is not meaningful.
Revenue
Total revenue decreased by $4.4 million, or 6% from $77.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2019 to $73.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. Revenue decreased by $17.7 million due to divested Porch businesses, offset by increase in revenue in 2020 primarily driven by the growth in our moving services and insurance businesses, which contributed $13.8 million of the revenue increase in 2020. As Porch has grown the number of companies that use our software and services, we have been able to grow our B2B2C (“Business to Business to Consumer”) and move related services revenues. This includes revenues related to moving, insurance, TV/Internet connections, and security.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue decreased by $3.9 million, or 18% from $21.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2019 to $17.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in the cost of revenue was mostly attributable to a $5.9 million of costs related to divested businesses, offset by growth in moving services. As a percentage of revenue, cost of revenue represented 24% of revenue in 2020 compared to 28% in 2019.
Selling and marketing
Selling and marketing expenses decreased by $14.4 million, or 26% from $56.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2019 to $41.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is due to $6.8 million related to divested businesses, $7.6 million mainly related to savings in third party data leads and marketing costs. The spend on data leads was optimized by focusing on the most productive lead sources that reduced overall spend and generated higher revenue. As a percentage of revenue, selling and marketing expenses represented 57% of revenue in 2020 compared with 73% in 2019 due to the economies of scale.
Product and technology
Product and technology expenses decreased by $2.7 million, or 9% from $31 million in the year ended December 31, 2019 to $28.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The $2.7 million decrease is due to divested businesses of $3.1 million, offset by growth in our moving group. As a percentage of revenue, product and technology expenses represented 39% of revenue in 2020 compared with 40% in 2019.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses decreased by $23.6 million, or 45% from $52 million in the year ended December 31, 2019 to $28.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to a significantly higher stock-based compensation charge related to the 2019 secondary market transaction as indicated in the table below, offset by higher stock-based compensation related to employee awards in 2020.
Stock-based compensation consists of expense related to (1) equity awards in the normal course of business operations and (2) a secondary market transaction as described below (dollar amounts in thousands):
In May 2019, the Company’s CEO purchased a total of 16,091,277 legacy Porch.com shares of redeemable convertible preferred stock from a significant Porch stockholder at the time for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $4.0 million ($0.25 per legacy Porch.com share). The Company determined that the purchase price was below fair value of such shares and as result recorded compensation expense of approximately $33.2 million in general and administrative expense for the difference between the purchase price and fair value. This secondary stock transaction was a transaction negotiated by such significant Porch stockholder and the CEO, whereby the CEO transferred funds for the purchase to the selling shareholder and did not involve a grant of new shares by the Company to the CEO. Due to the unique circumstances, this stock-based compensation charge in 2019 attributable to the CEO purchasing stock from a shareholder is not expected to reoccur in future years.
In July 2019, the Company’s CEO and Founder subsequently sold 901,940 shares of legacy Porch.com redeemable convertible preferred stock as an incentive to eleven executives of the Company at the same price at which the shares were initially acquired in the May 2019 transaction. The Company has the right to repurchase such shares if certain service vesting conditions and performance conditions are not met. In December 2020, the performance vesting conditions were met, and compensation expense of $1.6 million was recorded in 2020 related to these awards. The remaining stock compensation related to the award will be recognized over the remaining service period.
Loss on divestiture of businesses
In each of 2020 and 2019, the Company divested a business tied to the Company’s early Direct to Consumer (“D2C”) marketplace strategy. The Company recorded a gain on divestiture of $1.4 million in 2020, and a loss on divestiture of $5.0 million in 2019.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense increased by $7.6 million, or 107% from $7.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2019 to $14.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to higher average interest-bearing debt outstanding throughout 2020 compared to 2019. Over the course of the year, the Company borrowed more than $67 million of high-interest bearing debt which was mostly paid off upon the Merger, which resulted in higher interest payments and write offs of the related debt issuance costs.
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense) was a $2.8 million of income, net in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $8.0 million of expense, net in the year ended December 31, 2019. Gains on the remeasurement and extinguishment of debt and warrants totaled $2.0 million in 2020, while in 2019, the Company recorded a combined $9.0 million loss on the remeasurement and extinguishment of debt and warrants.
Income tax expense (benefit)
The income tax benefit of $1.7 million in 2020 was due to the partial release of the Company's valuation allowance as a result of deferred tax liabilities from acquisitions. The income tax expense was not material in 2019. The Company continues to recognize a full valuation allowance against substantially all of its net deferred tax assets.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our results determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP, we believe that Adjusted EBITDA, as defined below, a non-GAAP measure is useful in evaluating our operational performance distinct and apart from financing costs, certain non-cash expenses and non-operational expenses. We use this non-GAAP financial information to evaluate our ongoing operations and for internal planning, budgeting and forecasting purposes and for setting management bonus programs. We believe that non-GAAP financial information, when taken collectively, may be helpful to investors in assessing our operating performance and comparing our performance with competitors and other comparable companies. This non-GAAP measure should be considered in addition to results prepared in accordance with GAAP, but should not be considered a substitute for or superior to GAAP. We endeavor to compensate for the limitation of the non-GAAP measure presented by also providing the most directly comparable GAAP measure, which is net loss, and a description of the reconciling items and adjustments to derive the non-GAAP measure.
Adjusted EBITDA is defined as net loss adjusted for interest expense; income taxes; total other expenses, net; asset impairment charges; stock-based compensation expense; acquisition-related impacts, including compensation to the sellers that requires future service, amortization of intangible assets, gains (losses) recognized on changes in the value of contingent consideration arrangements, if any, gain or loss on divestures and certain transaction costs.
Adjusted EBITDA is intended as a supplemental measure of our performance that is neither required by, nor presented in accordance with, GAAP. We believe that the use of Adjusted EBITDA provides an additional tool for investors to use in evaluating ongoing operating results and trends and in comparing the Company’s financial measures with those of comparable companies, which may present similar non-GAAP financial measures to investors. However, you should be aware that when evaluating Adjusted EBITDA, we may incur future expenses similar to those excluded when calculating these measures. In addition, our presentation of these measures should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or non-recurring items. Our computation of Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures computed by other companies, because all companies may not calculate Adjusted EBITDA in the same fashion.
Because of these limitations, Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for performance measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using Adjusted EBITDA on a supplemental basis. You should review the reconciliation of net loss to Adjusted EBITDA below and not rely on any single financial measure to evaluate our business.
The following table reconciles net loss to Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, respectively (dollar amounts in thousands):
(1) Other expense, net includes:
(2) Acquisition and related expense, net includes:
Adjusted EBITDA loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $17.5 million, a $19.3 or 110% decrease from Adjusted EBITDA loss of $36.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The improvement in Adjusted EBITDA from 2019 to 2020 was due to cost savings initiatives and implementation of a partial employee furlough and payroll reduction in exchange for RSUs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since inception, we have financed our operations primarily from the sales of redeemable convertible preferred stock and convertible promissory notes, and proceeds from senior secured loans. On December 23, 2020, the Company received approximately $269.5 million of aggregate cash proceeds from recapitalization, net of transactions costs. As of
December 31, 2020, the Company had cash and cash equivalents of $196 million and $11.4 million of restricted cash representing the minimum cash balance of $3.0 million required by our senior secured lenders and $8.4 million of loan proceeds related to the Paycheck Protection Program Loan.
The Company has incurred losses since its inception, and has an accumulated deficit at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 totaling $315.1 million and $263.5 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019 the Company had $50.8 million and $65.7 million aggregate principal amount outstanding on term loans and promissory notes, respectively. During 2020, the Company refinanced the existing $40.0 million term loans and received additional loan proceeds of $7.0 million from new senior secured term loans and $8.3 million from the U.S. government pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program under the CARES Act. In August and October 2020, the Company received a total of $10.0 million in loan proceeds from a convertible loan agreement, which was repaid along with other subordinated notes payable in connection with the Merger. The Company has used debt proceeds principally to fund general operations and acquisitions. In 2020, the Company invested $7.8 million (net of cash acquired) to acquire four companies, in a transaction accounted for as a business combination.
The following table provides a summary of cash flow data for the year ended December 31, 2020 and the year ended December 31, 2019:
NM - percentage calculated is not meaningful.
Net cash used in operating activities was $48.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net cash used in operating activities consists of net loss of $51.6 million, adjusted for non-cash items and the effect of changes in working capital. Non-cash adjustments include stock-based compensation expense of $11.4 million, depreciation and amortization of $6.6 million, fair value adjustments to debt, contingent consideration and warrants of $0.6 million, non-cash accrued and payment-in-kind interest of $7.5 million and gain from the sale of assets or divestiture of businesses of $1.4 million. Net cash used in operating activities in 2020 of $48.7 million compared with $29.3 million in 2019 was an increase of $19.3 million, which was significantly impacted by the change in accrued expenses and other current liabilities in each year. During 2019, the Company in order to conserve cash allowed accrued expenses and other current liabilities to increase by $7.7 million. After the completion of the Merger, in December 2020, the Company paid down $15.9 million of accrued expenses and other current liabilities in order to reduce obligations to vendors and suppliers. The combined impact between years resulted in year-over-year change in net cash used cash of $23.6 million attributable to the change in accrued expenses and other current liabilities.
Net cash used in investing activities was $10.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net cash used in investing activities is primarily related to investments to develop internal use software of $2.6 million, acquisitions, net of cash acquired of $7.8 million and purchases of property and equipment of $0.3 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $259.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net cash provided by financing activities is primarily related to proceeds from the recapitalization of $269.5 million, debt financing of $66.2, net of loan repayments of $81.6 million, and redeemable convertible preferred stock financing of $4.7 million.
Net cash used in operating activities was $29.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net cash used in operating activities consists of net loss of $103.3 million, adjusted for non-cash items and the effect of changes in working capital. Non-cash adjustments include stock-based compensation expense of $36.0 million, depreciation and amortization of $7.4 million, fair value adjustments to debt, contingent consideration and warrants of $8.7 million, non-cash accrued and payment-in-kind interest of $2.4 million and loss from the sale of assets or divestiture of businesses of $5.0 million. Net changes in working capital provided cash of $13.2 million, primarily due to increases in current liabilities.
Net cash used in investing activities was $5.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net cash used in investing activities is primarily related to investments to develop internal use software of $4.1 million, divestitures of $0.8 million and purchases of property and equipment of $0.5 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $34.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net cash provided by financing activities is primarily related to debt financing of $31.1 million, net of loan repayments of $0.2 million, and redeemable convertible preferred stock financing of $3.3 million.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations and other commitments as of December 31, 2020, and the years in which these obligations are due:
Purchase commitments include non-cancellable purchase commitments primarily for data purchases.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Since the date of our incorporation, we have not engaged in any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Emerging Growth Company Status
The Company is an emerging growth company, as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”). Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies. The Company has elected to use this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date that it (i) is no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opts out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, these consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with the new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates. The Company expects to use the extended transition period for any other new or revised accounting standards during the period in which it remains an emerging growth company.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 to our 2020 consolidated financial statements and for the year ended December 31, 2020 for more information about recent accounting pronouncements, the timing of their adoption, and our assessment, to the extent we have made one, of their potential impact on our financial condition and our results of operations.