Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward- looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are an e-commerce driven digital manufacturer of quick-turn, on-demand injection-molded, CNC-machined, 3D-printed and sheet metal-fabricated custom parts for prototyping and short-run production. We provide custom parts to product developers and engineers worldwide, who are under increasing pressure to bring their finished products to market faster than their competition. We believe custom parts manufacturing has historically been an underserved market due to the inefficiencies inherent in the quotation, equipment set-up and non-recurring engineering processes required to produce custom parts. Our proprietary technology eliminates most of the time-consuming and expensive skilled labor conventionally required to quote and manufacture parts in low volumes, and our customers conduct nearly all of their business with us over the Internet. We target our product lines to the millions of product developers and engineers who use 3D CAD software to design products across a diverse range of end markets. Our primary manufacturing product lines currently include Injection Molding, CNC Machining, 3D Printing and Sheet Metal.
We have experienced significant growth since our inception. Since we first introduced our Injection Molding product line in 1999, we have steadily expanded the size and geometric complexity of the injection-molded parts we are able to manufacture, and we continue to extend the diversity of materials we are able to support. Similarly, since first introducing our CNC Machining product line in 2007, we have expanded the range of part sizes, design geometries and materials we can support. In 2014, we acquired FineLine Prototyping, Inc. (FineLine) to expand the number of process types we offer to include stereolithography (SL), selective laser sintering (SLS) and direct metal laser sintering (DMLS). In 2017, we acquired RAPID to expand the number of process types we offer to include sheet metal fabrication and expand our CNC machining capability. In 2019, we added Carbon DLS to our 3D printing processes, introduced precision color matching on Injection Molding parts and launched production capabilities for metal 3D printing. We also continually seek to enhance other aspects of our technology and manufacturing processes, including our interactive web-based and automated user interface and quoting system. We intend to continue to invest significantly to enhance our technology and manufacturing processes and expand the range of our existing capabilities with the aim of meeting the needs of a broader set of customers. As a result of the factors described above, many of our customers tend to return to Proto Labs to meet their ongoing needs, with approximately 93%, 92% and 91% of our revenue in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively, derived from existing customers.
We have established our operations in the United States, Europe and Japan, which we believe are three of the largest geographic markets where product developers and engineers are located. We entered the European market in 2005 and launched operations in Japan in late 2009. Our operations were further expanded in Europe through our acquisition of Alphaform in 2015 and the United States through our acquisition of RAPID in November 2017. As of December 31, 2020, we had sold products into approximately 60 countries. Our revenue outside of the United States accounted for approximately 20%, 22% and 21% of our consolidated revenue in the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. We intend to continue to expand our international sales efforts and believe opportunities exist to serve the needs of product developers and engineers in select new geographic regions.
We have grown our total revenue from $298.1 million in 2016 to $434.4 million in 2020. During this period, our operating expenses increased from $105.2 million in 2016 to $158.0 million in 2020. Our recent growth in revenue has been accompanied by increased cost of revenues and operating expenses. We expect to increase investment in our operations to support anticipated future growth as discussed more fully below.
In addition, we believe that a number of trends affecting our industry have affected our results of operations and may continue to do so. For example, we believe that many of our target product developer and engineer customers are facing three mega trends, which are disrupting long-term product growth models. We believe our customers are facing increased pressure to shorten product life-cycles, to embed products with connectivity driven by the internet of things technology, and to deliver products that are personalized and customized to unique customer specifications. We believe we continue to be well positioned to benefit from these trends, given our proprietary technology that enables us to automate and integrate the majority of activities involved in procuring custom parts. The COVID-19 pandemic has also impacted the manufacturing environment. For example, the pandemic accelerated the digitization of manufacturing as companies pivoted to a work-from-home and socially-distanced manufacturing plant environment. As a result, the adoption of e-commerce was accelerated, which allows opportunity for us to provide valuable solutions to manufacturers looking to build resiliency in their supply chains through fast, on-demand manufacturers. While our business may be positively affected by these trends, our results may also be favorably or unfavorably impacted by other trends that affect product developer and engineer orders for custom parts in low volumes, including, among others, economic conditions, changes in product developer and engineer preferences or needs, developments in our industry and among our competitors, and developments in our customers' industries. For a more complete discussion of the risks facing our business, see Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Key Financial Measures and Trends
Revenue
Our operations are comprised of three geographic operating segments in the United States, Europe and Japan. Revenue is derived from our Injection Molding, CNC Machining, 3D Printing and Sheet Metal product lines. Injection Molding revenue consists of sales of custom injection molds and injection-molded parts. CNC Machining revenue consists of sales of CNC-machined custom parts. 3D Printing revenue consists of sales of custom 3D-printed parts. Sheet Metal revenue consists of sales of fabricated sheet metal custom parts. Our revenue is generated from a diverse customer base, with no single customer company representing more than 2% of our total revenue in 2020. Our historical and current efforts to increase revenue have been directed at gaining new customers and selling to our existing customer base by increasing marketing and selling activities, including:
•
the introduction of our 3D Printing product line through our acquisition of FineLine in 2014;
•
expanding 3D printing to Europe through our acquisition of Alphaform in October 2015;
•
the introduction of our Sheet Metal product line through our acquisition of RAPID in 2017;
•
continuously improving the usability of our product lines such as our web-centric applications; and
•
expanding the breadth and scope of our products by adding more sizes and materials to our offerings.
During 2020, we served 40,267 unique product developers and engineers who purchased our products through our web-based customer interface, a decrease of 15.7% over the same period in 2019. The economic uncertainty arising from the COVID-19 pandemic has impacted the number of product developers and engineers who purchase our products. While we expect the number of product developers and engineers served to grow in the long-term, challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic on the global economy have continued through the date of this report. Steps taken by national and local governments to slow the spread of the virus, including business shutdowns and shelter in place orders, have hindered the ability and willingness of project developers and engineers to proceed with development and commercialization projects on the same scale as they have historically. At this time, it is difficult to predict the future given the current economic uncertainty and evolving market conditions.
During 2019, we served 47,774 unique product developers and engineers who purchased our products through our web-based customer interface, an increase of 3.9% over the same period in 2018.
Cost of Revenue, Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Cost of revenue consists primarily of raw materials, equipment depreciation, employee compensation including benefits and stock-based compensation, facilities costs and overhead allocations associated with the manufacturing process for molds and custom parts. We expect our personnel-related costs to increase in order to retain and attract top talent and remain competitive in the market. Overall, we expect cost of revenue to increase in absolute dollars, but remain relatively constant as a percentage of total revenue.
Our business model requires that we invest in our capacity well in advance of demand to ensure we can fulfill the expectations for quick delivery of our products to our customers. Therefore, during each of 2020, 2019 and 2018 we made significant investments in additional factory space, equipment, and infrastructure in the United States. We also made significant investments in infrastructure in Europe in 2020 and 2017 and significant investments in additional factory space in Japan in 2019 and 2016. We expect to continue to grow in future periods, which will result in the need for additional investments in factory space and equipment. We expect that these additional costs for factory and equipment expansion can be absorbed by revenue growth, and allow gross margins by product line to remain relatively consistent over time.
We define gross profit as our revenue less our cost of revenue, and we define gross margin as gross profit expressed as a percentage of revenue. Our gross profit and gross margin are affected by many factors, including our mix of revenue by product line, pricing, sales volume, manufacturing costs, the costs associated with increasing production capacity, the mix between domestic and foreign revenue sources and foreign exchange rates.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses consist of marketing and sales, research and development and general and administrative expenses. Personnel-related costs are the most significant component in each of these categories.
Our recent growth in operating expenses is mainly due to the launch of our Protolabs 2.0 project in the fourth quarter of 2020. Expenses that were previously capitalizable as part of the project were expensed after the system was placed in service in November 2020. Our business strategy is to continue to be a leading online and technology-enabled manufacturer of quick-turn, on-demand injection-molded, CNC-machined, CNC-turned, 3D-printed and sheet metal custom parts for prototyping and low-volume production. In order to achieve our goals, we anticipate continued substantial investments in technology and personnel, resulting in increased operating expenses.
Marketing and sales. Marketing and sales expense consists primarily of employee compensation, benefits, commissions, stock-based compensation, marketing programs such as electronic, print and pay-per-click advertising, trade shows and other related overhead. We expect sales and marketing expense to increase in the future as we increase the number of marketing and sales professionals and marketing programs targeted to increase our customer base and grow revenue.
Research and development. Research and development expense consists primarily of personnel and outside service costs related to the development of new processes and product lines, enhancement of existing product lines, software developed for internal use, maintenance of internally developed software, quality assurance and testing. Costs for internal use software are evaluated by project and capitalized where appropriate under Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 350-40, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other, Internal-Use Software. We expect research and development expense to increase in the future as we seek to enhance our e-commerce interface technology, internal software and supporting business systems, and continue to expand our product lines.
General and administrative. General and administrative expense consists primarily of employee compensation, benefits, stock-based compensation, professional service fees related to accounting, tax and legal and other related overhead. We expect general and administrative expense to increase in the future as we continue to grow and expand as a global organization.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net primarily consists of foreign currency-related gains and losses and interest income on cash balances and investments. Our foreign currency-related gains and losses will vary depending upon movements in underlying exchange rates. Our interest income will vary each reporting period depending on our average cash balances during the period, composition of our marketable security portfolio and the current level of interest rates.
Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes is comprised of federal, state, local and foreign taxes based on pre-tax income. On December 22, 2017, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act was signed into law in the United States. As a result, many provisions will affect our tax rate in future years. Some provisions, such as the reduction to the U.S. corporate tax rate from 35% to 21%, which began in 2018, reduced our effective tax rate in 2018 and subsequent years. Overall, our effective tax rate for 2020 and beyond will remain consistent with the current tax laws.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes our results of operations and the related changes for the periods indicated. The results below are not necessarily indicative of the results for future periods.
Stock-based compensation expense included in the statements of comprehensive income data above is as follows:
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
Revenue by reportable segment and the related changes for 2020 and 2019 is summarized as follows:
Our revenue decreased $24.3 million, or 5.3%, for 2020 compared with 2019. By reportable segment, revenue in the United States decreased $14.5 million, or 4.0%, for 2020 compared with 2019. Revenue in Europe decreased $8.0 million, or 9.7%, for 2020 compared with 2019. Revenue in Japan decreased $1.8 million, or 11.6%, for 2020 compared with 2019.
Our revenue decline in 2020 was the result of a decrease in the volume of product developers and engineers we served. During 2020, we served 40,267 unique product developers and engineers, a decrease of 15.7% over 2019. The economic uncertainty arising from the COVID-19 pandemic has impacted the number of product developers and engineers who purchase our products. While we expect the number of product developers and engineers served to grow in the long-term, challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic on the global economy have continued through the date of this report. Steps taken by national and local governments to slow the spread of the virus, including business shutdowns and shelter in place orders, have hindered the ability and willingness of project developers and engineers to proceed with development and commercialization projects on the same scale as they have historically. At this time, it is difficult to predict the future given the current economic uncertainty and evolving market conditions.
The decrease in product developers served led to a reduction in overall order activity as a result of the economic uncertainty created by the COVID-19 pandemic, which in turn resulted in a decrease in revenue. International revenue was positively impacted by $1.0 million in 2020 compared to 2019 as a result of foreign currency movements, primarily the strengthening of the Euro relative to the United States dollar.
Revenue by product line and the related changes for 2020 and 2019 is summarized as follows:
By product line, our revenue decline was driven by a 15.4% decrease in CNC Machining revenue, a 10.3% decrease in Sheet Metal revenue, and a 0.3% decrease in Other revenue, which was partially offset by a 0.3% increase in Injection Molding revenue and a 1.9% increase in 3D Printing revenue in each case for 2020 compared with 2019.
Cost of Revenue, Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Cost of Revenue. Cost of revenue decreased $6.9 million, or 3.1%, for 2020 compared to 2019, which was less than the rate of revenue decrease of 5.3% for 2020 compared to 2019. The decreases were driven by raw material and production cost decreases of $7.1 million and personnel and related cost decreases of $3.3 million, which were partially offset by equipment and facility-related cost increases of $3.5 million. The increases in equipment and facility-related costs are primarily driven by past investments which will support increased sales volumes in certain product lines and future growth of the business.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin. Gross profit decreased from $235.3 million in 2019 to $217.8 million in 2020 primarily due to a decrease in revenue. Gross margin decreased from 51.3% of revenue in 2019 to 50.1% of revenue in 2020 due to the fixed cost structure of our facilities and equipment supporting lower revenue this year and the timing and mix of revenue.
Operating Expenses
Marketing and Sales. Marketing and sales expense decreased $3.7 million, or 5.0%, for 2020 compared to 2019 due to a decrease in marketing program costs of $3.1 million which were primarily driven by reduced travel and a transition to virtual trade shows, as well as a decrease in personnel and related costs of $0.6 million.
Research and Development. Our research and development expense increased $4.2 million, or 13.0%, for 2020 compared to 2019 due to personnel and related cost increases of $4.3 million driven by the launch of our Protolabs 2.0 system. These costs were partially offset by a decrease in administrative and depreciation costs of $0.1 million.
General and Administrative. Our general and administrative expense increased $2.0 million, or 4.0%, for 2020 compared to 2019 due to stock-based compensation cost increases of $2.4 million, amortization cost increases of $0.3 million, personnel and related cost increases of $0.5 million and professional service cost increases of $0.3 million, which were partially offset by administrative cost decreases of $1.5 million.
Income from Operations
Income from operations decreased $20.0 million, or 25.1%, for 2020 compared with 2019. By reportable segment, income from operations for the United States and Europe decreased 9.1% and 22.4%, respectively, and loss from operations and expenses included in Corporate Unallocated and Japan increased 15.6% for 2020 compared with 2019. The decrease in income from operations is primarily driven by the reduction in volume and an increase in operating expenses related to the Protolabs 2.0 launch in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Other Income, Net and Provision for Income Taxes
Other Income, Net. We recognized other income, net of $3.1 million in 2020, an increase of $1.8 million compared to other income, net of $1.3 million for 2019. Other income, net for 2020 primarily consisted of $1.4 million in interest income on investments and a $1.5 million gain on foreign currency. Other income, net for 2019 primarily consisted of $2.1 million in interest income on investments, which was partially offset by a $0.8 million loss on foreign currency.
Provision for Income Taxes. Our income tax provision decreased by $5.5 million for 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease in the provision is primarily due to lower taxable income and an increase in tax benefits from the vesting of restricted stock and exercise of stock options. This decrease was coupled with an increase in the research and development tax credit. Our effective tax rate of 19.2% for 2020 decreased 2.4% compared to 21.6% for the same period in 2019.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
For a comparison of our results of operations for fiscal years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018, see "Part II, Item 7 Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" of our Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 26, 2020.
Selected Quarterly Results of Operations Data
The following tables set forth selected unaudited quarterly results of operations data for 2020 and 2019. This unaudited quarterly information has been prepared on the same basis as our annual audited consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and includes all adjustments, consisting only of normal recurring adjustments, that we consider necessary to present fairly the financial information for the fiscal quarters presented. The quarterly data should be read in conjunction with our selected financial data and consolidated financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Operating results for any quarter are not necessarily indicative of results for a full-year period, and the historical results presented below are not necessarily indicative of the results to be expected in any future period.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
Sources of Liquidity
We finance our operations and capital expenditures through cash flow from operations. We had cash and cash equivalents of $127.6 million as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $2.4 million from December 31, 2019. The increase in our cash was due primarily to cash generated through operations, partially offset by investing activity and repurchases of common stock. We had cash and cash equivalents of $125.2 million as of December 31, 2019, an increase of $40.2 million from December 31, 2018. The increase in our cash was due primarily to cash generated through operations, partially offset by investing activity and repurchases of common stock. We had cash and cash equivalents of $85.0 million as of December 31, 2018, an increase of $48.3 million from December 31, 2017. The increase in our cash was due primarily to cash generated through operations.
As of December 31, 2020, the amount of cash and cash equivalents held by foreign subsidiaries was $23.4 million. Our intent is to continue to permanently reinvest these funds outside the U.S. and our current plans do not demonstrate a need to repatriate them to fund our domestic operations. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents together with cash generated from operations will be sufficient to meet our working capital expenditure requirements for at least the next 12 months.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash flow from operating activities of $107.0 million during 2020 primarily consisted of net income of $50.9 million, adjusted for certain non-cash items, including depreciation and amortization of $32.6 million, stock-based compensation expense of $14.7 million and deferred taxes of $7.6 million and changes in operating assets and liabilities and other items totaling $1.3 million. The cash flow from operating activities during 2020 compared to 2019 decreased $9.1 million due to decreases in net income of $12.8 million and changes in operating assets and liabilities and other items of $3.8 million, which were partially offset by increases in stock-based compensation expenses of $3.9 million, increases in deferred taxes of $1.5 million, increases in depreciation and amortization of $1.7 million driven by an increase in capital investments and increases in amortization of held-to-maturity securities of $0.4 million.
Cash flow from operating activities of $116.1 million during 2019 primarily consisted of net income of $63.7 million, adjusted for certain non-cash items, including depreciation and amortization of $30.9 million, stock-based compensation expense of $10.8 million and deferred taxes of $6.1 million and changes in operating assets and liabilities and other items totaling $4.3 million. The cash flow from operating activities during 2019 compared to 2018 decreased $6.8 million due to decreases in net income of $12.9 million and deferred taxes of $5.8 million, which were partially offset by increases in depreciation and amortization of $4.1 million driven by an increase in capital investments and changes in operating assets and liabilities and other items of $7.8 million.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities was $95.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, consisting of $47.0 million for the purchase of property, equipment and other capital assets, $113.2 million for the purchase of marketable securities and $3.0 in other investing activities, which were partially offset by $67.7 million in proceeds from maturities of marketable securities.
Cash used in investing activities was $44.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, consisting of $62.2 million for the purchase of property, equipment and other capital assets, $46.4 million for the purchase of marketable securities and $4.0 in other investing activities, which were partially offset by $68.3 million in proceeds from maturities of marketable securities.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities was $10.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, consisting of $14.7 million in repurchases of common stock, $3.4 million in purchases of shares withheld for tax obligations associated with equity transactions and $0.2 million in principal repayments of finance lease obligations, partially offset by $7.6 million in proceeds from exercises of stock options.
Cash used in financing activities was $31.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, consisting of $33.5 million in repurchases of common stock, and $2.5 million in purchases of shares withheld for tax obligations associated with equity transactions, partially offset by $4.4 million in proceeds from exercises of stock options.
Operating and Capital Expenditure Requirements
We believe, based on our current operating plan, that our cash balances and cash generated through operations and interest income will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash requirements through at least the next 12 months. From time to time we may seek to sell equity or convertible debt securities or enter into credit facilities. The sale of equity and convertible debt securities may result in dilution to our shareholders. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of convertible debt securities or enter into credit facilities, these securities and debt holders could have rights senior to those of our common stock, and this debt could contain covenants that would restrict our operations. We may require additional capital beyond our currently forecasted amounts. Any such required additional capital may not be available on terms acceptable to us, or at all.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including the following:
•
the revenue growth in Injection Molding, CNC Machining, 3D Printing and Sheet Metal product lines;
•
costs of operations, including costs relating to expansion and growth;
•
the emergence of competing or complementary technological developments;
•
the costs of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing any patent claims and other intellectual product rights, or participating in litigation-related activities; and
•
the acquisition of businesses, products and technologies, although we currently have no commitments or agreements relating to any of these types of transactions.
Our recent annual capital expenditures have varied between 10% and 20% of annual revenue. We believe future growth capital expenditures, excluding any expenditures for buildings and maintenance capital we might purchase for our operations, are likely to vary between approximately 8% and 12% of annual revenue.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, our contractual obligations and the effect such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods were as follows:
The table above reflects only payment obligations that are fixed and determinable. Our commitments for operating leases relate to three of our United States manufacturing facilities; our European sales, customer service and technical support offices and certain vehicles and equipment; manufacturing and office facilities located in Germany and certain vehicles and equipment; and our Japan facility and certain vehicles. Our commitment for financing leases relate to certain equipment in the United States.
Financing Arrangements
We had no financing arrangements as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Inflation
We experience normal inflation and changing prices, primarily on our production materials and labor. In 2020 and 2019, wage inflation contributed to our lower gross margin. In 2018, we do not believe inflation and changing prices had a material effect on our financial condition.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Since our inception, we have not engaged in any off-balance sheet arrangements, including the use of structured finance, special purpose entities or variable interest entities.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amount of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses and related disclosures. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to revenue recognition, goodwill, capitalized software costs, other intangible assets, stock-based compensation, and income taxes. We base our estimates of the carrying value of certain assets and liabilities on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. In many cases, we could reasonably have used different accounting policies and estimates. In some cases, changes in the accounting estimates are reasonably likely to occur from period to period. Management has discussed the development, selection and disclosure of these estimates with the audit committee of our board of directors. Our actual results may differ significantly from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe the following critical accounting policies affect our more significant judgments used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. See the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information about these critical accounting policies, as well as a description of our other accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue in accordance with ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. We manufacture custom parts to specific customer orders that have no alternative use to us, and we believe there is a legally enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date on these manufactured parts. For manufactured parts that meet these two criteria, we will recognize revenue over time. Revenue is recognized over time using the input method based on time in production as a percentage of total estimated production time to measure progress toward satisfying performance obligations using the estimated total time necessary to complete the parts per the customer's order and an estimate of inventory and production costs incurred to date. The majority of our CNC machining, 3D printing, and sheet metal contracts have a single performance obligation. The majority of our injection molding contracts have multiple performance obligations including one obligation to produce the mold and a second obligation to produce parts. For injection molding contracts with multiple performance obligations, we allocate revenue to each performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price. We generally determine standalone selling price based on the price charged to customers.
Goodwill
We recognize goodwill in accordance with ASC 350, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other. Goodwill is the excess of cost of an acquired entity over the amounts assigned to assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination. Goodwill is not amortized. Goodwill is tested for impairment annually in the fourth quarter of each year, and is tested for impairment between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would indicate the carrying amount may be impaired. An impairment charge for goodwill is recognized only when the estimated fair value of a reporting unit, including goodwill, is less than its carrying amount. As of December 31, 2020 no impairment charges for goodwill have been recognized. In 2020, we performed a qualitative analysis based on the significance of the fair value over the carrying value in prior period assessments. As of December 31, 2020, no impairment charges for goodwill have been recognized.
Capitalized Software Costs
We follow ASC 350-40, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other, Internal-Use Software, in accounting for internally developed software. Costs for internal-use software are evaluated by projected and capitalized where appropriate.
Other Intangible Assets
We recognize other intangibles assets in accordance with ASC 350, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other. Other intangible assets include software technology, customer relationships and other intangible assets acquired from independent parties. Other intangible assets with a definite life are amortized over a period ranging from two to 10 years on a straight line basis, and are tested for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset (asset group) may not be recoverable. An impairment loss is recognized when the carrying amount of an asset exceeds the estimated undiscounted cash flows generated by the asset. As of December 31, 2020 no impairment charges for intangible assets have been recognized.
Stock-Based Compensation
We determine our stock-based compensation in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation (ASC 718), which requires the measurement and recognition of compensation expense for all share-based payment awards made to employees and non-employee directors based on the grant date fair value of the award.
Determining the appropriate fair value model and calculating the fair value of stock option grants requires the input of subjective assumptions. We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to value our stock option awards. Stock-based compensation expense is significant to our consolidated financial statements and is calculated using our best estimates, which involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. Significant estimates include our expected term and stock price volatility. If different estimates and assumptions had been used, our common stock valuations could be significantly different and related stock-based compensation expense may be materially impacted.
The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires inputs such as the risk-free interest rate, expected term, expected volatility and expected dividend yield. We base the risk-free interest rate that we use in the Black-Scholes option pricing model on zero coupon U.S. Treasury instruments with maturities similar to the expected term of the award being valued. The expected term of stock options is estimated from the vesting period of the award and represents the weighted average period that our stock options are expected to be outstanding. We estimated the volatility of our stock price based on the historic volatility of our common stock. We have never paid and do not anticipate paying any cash dividends in the foreseeable future and, therefore, we use an expected dividend yield of zero in the option pricing model. We account for forfeitures as they occur.
The fair value of each new employee option awarded was estimated on the date of grant for the periods below using the Black-Scholes option pricing model with the following assumptions:
Our 2012 Employee Stock Purchase Plan (ESPP) allows eligible employees to purchase a variable number of shares of our common stock during each offering period at a discount through payroll deductions of up to 15% of their eligible compensation, subject to plan limitations. The ESPP provides for six-month offering periods with a single purchase period. At the end of each offering period, employees are able to purchase shares at 85% of the lower of the fair market value of our common stock on the first trading day of the offering period or on the last trading day of the offering period. We determine the fair value stock-based compensation related to our ESPP in accordance with ASC 718 using the component measurement approach and the Black-Scholes standard option pricing model.
The fair value of each offering period was estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model with the following assumptions:
There are significant differences among option valuation models, and this may result in a lack of comparability with other companies that use different models, methods and assumptions. If factors change and we employ different assumptions in the application of ASC 718 in future periods, or if we decide to use a different valuation model, such as a lattice model, the stock-based compensation expense that we record in the future under ASC 718 may differ significantly from what we have recorded using the Black-Scholes option pricing model and could materially affect our operating results.
We recognize stock-based compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. We recorded stock-based compensation expense relating to stock options, restricted stock awards, performance stock units and our ESPP of $14.7 million, $10.8 million and $10.9 million during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had $4.2 million of unrecognized stock-based compensation costs related to unvested stock options that are expected to be recognized over a weighted average period of 2.6 years. We issued options to purchase 60,065, 53,708 and 36,600 shares of our common stock in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had $21.2 million of unrecognized stock-based compensation costs related to non-vested restricted stock, which is expected to be recognized over a weighted average period of 2.4 years. We issued restricted stock awards of 108,179, 115,471 and 106,855 shares of our common stock in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had $1.7 million of unrecognized stock-based compensation costs related to non-vested performance stock, which is expected to be recognized over a weighted average period of 2.1 years. The increase in unrecognized stock-based compensation costs related to non-vested performance stock in 2020 when compared to 2019 is driven by an increase in the number of shares expected to vest at the end of future performance periods. We issued performance stock awards of 19,956, 21,434 and 20,006 shares of our common stock in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
In future periods, our stock-based compensation expense is expected to increase due to our existing unrecognized stock-based compensation and the issuance of additional stock-based awards to continue to attract and retain employees and non-employee directors.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes (ASC 740). Under this method, we determine tax assets and liabilities based upon the differences between the financial statement carrying amounts and the tax basis of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to affect taxable income. The tax consequences of most events recognized in the current year’s financial statements are included in determining income taxes currently payable. However, because tax laws and financial accounting standards differ in their recognition and measurement of assets, liabilities and equity, revenues, expenses, gains and losses, differences arise between the amount of taxable income and pretax financial income for a year and between the tax basis of assets or liabilities and their reported amounts in the financial statements. Because we assume that the reported amounts of assets and liabilities will be recovered and settled, respectively, a difference between the tax basis of an asset or liability and its reported amount in the balance sheet will result in a taxable or a deductible amount in some future years when the related liabilities are settled or the reported amounts of the assets are recovered, giving rise to a deferred tax asset or liability. We establish a valuation allowance for any portion of our deferred tax assets that we believe will not be recognized.
ASC 740 also clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in an enterprise’s financial statements by defining a criterion that an individual tax position must meet for any part of the benefit of that position to be recognized in an enterprise’s financial statements. The Company recognizes the effect of income tax positions only if sustaining those positions is more likely than not. The Company records penalties and interest related to unrecognized tax benefits in income taxes in the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Income. Including interest and penalties, we have established a liability for uncertain tax positions of $6.2 million as of December 31, 2020.
The effective tax rate decreased by 2.4% for the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to 2019 primarily due to an increase in tax benefits from the vesting of restricted stock and exercise of stock options and an increase in the research and development tax credit.
The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “Act”) was enacted on December 22, 2017. The Act reduced the U.S. federal corporate tax rate from 35% to 21%, required companies to pay a transition tax on earnings of certain foreign subsidiaries that were previously tax deferred and creates new taxes on certain foreign sourced earnings. No additional income taxes have been provided for any remaining undistributed foreign earnings not subject to the transition tax or any additional outside basis difference inherent in these entities as these amounts continue to be indefinitely reinvested in foreign operations.
Recently adopted accounting pronouncements
During the first quarter of 2020, the Company adopted the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) Accounting Standards Update (ASU) 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses, which is intended to provide financial statement users with more decision-useful information about the expected credit losses on financial instruments held by a reporting entity at each reporting date. The adoption of this guidance had no material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
During the first quarter of 2019, we adopted the FASB ASU 2016-02, Leases (ASC 842), which introduces the balance sheet recognition of lease assets and lease liabilities by lessees for those leases classified as operating leases under previous guidance. We have adopted the new lease standard using the new transition option issued under the amendments in ASU 2018-11, Leases, which allowed us to continue to apply the legacy guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 840, Leases, in the comparative periods presented in the year of adoption. We elected the package of practical expedients permitted under the transition guidance within the new standard, which among other things, allowed us to carry forward the historical lease classification. We made an accounting policy election to keep leases with an initial term of 12 months or less off of the balance sheet. We will recognize those lease payments in the Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income on a straight-line basis over the lease term. The impact of the adoption was an increase to our operating lease assets and liabilities on January 1, 2019 of $13.1 million.
Recently issued accounting pronouncements
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, Income Taxes, which is intended to simplify the accounting for income taxes. This guidance will be effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020 and interim periods within those fiscal years with early adoption permitted. We are evaluating the impact of future adoption of this guidance on our consolidated financial statements, but we do not expect the impact to be material.