ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
Primo is a leading pure-play water solutions provider in North America, Europe and Israel. Primo operates largely under a recurring razor/razorblade revenue model. The razor in Primo’s revenue model is its industry leading line-up of sleek and innovative water dispensers, which are sold through major retailers and online at various price points or leased to customers. The dispensers help increase household penetration, which drives recurring purchases of Primo’s razorblade offering. Primo’s razorblade offering is comprised of Water Direct, Water Exchange, and Water Refill. Through its Water Direct business, Primo delivers sustainable hydration solutions across its 21-country footprint direct to the customer’s door, whether at home or to commercial businesses. Through its Water Exchange and Water Refill businesses, Primo offers pre-filled and reusable containers at over 13,000 locations and water refill units at approximately 22,000 locations, respectively. Primo also offers water filtration units across its 21-country footprint representing a top five position.
Primo’s water solutions expand consumer access to purified, spring and mineral water to promote a healthier, more sustainable lifestyle while simultaneously reducing plastic waste and pollution. Primo is committed to its water stewardship standards and is proud to partner with the International Bottled Water Association in North America as well as with Watercoolers Europe, which ensure strict adherence to safety, quality, sanitation and regulatory standards for the benefit of consumer protection. In the third quarter of 2020, our U.S. operations achieved a carbon neutral certification under the Carbon Neutral Protocol, an international standard administered by Natural Capital Partners. This certification is in addition to the certifications in our European operations where we have maintained carbon neutrality for the past nine consecutive years in many of our markets.
We conduct operations in countries involving transactions denominated in a variety of currencies. We are subject to currency exchange risks to the extent that our costs are denominated in currencies other than those in which we earn revenues. As our financial statements are denominated in U.S. dollars, fluctuations in currency exchange rates between the U.S. dollar and other currencies have had, and will continue to have an impact on our results of operations.
The market in which we operate is subject to some seasonal variations. Our water delivery sales are generally higher during the warmer months. Our purchases of raw materials and related accounts payable fluctuate based upon the demand for our products. The seasonality of our sales volume causes our working capital needs to fluctuate throughout the year.
Ingredient and packaging costs represent a significant portion of our cost of sales. These costs are subject to global and regional commodity price trends. Our most significant commodities are polyethylene terephthalate (“PET”) resin, high-density polyethylene (“HDPE”) and polycarbonate bottles, caps and preforms, labels and cartons and trays. We attempt to manage our exposure to fluctuations in ingredient and packaging costs by entering into fixed price commitments for a portion of our ingredient and packaging requirements and implementing price increases as needed.
In 2020, our capital expenditures were devoted primarily to supporting growth in our business, maintaining existing facilities and making equipment upgrades.
During the second quarter of 2020, we implemented a restructuring program intended to optimize synergies from the Company’s transition to a pure-play water company following the Legacy Primo Acquisition (defined below) and, as a result, reorganized into two reporting segments: North America (which includes our DS Services of America, Inc. (“DSS”), Aquaterra Corporation (“Aquaterra”), Mountain Valley Spring Company (“Mountain Valley”) and Legacy Primo (defined below) businesses) and Rest of World (which includes our Eden Springs Nederland B.V. (“Eden”), Aimia Foods Limited (“Aimia”), Decantae Mineral Water Limited (“Decantae”) and John Farrer & Company Limited (“Farrers”) businesses). Our corporate oversight function and other miscellaneous expenses are aggregated and included in the All Other category. Segment reporting results have been recast to reflect these changes for all periods presented.
Our fiscal year is based on either a 52- or 53- week period ending on the Saturday closest to December 31. For the year ended January 2, 2021, we had 53 weeks of activity, compared to 52 weeks of activity for the years ended December 28, 2019 and December 29, 2018. We estimate the additional week contributed $19.4 million of additional revenue and $3.9 million of additional operating income for the year ended January 2, 2021. One of our subsidiaries uses a calendar year-end which differs from the Company’s 52- or 53- week fiscal year-end. Differences arising from the use of the different fiscal year-ends were not deemed material for the fiscal years ended January 2, 2021, December 28, 2019 or December 29, 2018.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
Our global operations expose us to risks associated with the coronavirus (“COVID-19”) pandemic, which has resulted in challenging operating environments. COVID-19 has spread across the globe to all of the countries in which we operate. Authorities in many of these markets have implemented numerous measures to stall the spread of COVID-19, including travel bans and restrictions, quarantines, curfews, shelter in place orders, and business shutdowns. These measures have impacted and will continue to impact us, our customers, employees, distributors, suppliers and other third parties with whom we do business. There is considerable uncertainty regarding the extent and duration of any impact that these measures and future measures in response to the pandemic may have on our business, including whether they will result in further changes in demand for our services and products, further increases in operating costs (whether as a result of changes to our supply chain or increases in employee costs or otherwise), and how they will further impact our supply chain, each or all of which can impact our ability to make, manufacture, distribute and sell our products. In addition, measures that impact our ability to access our offices, plants, warehouses, distribution centers or other facilities, or that impact the ability of our customers, employees, distributors, suppliers and other third parties to do the same, may impact the availability of our and their employees, many of whom are not able to perform their job functions remotely.
We have implemented safety protocols, including implementing social distancing guidelines, staggering employee shifts, providing our associates with personal protective equipment, and continuing to allow members of our team to work from home where possible. We have been working and will continue to work closely with our business partners on contingency planning in an effort to maintain supply. To date, we have not experienced a material disruption to our operations or supply chain.
While we continue to develop and implement health and safety protocols, business continuity plans and crisis management protocols and have taken other operational actions in an effort to try to mitigate the negative impact of COVID-19 to our employees and our business, the extent of the impact of the pandemic on our business and financial results will depend on numerous evolving factors that we are not able to accurately predict and that all will vary by market, including the duration and scope of the pandemic, global economic conditions during and after the pandemic, governmental actions that have been taken, or may be taken in the future, in response to the pandemic and changes in customer behavior in response to the pandemic, some of which may be more than just temporary.
As we deliver bottled water to residential and commercial customers across a 21-country footprint and provide multi-gallon bottled water, self-service refill drinking water and water dispensers to customers through major retailers in North America, the profile of the services we provide and the products we sell, and the amount of revenue attributable to such services and products, varies by jurisdiction. Changes in demand as a result of COVID-19 will vary in scope and timing across these markets. For example, to date, we have seen an increase in volumes in our residential Water Direct business and a decrease in volumes in our commercial Water Direct business as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Any continued economic uncertainty can adversely affect our customers’ financial condition, resulting in an inability to pay for our services or products, reduced or canceled orders of our services or products, or our suppliers’ inability to supply us with the items necessary for us to make, manufacture, distribute or sell our products. Such adverse changes in our customers’ or suppliers’ financial condition may also result in our recording impairment charges for our inability to recover or collect any accounts receivable. In addition, economic uncertainty associated with COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in volatility in the global capital and credit markets, which can impair our ability to access these markets on terms commercially acceptable to us, or at all.
In response to COVID-19, certain government authorities have enacted programs which provide various economic stimulus measures, including several tax provisions. Among the business tax provisions is the deferral of certain payroll and other tax remittances to future years and wage subsidies as reimbursement for a portion of certain furloughed employees’ salaries. During the year ended January 2, 2021, we received wage subsidies under these programs totaling $7.4 million. We review our eligibility for these programs for each qualifying period and account for such wage subsidies on an accrual basis when the conditions for eligibility are met. The Company has adopted an accounting policy to present wage subsidies as a reduction of selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses. In addition, deferred payroll and other taxes totaling $9.0 million were included in accounts payable and accrued liabilities and $7.5 million were included in other long-term liabilities on our Consolidated Balance Sheet as of January 2, 2021.
During the second quarter of 2020, we recorded a total of $115.2 million of non-cash impairment charges related to goodwill and intangible assets. See Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on goodwill and intangible asset impairment. The impairment charges were primarily driven by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and revised projections of future operating results.
Additionally, on June 11, 2020, we announced that our Board of Directors approved a plan intended to optimize synergies from the Company’s transition to a pure-play water company following the acquisition of Legacy Primo (defined below) and to mitigate the negative financial and operational impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, including implementing headcount reductions and furloughs in our North America and Rest of World reporting segments (“2020 Restructuring Plan”). When we implement these programs, we incur various charges, including severance, asset impairments, and other employment related costs. In connection with the 2020 Restructuring Plan, we expected to incur approximately $19.0 million in severance costs. We have revised this estimate to $10.5 million and all costs related to the 2020 Restructuring Plan have been recorded as of January 2, 2021. All costs incurred by the 2020 Restructuring Plan are included in SG&A expenses for the year ended January 2, 2021. See Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on restructuring charges incurred during the year ended January 2, 2021.
During the year ended January 2, 2021 we also incurred $10.3 million in other COVID-19 related costs. Other COVID-19 related costs primarily include front-line incentives paid and costs incurred for supplies.
Divestiture, Acquisition and Financing Transactions
Divestitures
On February 28, 2020, we completed the sale of our coffee, tea and extract solutions business, S. & D. Coffee, Inc. (“S&D”), to Westrock Coffee Company, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“Westrock”), pursuant to which Westrock acquired all of the issued and outstanding equity of S&D from the Company (“S&D Divestiture”). The consideration was $405.0 million paid at closing in cash, with customary post-closing working capital adjustments, which were resolved in June 2020 by payment of $1.5 million from the Company to Westrock. We used the proceeds of the transaction to finance a portion of the Legacy Primo Acquisition (defined below).
On February 8, 2019, we sold all of the outstanding equity of Cott Beverages LLC to Refresco Group B.V., a Dutch company (“Refresco”). The aggregate deal consideration paid at closing was $50.0 million. We used the proceeds of this transaction to repay a portion of the outstanding borrowings under our previously existing asset-based lending credit facility (“ABL facility”).
In July 2017, we entered into a Share Repurchase Agreement with Refresco, pursuant to which we sold to Refresco, in January 2018, our carbonated soft drinks and juice businesses and our RCI finished goods export business (collectively, the “Traditional Business” and such transaction, the “Traditional Business Divestiture”). The Traditional Business Divestiture was structured as a sale of the assets of our Canadian business and a sale of the stock of the operating subsidiaries engaged in the Traditional Business in the other jurisdictions after we completed an internal reorganization. The aggregate deal consideration was $1.25 billion, paid at closing in cash, with customary post-closing adjustments resolved in December 2018 by the payment of $7.9 million from us to Refresco. The Traditional Business Divestiture did not include our North America or Rest of World reporting segments, or our Cott Beverages LLC business.
As a result of the S&D Divestiture and the Traditional Business Divestiture, the operating results associated with the S&D business and the Traditional Business have been presented as discontinued operations for all years presented. The following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are those of our continuing operations unless otherwise indicated. For additional information regarding our discontinued operations, see Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Acquisitions
On March 2, 2020, pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Agreement and Plan of Merger entered into on January 13, 2020, Cott Corporation completed the acquisition of Primo Water Corporation (“Legacy Primo” and such transaction, the “Legacy Primo Acquisition”). The aggregate consideration paid in the Legacy Primo Acquisition was approximately $798.2 million and includes $377.6 million of our common shares issued by us to holders of Legacy Primo common stock, $216.1 million paid in cash by us to holders of Legacy Primo common stock, $196.9 million of cash paid to retire outstanding indebtedness on behalf of Legacy Primo, $4.7 million to settle a pre-existing liability and $2.9 million in fair value of replacement common share options and restricted stock units for vested Legacy Primo awards. The Legacy Primo Acquisition is consistent with our strategy of transitioning to a pure-play water solutions provider.
In connection with the closing of the Legacy Primo Acquisition, Cott Corporation changed its corporate name to Primo Water Corporation and its ticker symbol on the New York Stock Exchange and Toronto Stock Exchange to “PRMW”.
In October 2018, we acquired Mountain Valley, a growing American brand of spring and sparkling bottled water delivered to homes and offices throughout the United States (the “Mountain Valley Acquisition”). The initial purchase price paid by us in the Mountain Valley Acquisition was $80.4 million on a debt and cash free basis. The post-closing working capital adjustment was resolved in February 2019 by the payment of $0.4 million by the former owners of Mountain Valley to us. The Mountain Valley Acquisition was funded through a combination of incremental borrowings under our previously existing ABL facility and cash on hand.
In March 2018, we completed the acquisition of Crystal Rock Holdings, Inc., a direct-to-consumer residential and commercial water, coffee and filtration business serving customers throughout New York and New England (“Crystal Rock”). The transaction was structured as a merger following a cash tender offer for all outstanding shares of Crystal Rock, with Crystal Rock becoming our wholly-owned indirect subsidiary. The aggregate consideration paid was $37.7 million and includes the purchase price paid to the Crystal Rock shareholders of $20.7 million, $0.8 million in transaction expenses paid on behalf of the target entity and $16.2 million of assumed debt and accrued interest obligations of the acquired company that was paid by us.
Financing Activity
On October 22, 2020, we issued €450.0 million ($551.9 million at exchange rates in effect on January 2, 2021) of 3.875% senior notes due October 31, 2028 (“2028 Notes”) to qualified purchasers in a private placement offering under Rule 144A under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), and outside the United States to non-U.S. purchasers pursuant to Regulation S under the Securities Act and other applicable laws. The 2028 Notes were issued by our wholly-owned subsidiary Primo Water Holdings Inc. The 2028 Notes are guaranteed by the Company and certain subsidiaries that are currently obligors under the Revolving Credit Facility (defined below), the €450.0 million of 5.500% senior notes due July 1, 2024 (“2024 Notes”) and the $750.0 million of 5.500% senior notes due April 1, 2025 (“2025 Notes”). The 2028 Notes will mature on October 31, 2028 and interest is payable semi-annually on April 30th and October 31st of each year commencing on April 30, 2021. The proceeds of the 2028 Notes, along with borrowings from the Revolving Credit Facility, were used to redeem in full the 2024 Notes and pay related premiums, fees and expenses.
We incurred approximately $8.5 million of financing fees for the issuance of the 2028 Notes. The financing fees are being amortized using the effective interest method over an eight-year period, which represents the term to maturity of the 2028 Notes. The redemption of the 2024 Notes included $14.7 million in premium payments, accrued interest of $9.0 million, and the write-off of $5.1 million in deferred financing fees.
On March 6, 2020, we entered into a credit agreement among the Company, as parent borrower, Primo Water Holdings Inc. and certain other subsidiary borrowers, certain other subsidiaries of the Company from time to time designated as subsidiary borrowers, Bank of America, N.A., as administrative agent and collateral agent, and the lenders from time to time party thereto (the “Credit Agreement”).
The Credit Agreement provides for a senior secured revolving credit facility in an initial aggregate committed amount of $350.0 million (the “Revolving Credit Facility”), which may be increased by incremental credit extensions from time to time in the form of term loans or additional revolving credit commitments. The Revolving Credit Facility has a five year maturity date and includes letter of credit and swing line loan sub facilities. Borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility were used to refinance in full and terminate our previously existing ABL facility.
In January 2018, in connection with the closing of the Traditional Business Divestiture, we used a portion of the proceeds to retire $525.0 million aggregate principal amount of 5.375% senior notes due 2022 (the “2022 Notes”) and retire the remaining $250.0 million aggregate principal amount of 10.000% senior secured notes due 2021 (the “DSS Notes”). The redemption of our 2022 Notes included $21.2 million in premium payments and accrued interest of $2.2 million. The redemption of our DSS Notes included $12.5 million in premium payments and accrued interest of $10.3 million.
We also used a portion of the proceeds from the Traditional Business Divestiture to repay in full our $262.5 million outstanding balance on our previously existing ABL facility and repay $1.9 million in aggregate principal outstanding on our capital lease finance arrangement with General Electric Capital Corporation.
Summary Financial Results
Net loss from continuing operations in 2020 was $156.8 million or $1.01 per diluted common share, compared with net loss from continuing operations of $10.8 million or $0.08 per diluted common share in 2019.
The following items of significance affected our 2020 financial results:
•Net revenue increased $158.1 million, or 8.8%, in 2020 compared to the prior year due primarily to the addition of revenues from the Legacy Primo business, pricing initiatives, the favorable impact of foreign exchange rates and the impact of the 53rd week in 2020. The increase was partially offset by a decline in water and office coffee services consumption and volumes due to the impact of COVID-19 and the non-recurrence of revenues contributed by our Cott Beverages LLC business, which was sold during the first quarter of 2019. Excluding the impact of foreign exchange and the impact of the 53rd week in 2020, net revenue increased $133.1 million, or 7.4%, from the prior year;
•Gross profit increased $52.7, or 5.0%, in 2020 compared to the prior year due primarily to the addition of the Legacy Primo business, pricing initiatives, the favorable impact of foreign exchange rates and the impact of the 53rd week in 2020. The increase was partially offset by a decline in water and office coffee services consumption and volumes due to the impact of COVID-19. Excluding the impact of foreign exchange and the impact of the 53rd week in 2020, gross profit increased $37.2 million, or 3.5%, from the prior year. Gross profit as a percentage of net revenue decreased to 57.0% in 2020 compared to 59.1% in the prior year;
•SG&A expenses increased to $1,006.6 million in 2020 compared to $962.2 million in the prior year due primarily to the addition of the Legacy Primo business, partially offset by lower delivery expenses and cost reduction initiatives executed as a result of the impact of COVID-19, as well as the non-recurrence of SG&A expenses incurred by our Cott Beverages LLC business that was sold during the first quarter of 2019. SG&A expenses as a percentage of net revenue decreased to 51.5% in 2020 compared to 53.6% in the prior year;
•Loss on disposal of property, plant and equipment, net was primarily related to the disposal of $10.6 million of equipment that was either replaced or no longer being used in our reporting segments;
•Acquisition and integration expenses increased to $33.7 million in 2020 compared to $16.4 million in the prior year due primarily to the acquisition and integration of the Legacy Primo business. Acquisition and integration expenses as a percentage of net revenue increased to 1.7% in 2020 compared to 0.9% in the prior year;
•Goodwill and intangible asset impairment charges increased to $115.2 million from nil in the prior year due primarily to general deterioration in economic and market conditions in which we operate arising from COVID-19.
•Other expense, net was $18.7 million in 2020 compared to $3.7 million in the prior year due primarily to the loss recognized on the redemption of our 2024 Notes and an increase of net losses on foreign currency transactions, partially offset by income recognized from a favorable legal settlement, as well as the loss recognized on the sale of our Cott Beverages LLC business in the prior year;
•Income tax expense was $4.3 million on pre-tax loss from continuing operations of $152.5 million in 2020 compared to income tax expense of $4.5 million on pre-tax loss from continuing operations of $6.3 million in the prior year due primarily to increased losses driven by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 for which minimal tax benefit is recognized, including the impairment charges related to goodwill and intangible assets during the second quarter of 2020;
•Adjusted EBITDA increased to $361.5 million in 2020 compared to $287.1 million in the prior year due to the items listed above; and
•Cash flows provided by operating activities from continuing operations was $193.6 million in 2020 compared to $205.2 million in the prior year. The $11.6 million decrease was due primarily to the change in working capital balances, partially offset by the increase in net income from continuing operations, excluding non-cash charges, relative to the prior year.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our significant accounting policies and recently issued accounting pronouncements are described in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We believe the following represent our critical accounting policies:
Estimates
The preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the amount of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. The Consolidated Financial Statements include estimates and assumptions that, in the opinion of management, were significant to the underlying amounts representing the future valuation of intangible assets, long-lived assets and goodwill, realization of deferred income tax assets, the resolution of tax contingencies, and projected benefit plan obligations.
Impairment Testing of Goodwill
Primo operates through two operating segments: North America and Rest of World. These two operating segments are also reportable segments. We evaluate goodwill for impairment on a reporting unit basis, which is an operating segment or a level below an operating segment, referred to as a component. A component of an operating segment is a reporting unit if the component constitutes a business for which discrete financial information is available and management regularly reviews the operating results of that component. However, two or more components of an operating segment can be aggregated and deemed a single reporting unit if the components have similar economic characteristics. Our North America operating segment was determined to have three components: DSS, Aquaterra, and Mountain Valley. We have determined that DSS and Aquaterra have similar economic characteristics and have aggregated them as a single reporting unit for the purpose of testing goodwill for impairment (“DSSAqua”). Our Rest of World operating segment was determined to have four components: Eden, Aimia, Decantae, and Farrers, none of which have similar economic characteristics. For the purpose of testing goodwill for impairment in 2020, we have determined our reporting units are DSSAqua, Mountain Valley, Eden, Aimia, Decantae, and Farrers.
During the second quarter of 2020, given the general deterioration in economic and market conditions in which we operate arising from the COVID-19 pandemic, we identified a triggering event indicating possible impairment of goodwill and intangible assets, as further described below. We did not identify impairment of our property, plant and equipment, lease-related right-of-use assets, or long-lived assets.
Due to the triggering event identified above arising from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, we first performed a qualitative assessment of goodwill to determine whether it was more likely than not that the fair value of these reporting units exceeded their respective carrying values. Based on this qualitative assessment, we determined that it was more likely than not that the fair value of our Eden, Aimia, Decantae, and Farrers reporting units did not exceed their respective carrying values. As a result, we performed an interim quantitative impairment test as of June 27, 2020 on these reporting units.
We determined the fair value of the reporting units being evaluated using a mix of the income approach (which is based on the discounted cash flows of the reporting unit) and the guideline public company approach. We weighted the income approach and the guideline public company approach at 50% each to determine the fair value of the reporting unit. We believe using a combination of these approaches provides a more accurate valuation because it incorporates the expected cash generation of the Company, in addition to how a third-party market participant would value the reporting unit. Critical assumptions used in our valuation of the Eden reporting unit included the anticipated future cash flows, a weighted-average terminal revenue growth rate of 1.5% and a discount rate of 9.5%. Critical assumptions used in our valuation of the Aimia, Decantae, and Farrers reporting units included a weighted-average terminal revenue growth rate of 2.0% and a discount rate of 11.5%. The anticipated future cash flows assumption reflects projected revenue growth rates, SG&A expenses and capital expenditures. The terminal growth rate assumption incorporated into the discounted cash flow calculation reflects our long-term view of the market and industry, projected changes in the sale of our products, pricing of such products and operating profit margins. The discount rate was determined using various factors and sensitive assumptions, including bond yields, size premiums and tax rates. This rate was based on the weighted average cost of capital a market participant would use if evaluating the reporting unit as an investment. These assumptions are considered significant unobservable inputs and represent our best estimate of assumptions that market participants would use to determine the fair value of the respective reporting units. The key inputs into the discounted cash flow analysis were consistent with market data, where available, indicating that the assumptions used were in a reasonable range of observable market data.
Based on the quantitative assessment including consideration of the sensitivity of the assumptions made and methods used to determine fair value, industry trends and other relevant factors, we noted that the estimated fair value of the Aimia reporting unit exceeded its carrying value by approximately 23.5%. Therefore, no goodwill impairment charge was recorded for the Aimia reporting unit. Based on the quantitative assessment including consideration of the sensitivity of the assumptions made and methods used to determine fair value, industry trends and other relevant factors, we determined that goodwill was impaired for the Eden, Decantae, and Farrers reporting units and recognized impairment charges of $103.3 million, $0.3 million and $0.5 million, respectively. These impairment charges are included in goodwill and intangible asset impairment charges in the Consolidated Statement of Operations for the year ended January 2, 2021.
We had goodwill of $1,284.3 million on the Consolidated Balance Sheet at January 2, 2021, which represents amounts for the DSSAqua, Mountain Valley, Eden, Aimia, and Decantae reporting units.
For purposes of the 2020 annual test, we elected to perform a qualitative assessment for our DSSAqua, Mountain Valley, Eden, Aimia, and Decantae reporting units to assess whether it was more likely than not the fair value of these reporting units exceeded their respective carrying values. In performing these assessments, management relied on a number of factors including, but not limited to, macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors that would have a negative effect on earnings and cash flows, overall financial performance compared with forecasted projections in prior periods, and other relevant reporting unit events, the impact of which are all significant judgments and estimates. Based on these factors, management concluded that it was more likely than not that the fair values of the DSSAqua, Mountain Valley, Eden, Aimia, and Decantae reporting units were greater than their respective carrying amounts, including goodwill, indicating no impairment. Goodwill allocated to the DSSAqua, Mountain Valley, Eden, Aimia, and Decantae reporting units as of January 2, 2021 are $966.1 million, $16.0 million, $246.3 million, $54.6 million, and $1.3 million, respectively.
Each year during the fourth quarter, we re-evaluate the assumptions used in our assessments, such as revenue growth rates, SG&A expenses, capital expenditures and discount rates, to reflect any significant changes in the business environment that could materially affect the fair value of our reporting units. Based on the evaluations performed in 2020, we determined that the fair value of each of our reporting units exceeded their carrying amounts.
Impairment Testing of Intangible Assets With an Indefinite Life
Our intangible assets with indefinite lives relate to trademarks acquired in the acquisition of businesses, and there are no legal, regulatory, contractual, competitive, economic, or other factors that limit the useful life of these intangible assets. Our trademarks with indefinite lives are not amortized, but rather are tested for impairment at least annually or more frequently if we determine a triggering event has occurred during the year. We compare the carrying amount of the intangible assets to its fair value and when the carrying amount is greater than the fair value, we recognize an impairment loss. Our intangible assets with indefinite lives relate to trademarks acquired in the Legacy Primo Acquisition (the “Legacy Primo Trademarks”), trademarks acquired in the acquisition of DSS (the “DSS Trademarks”), trademarks acquired in the acquisition of Eden (the “Eden Trademarks”), trademarks acquired in the acquisition of Aquaterra (the “Aquaterra Trademarks”), trademarks acquired in the acquisition of Mountain Valley (the “Mountain Valley Trademarks”) and trademarks acquired in the acquisition of Crystal Rock (the “Crystal Rock Trademarks”).
As a result of the triggering event described above arising from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, we also performed recoverability tests on our intangible assets, primarily trademarks, within each of our reporting segments as of June 27, 2020. We assessed qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances indicated that it was more likely than not that the fair value of our trademarks with indefinite lives were less than their respective carrying value. The qualitative factors we assessed included macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors that would have a negative effect on earnings and cash flows, overall financial performance compared with forecasted projections in prior periods, and other relevant events, the impact of which are all significant judgments and estimates. Based on this qualitative assessment, we determined that impairment was more likely than not with the Eden Trademarks and the Aquaterra Trademarks. As a result, we performed an interim quantitative impairment test as of June 27, 2020 on these intangible assets.
To determine the fair value of the trademarks with indefinite lives associated with our Eden and Aquaterra businesses, we use a relief from royalty method of the income approach, which calculates a fair value royalty rate that is applied to revenue forecasts associated with those trademarks. The resulting cash flows are discounted using a rate to reflect the risk of achieving the projected royalty savings attributable to the trademarks. The assumptions used to estimate the fair value of these trademarks are subjective and require significant management judgment, including estimated future revenues, the royalty rate (which is estimated to be a reasonable market royalty charge that would be charged by a licensor of the trademarks) and the risk adjusted discount rate. Based on our impairment test, we determined the Eden Trademarks and the Aquaterra Trademarks were impaired and recognized impairment charges of $9.9 million and $1.2 million, respectively. These impairment charges are included in goodwill and intangible asset impairment charges in the Consolidated Statement of Operations for the year ended January 2, 2021.
As of January 2, 2021, the trademarks with indefinite lives have an aggregate net book value of $455.5 million.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, management concluded that it was more likely than not that the fair value of the Legacy Primo Trademarks, DSS Trademarks, Eden Trademarks, Aquaterra Trademarks, Mountain Valley Trademarks and Crystal Rock Trademarks were greater than their respective carrying value, indicating no impairment.
We assessed qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances indicated that it was more likely than not that the fair value of the DSS Trademarks, Aquaterra Trademarks, Mountain Valley Trademarks and Crystal Rock Trademarks were less than their respective carrying value. The qualitative factors we assessed included macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors that would have a negative effect on earnings and cash flows, overall financial performance compared with forecasted projections in prior periods, and other relevant events, the impact of which are all significant judgments and estimates. We concluded that it was more likely than not that the fair value of the DSS Trademarks, Aquaterra Trademarks, Mountain Valley Trademarks and Crystal Rock Trademarks were more than its carrying value and therefore we were not required to perform any additional testing. The Legacy Primo Trademarks were acquired in 2020 and since we noted no changes to the business environment, operations or use of the trademarks, we did not perform an impairment test with respect to these trademarks.
Other Intangible Assets
As of January 2, 2021, our intangible assets subject to amortization, net of accumulated amortization for continuing operations were $532.1 million, consisting principally of $485.2 million of customer relationships that arose from acquisitions, $24.3 million of software, and $12.8 million of patents. Customer relationships are typically amortized on an accelerated basis for the period over which we expect to receive the economic benefits. The customer relationship intangible assets acquired in our acquisitions are amortized over the expected remaining useful life of those relationships on a basis that reflects the pattern of realization of the estimated undiscounted after-tax cash flows. We review the estimated useful life of these intangible assets annually, unless a review is required more frequently due to a triggering event, such as the loss of a significant customer. Our review of the estimated useful life takes into consideration the specific net cash flows related to the intangible asset. The permanent loss of, or significant decline in sales to customers included in the intangible asset would result in either an impairment in the value of the intangible asset or an accelerated amortization of any remaining value and could lead to an impairment of the fixed assets that were used to service that customer. In 2020, we recorded $245.2 million in customer relationships acquired with the Legacy Primo Acquisition. We did not record impairment charges for intangible assets subject to amortization in 2020, 2019 or 2018.
Impairment and Disposal of Long-Lived Assets
When adverse events occur, we compare the carrying amount of long-lived assets to the estimated undiscounted future cash flows at the lowest level of independent cash flows for the group of long-lived assets and recognize any impairment loss based on discounted cash flows in the Consolidated Statements of Operations, taking into consideration the timing of testing and the asset’s remaining useful life. The expected life and value of these long-lived assets is based on an evaluation of the competitive environment, history and future prospects as appropriate.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in Canada as well as in numerous foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgments and estimates are required in determining the income tax expense in these jurisdictions. Our income tax expense, deferred tax assets and liabilities and reserves for unrecognized tax benefits reflect management’s best assessment of estimated future taxes to be paid in the jurisdictions in which we operate.
Deferred income taxes arise from temporary differences between the tax and financial statement recognition of revenue and expense. In evaluating our ability to recover our deferred tax assets within the jurisdiction from which they arise we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, tax planning strategies and recent financial operations. In projecting future taxable income, we begin with historical results adjusted for the results of discontinued operations and changes in accounting policies and incorporate assumptions including the amount of future Canadian and foreign pre-tax income, the reversal of temporary differences, and the implementation of feasible and prudent tax planning strategies. These assumptions require significant judgment about the forecasts of future taxable income and are consistent with the plans and estimates we are using to manage the underlying businesses. Changes in tax laws and rates could also affect recorded deferred tax assets and liabilities in the future.
The calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws and regulations in a multitude of jurisdictions across our global operations.
Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 740, “Income Taxes” (“ASC 740”) provides that a tax benefit from an uncertain tax position may be recognized when it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon examination, including resolutions of any related appeals or litigation processes, based on the technical merits. ASC 740 also provides guidance on measurement, derecognition, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim periods, disclosure and transition.
We recognize tax liabilities in accordance with ASC 740 and we adjust these liabilities when our judgment changes as a result of the evaluation of new information not previously available. Due to the complexity of some of these uncertainties, the ultimate resolution may result in a payment that is materially different from our current estimate of the tax liabilities. These differences will be reflected as increases or decreases to income tax expense in the period in which they are determined.
Pension Costs
We account for our defined benefit pension plans in accordance with ASC No. 715-20, “Compensation-Defined Benefit Plans-General” (“ASC 715-20”). The funded status is the difference between the fair value of plan assets and the benefit obligation. The adjustment to accumulated other comprehensive income represents the net unrecognized actuarial gains or losses and unrecognized prior service costs. Future actuarial gains or losses that are not recognized as net periodic benefits cost in the same periods will be recognized as a component of other comprehensive income.
We maintain several defined benefit plans that cover certain of our employees. We record the expenses associated with these plans based on calculations which include various actuarial assumptions such as discount rates and expected long-term rates of return on plan assets. Material changes in pension costs may occur in the future due to changes in these assumptions. Future annual amounts could be impacted by changes in the discount rate, changes in the expected long-term rate of return, changes in the level of contributions to the plans and other factors.
We utilize a yield curve analysis to determine the discount rates for our defined benefit plans’ obligations. The yield curve considers pricing and yield information for high quality corporate bonds with maturities matched to estimated payouts of future pension benefits. The expected return on plan assets is based on our expectation of the long-term rates of return on each asset class based on the current asset mix of the funds, considering the historical returns earned on the type of assets in the funds. We review our actuarial assumptions on an annual basis and make modifications to the assumptions based on current rates and trends when appropriate. The effects of the modifications to the actuarial assumptions which impact the projected benefit obligation are amortized over future periods.
In connection with certain other collective bargaining agreements to which we are a party, we are required to make contributions on behalf of certain union employees to multiemployer pension plans. The ongoing contributions and liabilities associated with these plans are not material.
Non-GAAP Measures
In this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we supplement our reporting of financial measures determined in accordance with GAAP by utilizing certain non-GAAP financial measures that exclude certain items to make period-over-period comparisons for our underlying operations before material charges. We exclude these items to better understand trends in the business. We exclude the impact of foreign exchange to separate the impact of currency exchange rate changes from our results of operations. We also exclude the impact of the 53rd week of operations for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021.
We also utilize (loss) earnings before interest expense, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”), which is GAAP net (loss) income from continuing operations before interest expense, net, expense (benefit) for income taxes and depreciation and amortization. We consider EBITDA to be an indicator of operating performance. We also use EBITDA, as do analysts, lenders, investors and others, because it excludes certain items that can vary widely across different industries or among companies within the same industry. These differences can result in considerable variability in the relative costs of productive assets and the depreciation and amortization expense among companies. We also utilize adjusted EBITDA, which is EBITDA excluding acquisition and integration costs, share-based compensation costs, COVID-19 costs, goodwill and intangible asset impairment charges, foreign exchange and other losses (gains), net, loss on disposal of property, plant and equipment, net, loss (gain) on extinguishment of long-term debt, (gain) loss on sale of business, and other adjustments, net, as the case may be (“Adjusted EBITDA”). We consider Adjusted EBITDA to be an indicator of our operating performance. Adjusted EBITDA excludes certain items to make more meaningful period-over-period comparisons of our underlying operations before material changes.
Because we use these adjusted financial results in the management of our business and to understand underlying business performance, we believe this supplemental information is useful to investors for their independent evaluation and understanding of our business performance and the performance of our management. The non-GAAP financial measures described above are in addition to, and not meant to be considered superior to, or a substitute for, our financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP. In addition, the non-GAAP financial measures included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K reflect our judgment of particular items, and may be different from, and therefore may not be comparable to, similarly titled measures reported by other companies.
The following table summarizes our Consolidated Statements of Operations as a percentage of net revenue for 2020, 2019 and 2018:
During the second quarter of 2020, we implemented a restructuring program intended to optimize synergies from the Company’s transition to a pure-play water company following the Legacy Primo Acquisition and, as a result, reorganized into two reporting segments: North America (which includes our DSS, Aquaterra, Mountain Valley and Legacy Primo businesses) and Rest of World (which includes our Eden, Aimia, Decantae and Farrers businesses). Our corporate oversight function and other miscellaneous expenses are aggregated and included in the All Other category. Segment reporting results have been recast to reflect these changes for all periods presented.
The following table summarizes our net revenue, gross profit, SG&A expenses and operating (loss) income by reporting segment for 2020, 2019 and 2018:
The following tables summarize revenue by channel for 2020, 2019 and 2018:
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes the change in revenue by reporting segment for 2020:
______________________
1 Impact of foreign exchange is the difference between the current year’s revenue translated utilizing the current year’s average foreign exchange rates less the current year’s revenue translated utilizing the prior year’s average foreign exchange rates.
The following table summarizes the change in revenue by reporting segment for 2019:
______________________
1 Impact of foreign exchange is the difference between the current year’s revenue translated utilizing the current year’s average foreign exchange rates less the current year’s revenue translated utilizing the prior year’s average foreign exchange rates.
The following tables summarize the change in gross profit by reporting segment for 2020:
______________________
1 Impact of foreign exchange is the difference between the current year's gross profit translated utilizing the current year's average foreign exchange rates less the current year's gross profit translated utilizing the prior year's average foreign exchange rates.
The following tables summarize the change in gross profit by reporting segment for 2019:
______________________
1 Impact of foreign exchange is the difference between the current year's gross profit translated utilizing the current year's average foreign exchange rates less the current year's gross profit translated utilizing the prior year's average foreign exchange rates.
Our corporate oversight function is not treated as a segment; it includes certain general and administrative costs that are disclosed in the All Other category.
The following table summarizes our EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for the fiscal years ended January 2, 2021, December 28, 2019 and December 29, 2018, respectively.
______________________
1 Includes $3.9 million of benefit associated with the 53rd week for the year ended January 2, 2021.
2 Includes an increase of $1.8 million and $0.8 million of share-based compensation costs for the years ended December 28, 2019 and December 29, 2018, respectively, related to awards granted in connection with the acquisition of our Eden business.
Year Ended January 2, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 28, 2019
Revenue, Net
Net revenue increased $158.1 million, or 8.8%, in 2020 from 2019. Excluding the impact of foreign exchange and the impact of the 53rd week in 2020, net revenue increased $133.1 million, or 7.4%, in 2020 from 2019.
North America net revenue increased $223.4 million, or 17.6%, in 2020 from 2019. Excluding the impact of foreign exchange and the impact of the 53rd week in 2020, net revenue increased $205.0 million, or 16.1%, in 2020 from 2019, due primarily to the addition of revenues from the Legacy Primo business and pricing initiatives, partially offset by a decline in water and office coffee services consumption and volumes due to the impact of COVID-19.
Rest of World net revenue decreased $58.1 million, or 11.2%, in 2020 from 2019. Excluding the impact of foreign exchange and the impact of the 53rd week in 2020, net revenue decreased $64.7 million, or 12.5%, in 2020 from 2019, due primarily to a decline in water consumption and volumes due to the impact of COVID-19.
All Other net revenue decreased $7.2 million, or 100.0%, in 2020 from 2019, due primarily to the non-recurrence of revenue contributed by our Cott Beverages LLC business, which was sold in the first quarter of 2019.
Gross Profit
Gross profit increased $52.7 million, or 5.0%, in 2020 from 2019. Excluding the impact of foreign exchange and the impact of the 53rd week in 2020, gross profit increased $37.2 million, or 3.5%, in 2020 from 2019. Gross profit as a percentage of net revenue was 57.0% in 2020 compared to 59.1% in 2019.
North America gross profit increased $92.4 million, or 12.0%, in 2020 from 2019. Excluding the impact of foreign exchange and the impact of the 53rd week in 2020, gross profit increased $80.5 million, or 10.4%, in 2020 from 2019, due primarily to the addition of the Legacy Primo business and pricing initiatives, partially offset by a decline in water and office coffee services consumption and volumes as a result of the impact of COVID-19.
Rest of World gross profit decreased $39.4 million, or 13.6%, in 2020 from 2019. Excluding the impact of foreign exchange and the impact of the 53rd week in 2020, gross profit decreased $43.0 million, or 14.8%, in 2020 from 2019, due primarily to a decline in water consumption and volumes due to the effect of COVID-19.
All Other gross profit decreased to nil in 2020 compared to $0.3 million in 2019, due primarily to the non-recurrence of gross profit contributed by our Cott Beverages LLC business, which was sold in the first quarter of 2019.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
SG&A expenses increased to $1,006.6 million in 2020 compared to $962.2 million in 2019. SG&A expenses as a percentage of net revenue was 51.5% in 2020 compared to 53.6% in 2019.
North America SG&A expenses increased to $710.0 million in 2020 compared to $668.2 million in 2019, due primarily to the addition of the Legacy Primo business, partially offset by lower delivery expenses and cost reduction initiatives executed as a result of the impact of COVID-19.
Rest of World SG&A expenses decreased to $244.8 million in 2020 compared to $252.0 million in 2019, due primarily to lower delivery expenses and cost reduction initiatives executed as a result of the impact of COVID-19, as well as wage subsidies received, partially offset by an increase in severance costs.
All Other SG&A expenses increased to $51.8 million in 2020 compared to $42.0 million in 2019, due primarily to an increase in professional fees and share-based compensation costs, partially offset by the non-recurrence of SG&A expenses incurred by our Cott Beverages LLC business, which was sold in the first quarter of 2019.
Acquisition and Integration Expenses
Acquisition and integration expenses increased to $33.7 million in 2020 compared to $16.4 million in 2019. Acquisition and integration expenses as a percentage of net revenue was 1.7% in 2020 compared to 0.9% in 2019.
North America acquisition and integration expenses increased to $9.8 million in 2020 compared to $3.0 million in 2019, due primarily to the addition of the Legacy Primo business. The expenses in 2019 related primarily to the additions of our Mountain Valley and Crystal Rock businesses.
Rest of World acquisition and integration expenses decreased to $2.8 million in 2020 compared to $8.3 million in 2019, due primarily to a reduction in costs associated with tuck-in acquisitions.
All Other acquisition and integration expenses increased to $21.1 million in 2020 compared to $5.1 million in 2019, due primarily to the addition of the Legacy Primo business.
Goodwill and Intangible Asset Impairment Charges
Goodwill and intangible asset impairment charges increased to $115.2 million in 2020 compared to nil in 2019. Goodwill and intangible asset impairment charges as a percentage of revenue was 5.9% in 2020 compared to nil in 2019.
North America goodwill and intangible asset impairment charges increased to $1.2 million in 2020 compared to nil in 2019 due to impairment charges recorded on certain of our Canadian trademarks.
Rest of World goodwill and intangible asset impairment charges increased to $114.0 million in 2020 compared to nil in 2019 due primarily to general deterioration in economic and market conditions in which we operate arising from COVID-19.
Operating (Loss) Income
Operating loss was $52.2 million in 2020 compared to operating income of $75.0 million in 2019.
North America operating income increased to $132.1 million in 2020 compared to $92.7 million in 2019, due to the items discussed above.
Rest of World operating loss was $111.4 million in 2020 compared to operating income of $29.1 million in 2019, due to the items discussed above.
All Other operating loss increased to $72.9 million in 2020 compared to $46.8 million in 2019, due to the items discussed above.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense, net was $18.7 million in 2020 compared to $3.7 million in 2019, due primarily to the loss recognized on the redemption of our 2024 Notes and an increase of net losses on foreign currency transactions, partially offset by income recognized from a favorable legal settlement, as well as the loss recognized on the sale of our Cott Beverages LLC business in the prior year.
Income Taxes
Income tax expense was $4.3 million in 2020 compared to $4.5 million in 2019. The effective tax rate was (2.8)% in 2020 compared to (71.4)% in 2019.
The effective tax rate for 2020 varied from the effective tax rate from 2019 due to increased losses primarily driven by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in the current year for which minimal tax benefit is recognized, including the impairment charges related to goodwill and intangible assets during the second quarter of 2020. The effective tax rate for 2020 differs from the Canadian statutory rate primarily due to: (a) significant permanent differences for which we have not recognized a tax benefit; (b) income in tax jurisdictions with lower statutory tax rates than Canada; and (c) losses in tax jurisdictions with existing valuations allowances.
Year Ended December 28, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 29, 2018
Revenue, Net
Net revenue increased $4.4 million, or 0.2%, in 2019 from 2018.
North America net revenue increased $81.4 million, or 6.8%, in 2019 from 2018, due primarily to the addition of revenues from the Mountain Valley and Crystal Rock businesses, pricing initiatives, and growth within our residential and commercial water delivery operation and retail.
Rest of World net revenue decreased $3.5 million, or 0.7% in 2019 from 2018, due primarily to the unfavorable impact of foreign exchange rates, partially offset by growth within our residential and commercial water delivery operations.
All Other net revenue decreased $73.5 million, or 91.1%, in 2019 from 2018, due primarily to less revenue being contributed by our Cott Beverages LLC business, which was sold in the first quarter of 2019.
Gross Profit
Gross profit increased $37.6 million, or 3.7%, in 2019 from 2018. Gross profit as a percentage of net revenue was 59.1% in 2019 compared to 57.2% in 2018.
North America gross profit increased $51.9 million, or 7.2%, in 2019 from 2018, due primarily to the addition of the Mountain Valley and Crystal Rock businesses, pricing initiatives and growth within our residential and commercial water delivery operations.
Rest of World gross profit decreased $2.6 million, or 0.9%, in 2019 from 2018, due primarily to the unfavorable impact of foreign exchange rates, partially offset by growth within our residential and commercial water delivery operations.
All Other gross profit decreased $11.7 million, or 97.5%, in 2019 from 2018, due primarily to less gross profit contributed by our Cott Beverages LLC business, which was sold in the first quarter of 2019.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
SG&A expenses increased to $962.2 million in 2019 compared to $955.0 million in 2018. SG&A expenses as a percentage of net revenue was 53.6% in 2019 compared to 53.3% in 2018.
North America SG&A expenses increased to $668.2 million in 2019 compared to $636.5 million in 2018, due primarily to the addition of the Mountain Valley and Crystal Rock businesses, partially offset by a decrease in amortization expense.
Rest of World SG&A expenses decreased to $252.0 million in 2019 compared to $259.7 million in 2018, due primarily to the favorable impact of foreign exchange rates.
All Other SG&A expenses decreased to $42.0 million in 2019 compared to $58.8 million in 2018, due primarily to lower SG&A expenses contributed by our Cott Beverages LLC business, which was sold in the first quarter of 2019, and a decrease in professional fees.
Acquisition and Integration Expenses
Acquisition and integration expenses decreased to $16.4 million in 2019 compared to $17.2 million in 2018. Acquisition and integration expenses as a percentage of net revenue was 0.9% in 2019 compared to 1.0% in 2018.
North America acquisition and integration expenses decreased to $3.0 million in 2019 compared to $5.2 million in 2018, due primarily to the reduction in costs with the integration of the Mountain Valley and Crystal Rock businesses.
Rest of World acquisition and integration expenses increased to $8.3 million in 2019 compared to $5.4 million in 2018, due primarily to an increase in costs associated with tuck-in acquisitions.
All Other acquisition and integration expenses decreased to $5.1 million in 2019 compared to $6.6 million in 2018, due primarily to the reduction in costs with the integration of the Mountain Valley and Crystal Rock businesses.
Operating Income
Operating income increased to $75.0 million in 2019 compared to $42.7 million in 2018.
North America operating income increased to $92.7 million in 2019 compared to $69.2 million in 2018, due to the items discussed above.
Rest of World operating income increased to $29.1 million in 2019 compared to $26.8 million in 2018, due to the items discussed above.
All Other operating loss decreased to $46.8 million in 2019 compared to $53.3 million in 2018, due to the items discussed above.
Other Expense (Income), Net
Other expense, net was $3.7 million in 2019 compared to other income, net of $42.0 million in 2018, due primarily to the loss recognized on the sale of our Cott Beverages LLC business and an increase of net losses on foreign currency transactions in the current year versus gains recognized on the redemption of the DSS Notes and the sale of our 3G and 5G bottled water container manufacturing business, mark to market gains on warrant securities, and income recognized from favorable legal settlements in the prior year.
Income Taxes
Income tax expense was $4.5 million in 2019 compared to income tax benefit of $8.3 million in 2018. The effective tax rate was (71.4)% in 2019 compared to (116.9)% in 2018. The income tax expense in 2019 was due primarily to increased income incurred in taxable jurisdictions. The income tax benefit in 2018 was due primarily to a $5.6 million release of a Canadian valuation allowance and releases of various uncertain tax positions. The 2019 effective tax rate differs from the Canadian statutory rate primarily due to: (a) significant permanent differences for which we have recognized a tax benefit; (b) income in tax jurisdictions with lower statutory tax rates than Canada; and (c) losses in tax jurisdictions with existing valuation allowances.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table summarizes our cash flows for 2020, 2019 and 2018 as reported in our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows in the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements:
Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations was $193.6 million in 2020 compared to $205.2 million in 2019 and $196.3 million in 2018. The $11.6 million decrease in 2020 compared to 2019 was due primarily to the change in working capital balances, partially offset by the increase in net income from continuing operations, excluding non-cash charges, relative to the prior year.
The $8.9 million increase in 2019 compared to 2018 was due primarily to the change in working capital balances relative to the prior year, partially offset by the decrease in net income from continuing operations.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities from continuing operations was $566.9 million in 2020 compared to $111.6 million in 2019 and $268.1 million in 2018. The $455.3 million increase in 2020 compared to 2019 was due primarily to the cash used to acquire our Legacy Primo business, an increase in additions to property, plant and equipment relative to the prior year, and cash received from the sale of our Cott Beverages LLC business in the prior year.
The $156.5 million decrease in 2019 compared to 2018 was due primarily to the cash received from the sale of our Cott Beverages LLC business in the first quarter of 2019, as well as a decrease in cash used to finance acquisitions and a decrease in additions to property, plant and equipment relative to the prior year, partially offset by the cash received from the sale of our 3G and 5G bottled water container manufacturing business and a sale of equity securities in the prior year.
Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities from continuing operations was $91.0 million in 2020 compared to $65.4 million in 2019 and $296.6 million in 2018. The $25.6 million increase in 2020 compared to 2019 was due primarily to the premium payments and financing fees incurred for the issuance of the 2028 Notes.
The $231.2 million decrease in 2019 compared to 2018 was due primarily to the redemption of the DSS Notes in the prior year and a decrease in common shares repurchased relative to the prior year, partially offset by a decrease in borrowings under our previously existing ABL facility net of payments relative to the prior year.
Financial Liquidity
As of January 2, 2021, we had $1,470.7 million of debt and $115.1 million of cash and cash equivalents compared to $1,358.4 million of debt and $156.9 million of cash and cash equivalents as of December 28, 2019. Our cash and cash equivalents balance as of December 28, 2019 includes $12.4 million of cash proceeds received from the Traditional Business Divestiture that were held in escrow by a third-party escrow agent to secure potential indemnification claims. Our cash and cash equivalents balance as of December 28, 2019 also includes $0.5 million of cash proceeds received from the sale of our Cott Beverages LLC business that were held in escrow by a third-party escrow agent to secure potential indemnification claims. In July 2020, a settlement agreement was reached with Refresco, the buyer of both businesses. In exchange for a settlement of pending and future claims, $4.0 million of the escrow funds were released to Refresco. The remaining $8.4 million and $0.5 million were released to us.
The recent COVID-19 pandemic has continued to disrupt our business. The extent and duration of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and financial results will depend on numerous evolving factors that we are not able to accurately predict and that all will vary by market. These factors include the duration and scope of the pandemic, global economic conditions during and after the pandemic, governmental actions that have been taken, or may be taken in the future, in response to the pandemic, and changes in customer behavior in response to the pandemic, some of which may be more than just temporary.
We believe that our level of resources, which includes cash on hand, available borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility and funds provided by operations, will be adequate to meet our expenses, capital expenditures, and debt service obligations for the next twelve months. Our ability to generate cash to meet our current expenses and debt service obligations will depend on our future performance. If we do not have enough cash to pay our debt service obligations, or if the Revolving Credit Facility or our outstanding notes were to become currently due, either at maturity or as a result of a breach, we may be required to take actions such as amending our Revolving Credit Facility or the indentures governing our outstanding notes, refinancing all or part of our existing debt, selling assets, incurring additional indebtedness or raising equity. If we need to seek additional financing, there is no assurance that this additional financing will be available on favorable terms or at all.
Our Revolving Credit Facility and debt capital markets transactions are described under “Debt” below.
In 2020, we declared a dividend of $0.06 per common share each quarter for an aggregate dividend payment of approximately $38.9 million.
We may, from time to time, depending on market conditions, including without limitation whether our outstanding notes are then trading at a discount to their face amount, repurchase our outstanding notes for cash and/or in exchange for shares of our common shares, warrants, preferred shares, debt or other consideration, in each case in open market purchases and/or privately negotiated transactions. The amounts involved in any such transactions, individually or in aggregate, may be material. However, the covenants in our Revolving Credit Facility subject such purchases to certain limitations and conditions.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements as defined under Item 303(a)(4) of Regulation S-K as of January 2, 2021.
Contractual Obligations
The following table shows the schedule of future payments under certain contracts, including debt agreements and guarantees, as of January 2, 2021:
______________________
1 The Revolving Credit Facility is considered a current liability. As of January 2, 2021, we had $104.8 million of outstanding borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility.
2 Interest expense includes fixed interest on the 2025 Notes, the 2028 Notes, the Revolving Credit Facility and other long-term liabilities. Actual amounts will differ from estimates provided.
3 Includes estimated interest payments using a weighted average discount rate of 4.9% as of January 2, 2021.
4 Purchase obligations consist of commitments for the purchase of inventory, energy transactions, and payments related to professional fees and technology outsourcing agreements. These obligations represent the minimum contractual obligations expected under the normal course of business.
5 The contractual obligations table excludes the Company’s ASC 740 uncertain tax positions of $15.6 million because the Company cannot make a reliable estimate as to when such amounts will be settled.
Debt
Our total debt as of January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019 was as follows:
Revolving Credit Facility
The Company entered into the Credit Agreement on March 6, 2020. The Credit Agreement provides the Revolving Credit Facility, which may be increased by incremental credit extensions from time to time in the form of term loans or additional revolving credit commitments. The Revolving Credit Facility has a five year maturity date and includes letter of credit and swing line loan sub facilities. Borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility were used to refinance in full and terminate our previously existing ABL facility, governed by the Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, dated January 30, 2019, by and among the Company, the other loan parties party thereto from time to time, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent and as collateral agent, and the lenders from time to time party thereto (as amended, the “ABL Credit Agreement”). Certain letters of credit outstanding under the ABL Credit Agreement were rolled over under the Revolving Credit Facility on March 6, 2020.
We incurred approximately $3.4 million of financing fees in connection with the Revolving Credit Facility. The Revolving Credit Facility was considered to be a modification of the ABL facility under GAAP. These new financing fees along with $1.8 million of unamortized deferred costs of the ABL facility are being amortized using the straight-line method over the duration of the Revolving Credit Facility.
As of January 2, 2021, our outstanding borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility were $104.8 million and outstanding letters of credit totaled $50.6 million resulting in total utilization under the Revolving Credit Facility of $155.4 million. As a result, our unused availability under the Revolving Credit Facility was $194.6 million as of January 2, 2021. The commitment fee was 0.25% per annum of the unused availability under the Revolving Credit Facility.
The weighted average effective interest rate at January 2, 2021 on the Revolving Credit Facility outstanding borrowings was 2.1%. The weighted average effective interest rate at December 28, 2019 on the ABL facility outstanding borrowings was 3.4%. The effective interest rates are based on our aggregate availability.
Borrowings under the Credit Agreement will bear interest at a rate per annum equal to either: (a) a eurocurrency rate as determined under the Credit Agreement, plus the applicable margin, or (b) a base rate equal to the highest of (i) Bank of America’s prime rate, (ii) 0.5% per annum above the federal funds rate, and (iii) the eurocurrency rate, as determined under the Credit Agreement, for a one month interest period, plus 1.0%, plus the applicable margin. Prior to delivery of financial statements and a compliance certificate for the full fiscal quarter following March 6, 2020, the applicable margin for eurocurrency rate loans was 150 basis points and the applicable margin for base rate loans was 50 basis points. Thereafter, the applicable margin for eurocurrency rate loans ranges from 137.5 to 200 basis points and the applicable margin for base rate loans ranges from 37.5 to 100 basis points, in each case depending on our consolidated total leverage ratio. Unutilized commitments under the Credit Agreement are subject to a commitment fee ranging from 20 to 30 basis points per annum depending on our consolidated total leverage ratio, payable on a quarterly basis.
3.875% Senior Notes due in 2028
On October 22, 2020, we issued €450.0 million ($551.9 million at exchange rates in effect on January 2, 2021) of 2028 Notes to qualified purchasers in a private placement offering under the Securities Act, and outside the United States to non-U.S. purchasers pursuant to Regulation S under the Securities Act and other applicable laws. The 2028 Notes were issued by our wholly-owned subsidiary Primo Water Holdings Inc. The 2028 Notes are guaranteed by the Company and certain subsidiaries that are currently obligors under the Revolving Credit Facility, the 2024 Notes and the 2025 Notes. The 2028 Notes will mature on October 31, 2028 and interest is payable semi-annually on April 30th and October 31st of each year commencing on April 30, 2021. The proceeds of the 2028 Notes, along with borrowings from the Revolving Credit Facility, were used to redeem in full the 2024 Notes and pay related premiums, fees and expenses.
We incurred approximately $8.5 million of financing fees for the issuance of the 2028 Notes. The financing fees are being amortized using the effective interest method over an eight-year period, which represents the term to maturity of the 2028 Notes.
5.500% Senior Notes due in 2025
In March 2017, we issued $750.0 million of our 2025 Notes to qualified purchasers in a private placement offering under Rule 144A under the Securities Act, and outside the United States to non-U.S. purchasers pursuant to Regulation S under the Securities Act and other applicable laws. The 2025 Notes were issued by our wholly-owned subsidiary Primo Water Holdings Inc. (formerly Cott Holdings Inc.), and most of our U.S., Canadian, U.K. and Dutch subsidiaries guarantee the 2025 Notes. The 2025 Notes will mature on April 1, 2025 and interest is payable semi-annually on April 1st and October 1st of each year commencing on October 1, 2017. The proceeds of the 2025 Notes were used to redeem in full $625.0 million of our 6.750% senior notes due 2020, redeem $100.0 million aggregate principal amount of the DSS Notes, and to pay related fees and expenses.
We incurred $11.7 million of financing fees in connection with the issuance of the 2025 Notes. The financing fees are being amortized using the effective interest method over an eight-year period, which represents the term to maturity of the 2025 Notes.
5.500% Senior Notes due in 2024
In June 2016, we issued €450.0 million of our 2024 Notes to qualified purchasers in a private placement offering under Rule 144A and Regulation S under the Securities Act and other applicable laws. The 2024 Notes were issued by us, and most of our U.S., Canadian, U.K. and Dutch subsidiaries guaranteed the 2024 Notes.
We incurred approximately $11.3 million of financing fees for the issuance of the 2024 Notes and $11.0 million of bridge financing commitment fees and professional fees in connection with the acquisition of Eden. The financing fees were being amortized using the effective interest method over an eight-year period, which represented the term to maturity of the 2024 Notes. The bridge financing commitment fees and professional fees were expensed as incurred.
On October 22, 2020, we used the €450.0 million proceeds of the 2028 Notes ($533.5 million at exchange rates in effect on October 22, 2020), along with borrowings from the Revolving Credit Facility, to redeem in full the 2024 Notes. The redemption of the 2024 Notes included $14.7 million in premium payments, accrued interest of $9.0 million, and the write-off of $5.1 million in deferred financing fees.
Credit Ratings and Covenant Compliance
Credit Ratings
Our objective is to maintain credit ratings that provide us with ready access to global capital and credit markets at favorable interest rates.
As of January 2, 2021, the Company’s credit ratings were as follows:
Any downgrade of our credit ratings by either Moody’s or S&P could increase our future borrowing costs or impair our ability to access capital markets on terms commercially acceptable to us or at all.
Covenant Compliance
Indentures governing our outstanding notes
Under the indentures governing our outstanding notes, we are subject to a number of covenants, including covenants that limit our and certain of our subsidiaries’ ability, subject to certain exceptions and qualifications, to (i) pay dividends or make distributions, repurchase equity securities, prepay subordinated debt or make certain investments, (ii) incur additional debt or issue certain disqualified stock or preferred stock, (iii) create or incur liens on assets securing indebtedness, (iv) merge or consolidate with another company or sell all or substantially all of our assets taken as a whole, (v) enter into transactions with affiliates and (vi) sell assets. The covenants are substantially similar across the series of notes. As of January 2, 2021, we were in compliance with all of the covenants under each series of notes. There have been no amendments to any such covenants of our outstanding notes since the date of their issuance or assumption, as applicable.
Revolving Credit Facility
Under the Credit Agreement governing the Revolving Credit Facility, we and our restricted subsidiaries are subject to a number of business and financial covenants, including a consolidated secured leverage ratio and an interest coverage ratio. The consolidated secured leverage ratio must not be more than 3.50 to 1.00, with an allowable temporary increase to 4.00 to 1.00 for the quarter in which we consummate a material acquisition with a price not less than $125.0 million, for three quarters. The interest coverage ratio must not be less than 3.00 to 1.00. We were in compliance with these financial covenants as of January 2, 2021.
In addition, the Credit Agreement has certain non-financial covenants, such as covenants regarding indebtedness, investments, and asset dispositions. We were in compliance with all of the applicable covenants as of January 2, 2021.
Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
Common Share Repurchase Programs
On December 11, 2019, our Board of Directors approved a share repurchase program for up to $50.0 million of our outstanding common shares over a 12-month period (the “Repurchase Plan”), which expired on December 15, 2020. For the year ended January 2, 2021, we repurchased 2,316,835 common shares for $25.0 million through open market transactions under the Repurchase Plan.
Tax Withholding
During 2020, 540,182 shares (2019-263,484; 2018-417,224) of our previously-issued common shares were withheld from delivery to our employees to satisfy their tax obligations related to share-based awards. Please refer to the table in Part II, Item 5 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Capital Structure
Since December 28, 2019, equity has increased by $180.7 million. The increase was due primarily to the issuance of common shares of $386.5 million and share-based compensation costs of $19.8 million, partially offset by net loss of $131.7 million, common shares repurchased and subsequently canceled of $33.2 million, other comprehensive loss, net of tax of $18.2 million and common share dividend payments of $38.9 million.
Dividend payments
Common Share Dividend
Our Board of Directors declared a quarterly dividend of $0.06 per common share in each quarter during 2020 and 2019 for an aggregate dividend payment of approximately $38.9 million and $32.6 million, respectively. We intend to pay a regular quarterly dividend on our common shares subject to, among other things, the best interests of our shareowners, our results of operations, cash balances and future cash requirements, financial condition, statutory regulations and covenants set forth in the Revolving Credit facility and indentures governing our outstanding notes as well as other factors that the Board of Directors may deem relevant from time to time.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 1 in the Consolidated Financial Statements for a summary of recently adopted and recently issued accounting standards and their related effects or anticipated effects on our consolidated results of operations and financial condition.