Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read together with our financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. See “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” for a discussion of the uncertainties, risks and assumptions associated with these statements. Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those discussed in our forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
General
We are a diversified medical science and technology company with deep experience with OTC consumer healthcare products and dietary supplements. We conduct our operations through two operating segments: consumer products and diagnostic services. Until late 2020 we were engaged in the research, development, manufacture, distribution, marketing and sale of OTC consumer healthcare products and dietary supplements in the United States. However, in December 2020, we also began to offer COVID-19 and other respiratory pathogen panel (RPP) molecular tests through our new diagnostic services business.
Our wholly-owned subsidiary, PMI, is a full-service contract manufacturer and private label developer of a broad range of non-GMO, organic and natural-based cough drops and lozenges and OTC drug and dietary supplement products. The dietary supplements are developed and marketed under the TK Supplements® brand name.
Our wholly-owned subsidiary, ProPhase Diagnostics, formed on October 9, 2020, offers a variety of important medical tests, including COVID-19 and (RPP) molecular tests. On October 23, 2020, we completed the acquisition of all of the issued and outstanding shares of capital stock of Confucius Plaza Medical Laboratory Corp. (“CPM”) for approximately $2.5 million in cash, subject to certain adjustments, pursuant to the terms of a Stock Purchase Agreement, by and among the Company, CPM, Pride Diagnostics and other parties named therein CPM (which is now known as ProPhase Diagnostics NJ, Inc.) is the owner of a 4,000 square foot CLIA accredited laboratory located in Old Bridge, New Jersey, which ProPhase Diagnostics acquired as part of the transaction. As a result of the acquisition of CPM in October 2020, we entered into a new business line, diagnostic services. In December 2020, we expanded our diagnostic services business with the signing of a lease and the recent build out of a second, larger CLIA accredited laboratory in Garden City, New York. Operations at this second facility commenced in January 2021.
We continue to actively pursue acquisition opportunities for other companies, technologies and products within and outside the consumer healthcare products and diagnostics services industries.
Results of Operations from Continuing Operations
Fiscal 2020 compared with Fiscal 2019
Net sales for Fiscal 2020 increased $4.6 million to $14.5 million as compared to $9.9 million for Fiscal 2019. The increase in net sales for Fiscal 2020 as compared to Fiscal 2019 is principally due to increased third party customer orders in contract manufacturing and revenue of $1.3 million related to our new diagnostic services business.
Cost of sales for Fiscal 2020 were $9.9 million as compared to $7.3 million for Fiscal 2019. We realized a gross profit $4.6 million for Fiscal 2020 as compared to $2.6 million for Fiscal 2019. For Fiscal 2020, our gross margin was 31.8% as compared to 26.5% for Fiscal 2019. Such increase in gross margin for Fiscal 2020 as compared to Fiscal 2019 is principally due to (i) an increase in the absorption of fixed production costs and (ii) fluctuations in our product mix and pricing fluctuations from period to period and increased margins generally associated with the new diagnostic services business. Gross margins have historically been influenced by fluctuations in quarter-to-quarter production volume, fixed production costs and related overhead absorption, raw ingredient costs, inventory mark to market write-downs and timing of shipments to customers.
Sales and marketing expense for Fiscal 2020 was $1.3 million as compared to $1.0 million for Fiscal 2019. The increase in sales and marketing expenses of $245,000 was related to an increase in advertising expenses for our retail consumer products and the new diagnostic services business.
Administrative expense increased $2.2 million for Fiscal 2020 to $6.7 million as compared to $4.5 million in Fiscal 2019. The increase in administrative expense for Fiscal 2020 as compared to Fiscal 2019 was principally due to greater professional and legal fees resulting from, in part, our entry into the diagnostic services business. In addition, share-based compensation expense increased by $715,000.
Research and development costs for Fiscal 2020 and 2019 were $663,000 and $332,000, respectively. The increase of $301,000 in research and development costs for Fiscal 2020 as compared to Fiscal 2019 was principally due to validation costs associated with diagnostic services in the current period.
Net interest income for Fiscal 2020 was $62,000 as compared to $133,000 for Fiscal 2019. The decrease in interest income in Fiscal 2020 as compared to Fiscal 2019 is principally due to a lower average account balance in our investment account. Interest expense for Fiscal 2020 was $295,000 as compared to $0 for Fiscal 2019. The increase in interest expenses in Fiscal 2020 as compared to Fiscal 2019 is principally due to the interest on the unsecured promissory notes issued in September 2020.
As a result of the effects of the above, the loss from continuing operations for Fiscal 2020 was $2.33 million, or ($0.18) per share, as compared to a loss from continuing operations of $3.1 million, or ($0.27) per share, for Fiscal 2019. In Fiscal 2020, we recognized a $1.9 million gain on the sales of real estate that contributed to a lower loss from operation. The gain from discontinued operations for Fiscal 2020 was $201,000, or $0.02 per share, as compared to a loss of $40,000, or ($0.00) per share, for Fiscal 2019. Net loss for Fiscal 2020 was $2.1 million, or ($0.18) per share, as compared to $3.1 million, or ($0.27) per share for Fiscal 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our aggregate cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities as of December 31, 2020 were $8.5 million as compared to $1.4 million at December 31, 2019. Our working capital was $9.6 million and $9.0 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase of $7.1 million in our cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities balance for the 12 months ended December 31, 2020 was principally due the following (i) the release of the escrow funds of $4.8 million by Mylan, (ii) our receipt of two loans for total proceeds of $10 million,and (ii) the sale of our corporate headquarters for $2.2 million offset by (i) the issuance of a net $3.00 million promissory note receivable, (ii) acquisition of a new CLIA accredited laboratory for $2.5 million, and (iii) our investment in capital expenditures, prepaid supplies and inventory for our the diagnostic services business of $5.1 million.
As a consequence of the seasonality of our business, we realize variations in operating results and demand for working capital from quarter to quarter.
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic has not had a material impact on our business to date, although we did experience higher than normal net sales for Fiscal 2020, primarily as a result of increased customer demand for our OTC healthcare and cold remedy products as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
In October 2020, we acquired our first CLIA accredited laboratory that offers a variety of important medical tests, including, among others, COVID-19 diagnostic testing services. In December 2020, we acquired our second diagnostic testing facility. While we expect revenues to continue to increase as result of our new business line, we will need to continue to make substantial investments to secure the necessary equipment, supplies and personnel to provide these services. There can be no assurance that our efforts to offer and perform COVID-19 testing will be successful and that we will be able to generate a profit.
The ultimate impact of COVID-19 on our business will depend on many factors beyond our knowledge or control, including the duration and severity of the outbreak, the timing, scope and effectiveness of federal, state and local governmental responses to the COVID-19 pandemic, and the extent of business disruptions caused by the pandemic, including as a result of travel restrictions, quarantines, social distancing requirements and business closures in the United States and other countries in order to contain and treat the virus. We may also be impacted by changes in the severity of the COVID-19 pandemic at different times in the various cities and regions where we operate and offer diagnostic testing services. Also, there can be no assurance that demand for our COVID-19 testing services will continue to exist in the future due to successful containment efforts, the successful vaccination of a majority of Americans, or due to other events. If there is no demand for our COVID-19 testing services, and we are unable to generate sufficient profits from other RPP Molecular tests, our business could be materially harmed. For these reasons, we are unable to estimate the extent to which COVID-19 will negatively impact our financial results or liquidity.
The COVID-19 pandemic has had a negative impact on the global capital markets and economies worldwide and could ultimately have a material adverse impact on our ability to raise capital needed to develop and commercialize products.
September 2020 Notes
On September 15, 2020, we issued two unsecured, partially convertible promissory notes (the “September 2020 Notes”) for an aggregate principal amount of $10 million to two investors. We intend to use the proceeds from the September 2020 Notes for working capital and general corporate purposes, which may include capital expenditures, product development and commercialization expenditures, and acquisitions of companies, businesses, technologies and products.
September 2020 Notes
On September 15, 2020, we issued two unsecured, partially convertible, promissory notes (the “September 2020 Notes”) for an aggregate principal amount of $10 million to two investors. We used the proceeds from the September 2020 Notes for working capital and general corporate purposes, which included capital expenditures and acquisitions of companies, businesses.
January 2021 Offerings
In January 2021, we completed two separate equity offerings whereby we issued a total of 3,550,000 shares of our common stock for net proceeds of $40.6 million. The net proceeds derived from these equity offerings will be used principally for the expansion of our diagnostics services business.
General
Management is not aware of any other trends, events or uncertainties that have or are reasonably likely to have a material negative impact upon our (i) short-term or long-term liquidity, or (ii) revenue or income from continuing operations. Any challenge to our trademark rights could have a material adverse effect on our future; however, we are not aware of any condition that would make such an event probable. Our business is subject to seasonal variations that impact our liquidity and working capital during the course of our fiscal year and is now subject to the demand for COVID testing in our diagnostic services business.
To the extent that we do not generate sufficient cash from operations, our cash balances will decline. We may also use our cash to explore and/or acquire new product technologies, applications, product line extensions, new contract manufacturing applications and other new business opportunities. In the event that our available cash is insufficient to support such initiatives and the development of our new diagnostic service business, we may need to incur indebtedness or issue common stock to finance plans for growth. Volatility in the credit markets and the liquidity of major financial institutions may have an adverse effect on our ability to fund our business strategy through borrowings, under either existing or newly created loan instruments, or the sale of securities in the public or private markets on terms that we believe to be reasonable, if at all.
Impact of Inflation
We are subject to normal inflationary trends and anticipate that any increased costs would be passed on to our customers. Inflation has not had a material effect on our business.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under Item 8 of this Part II. However, certain accounting policies are deemed “critical”, as they require management’s highest degree of judgment, estimates and assumptions. These accounting policies, estimates and disclosures have been discussed with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors. A discussion of our critical accounting policies and estimates, the judgments and uncertainties affecting their application and the likelihood that materially different amounts would be reported under different conditions or using different assumptions are as follows:
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and the accompanying notes thereto, in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America (“GAAP”), requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the respective reporting periods. Examples include the provision for bad debt, sales returns and allowances, inventory obsolescence, useful lives of property and equipment, impairment of goodwill, intangibles and property and equipment, income tax valuations and assumptions related to accrued advertising. The estimates and assumptions are based on historical experience, current trends and other factors that management believes to be relevant at the time the financial statements are prepared. Management reviews the accounting policies, assumptions, estimates and judgments on a quarterly basis. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Revenue Recognition and Accounts Receivables
We generate revenue principally through two types of revenue streams, diagnostic services and consumer products with two types of customers, contract manufacturing customers and retail customers. The process for estimating revenues and the ultimate collection of receivables involves assumptions and judgments.
Revenue from our diagnostic services are recognized when the lab test is complete and the diagnostic test result is provided to the customer. Revenue from our consumer products is recognized when the shipments to contract manufacturing and retailer customers are recognized at the time ownership is transferred to the customer. In 2020, we had $14.5 million of net sales of which approximately $12.3 million were from contract manufacturing customers, $1.0 million of our sales were from retailer sales and $1.2 million were from diagnostic services. We bill the providers at standard price and take into consideration for negotiated discounts and an anticipated reimbursement remittance adjustments based on, the payer portfolio, when revenue is recorded. We use the most expected value method to estimate the transaction price for reimbursements that may vary from the listed contract price.
Revenue Recognition - Sales Allowances
When providing for the appropriate sales returns, allowances, cash discounts and cooperative incentive promotion costs (“sales allowances”), we apply a uniform and consistent method for making certain assumptions for estimating these provisions. These estimates and assumptions are based on historical experience, current trends and other factors that management believes to be relevant at the time the financial statements are prepared. Management reviews the accounting policies, assumptions, estimates and judgments on a quarterly basis. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Our return policy accommodates returns for (i) discontinued products, (ii) store closings and (iii) products that have reached or exceeded designated expiration date. The following is a summary of the change in the return provision for the years ended December 31, 2019 to the year ended December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
For Fiscal 2020, the return provision increased by $122,000. The increase in the return provision was principally due to net returns associated with Fiscal 2020.
A one percent deviation for these sales allowance provisions for Fiscal 2020 and 2019 would affect net sales by approximately $10,000 and $8,600, respectively.
Additionally, accrued advertising and other allowances from retail as of December 31, 2020 include $463,000 for cooperative incentive promotion costs, which is reported as accrued advertising and other allowances under current liabilities. As of December 31, 2019, accrued advertising and other allowances from retail revenue include $92,000 for cooperative incentive promotion costs, which is reported as accrued advertising and other allowances under current liabilities.
Goodwill and Long lived Assets
We review our goodwill at least annually for impairment as well as the carrying value of goodwill and our long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of these assets may not be fully recoverable. When it is determined that the carrying amount of long-lived assets or goodwill is impaired, impairment is measured by comparing an asset’s estimated fair value to its carrying value. The determination of fair value is based on quoted market prices in active markets, if available, or independent appraisals; sales price negotiations; or projected future cash flows discounted at a rate determined by management to be commensurate with our business risk. The estimation of fair value utilizing discounted forecasted cash flows includes significant judgments regarding assumptions of revenue, operating and marketing costs; selling and administrative expenses; interest rates; property and equipment additions and retirements; and industry competition, general economic and business conditions, among other factors.
Management has determined that there was no impairment to our long-lived assets and goodwill on the basis of a review of a discounted cash flow analysis, which for goodwill is performed at the level of the subsidiaries to which the goodwill relates. If there is a material change in the assumptions used in the determination of fair value or a material change in the conditions or circumstances influencing fair value, we could be required to recognize a material impairment charge.
Income Taxes
Accounting for income taxes requires recognition of deferred tax liabilities and assets for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements or tax returns. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the difference between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities. These deferred taxes are measured by applying the provisions of tax laws in effect at the balance sheet date, including the impact of the TCJA enacted on December 22, 2017. The TCJA made broad and significant changes to the U.S. tax code that affects the year ended December 31, 2017, including, but not limited to, a change in the federal rate from 35% to 21% effective January 1, 2018.
We recognizes in income the effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities in the period that includes the TCJA enactment date. We utilize the asset and liability approach which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our financial statements or tax returns. In estimating future tax consequences, we generally consider all expected future events other than enactments of changes in the tax law or rates. Until sufficient taxable income to offset the temporary timing differences attributable to operations and the tax deductions attributable to option, warrant and stock activities are assured, a valuation allowance equaling the total net current and non-current deferred tax asset is being provided.
Recently Adopted Accounting Standards
In February 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842) in order to increase transparency and comparability among organizations by, among other provisions, recognizing lease assets and lease liabilities on the balance sheet for those leases classified as operating leases under previous GAAP. For public companies, ASU 2016-02 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2018 (including interim periods within those periods) using a modified retrospective approach and early adoption is permitted. In transition, entities may also elect a package of practical expedients that must be applied in its entirety to all leases commencing before the adoption date, unless the lease is modified, and permits entities to not reassess (a) the existence of a lease, (b) lease classification or (c) determination of initial direct costs, as of the adoption date, which effectively allows entities to carryforward accounting conclusions under previous GAAP. In July 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-11, Leases (Topic 842): Targeted Improvements, which provides entities an optional transition method to apply the guidance under Topic 842 as of the adoption date, rather than as of the earliest period presented. We adopted Topic 842 on January 1, 2019, using the optional transition method to apply the new guidance as of January 1, 2019, rather than as of the earliest period presented, and elected the package of practical expedients described above. The adoption of this standard did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In June 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-07 “Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting”, which simplifies the accounting for share-based payments granted to nonemployees for goods and services. Under the ASU, most of the guidance on such payments to nonemployees would be aligned with the requirements for share-based payments granted to employees. The amendments are effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019, and interim periods within fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020. Early adoption is permitted, but not earlier than an entity’s adoption date of Topic 606. We adopted this standard on January 1, 2019. The adoption of this standard did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards, Not Yet Adopted
In September 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326). The ASU sets forth a “current expected credit loss” (CECL) model which requires the Company to measure all expected credit losses for financial instruments held at the reporting date based on historical experience, current conditions, and reasonable supportable forecasts. This replaces the existing incurred loss model and is applicable to the measurement of credit losses on financial assets measured at amortized cost and applies to some off-balance sheet credit exposures. In February 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-02, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326), which amends the effective date of the original pronouncement for smaller reporting companies. ASU 2016-13 and its amendments will be effective for the Company for interim and annual periods in fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022. The Company is currently assessing the impact of the adoption of this ASU on its financial statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12, “Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes (“ASU 2019-12”), which is intended to simplify various aspects related to accounting for income taxes. ASU 2019-12 removes certain exceptions to the general principles in Topic 740 and also clarifies and amends existing guidance to improve consistent application. This guidance is effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2020, with early adoption permitted. The Company is currently evaluating the impact of this standard on its consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.