Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Forward-Looking Information
This Annual Report on Form 10-K, including this Management’s Discussion and Analysis, contains forward-looking statements. These statements are based on management’s current views, assumptions or beliefs of future events and financial performance and are subject to uncertainty and changes in circumstances. Readers of this report should understand that these statements are not guarantees of performance or results. Many factors could affect our actual financial results and cause them to vary materially from the expectations contained in the forward-looking statements. These factors include, among other things: the expected or potential impact of COVID-19 which is highly uncertain and will depend on future developments, our expected revenue, income (loss), receivables, operating expenses, supplier pricing, availability and prices of raw materials, insurance reimbursements, product pricing, sources of funding operations and acquisitions, our ability to raise funds, sufficiency of available liquidity, future interest costs, future economic circumstances, business strategy, industry conditions, our ability to execute our operating plans, the success of our cost savings initiatives, competitive environment and related market conditions, expected financial and other benefits from our organizational restructuring activities, actions of governments and regulatory factors affecting our business, retaining key employees and other risks as described in our reports filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission. In some cases these statements are identifiable through the use of words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “plan,” “project,” “target,” “can,” “could,” “may,” “should,” “will,” “would” or the negative versions of these terms and other similar expressions.
You are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements. The forward-looking statements we make are not guarantees of future performance and are subject to various assumptions, risks and other factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those suggested by these forward-looking statements. Actual results may differ materially from those suggested by the forward-looking statements that we make for a number of reasons, including those described in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors,” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We expressly disclaim any obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by law.
Overview
We are a cancer diagnostics and reagent technology company providing diagnostic products, reagents and services to the oncology market. We have built and continue to develop a platform designed to eradicate the problem of misdiagnosis by harnessing the intellect, expertise and technologies developed in collaboration with academic institutions, and delivering quality diagnostic information to physicians and their patients worldwide. We operate a cancer diagnostic laboratory located in New Haven, Connecticut and have partnered with various academic institutions to capture the expertise, experience and technologies developed within academia to provide a better standard of cancer diagnostics and aim to solve the growing problem of cancer misdiagnosis. In support of this platform, we also operate a research and development facility in Omaha, Nebraska which focuses on the development of various technologies, among them our internally developed proprietary products IV-Cell and HemeScreen. To expand our product offering capabilities, the Omaha facility was recently CLIA and CAP certified in order to process a variety of commercial molecular tests previously referenced out and to further expand our capabilities and know-how in transitioning R&D lab generated technology into a commercial laboratory environment.
The Company also holds an exclusive license to patented ICE-COLD-PCR, or ICP technology from Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Inc., or Dana-Farber, at Harvard University. We believe that such technology will provide additional services and products directed at improving diagnostic outcomes and providing physicians with options for targeted therapies.
In April 2020, we formed a Joint Venture with Poplar. Poplar provides specialized laboratory testing services to a nationwide client base of gastroenterologists, dermatologists, oncologists, urologists, gynecologists and their patients. The business purpose of the Joint Venture is to facilitate and capitalize on the combined capabilities, resources and healthcare industry relationships of its members by partnering, promoting and providing oncology services to office based
physicians, hospitals and medical centers. Under the terms of the Joint Venture, Precipio SPV has a 49% ownership interest in the Joint Venture, with Poplar having a 51 % ownership. We have determined that we hold a variable interest in the Joint Venture and that we are the primary beneficiary of the Joint Venture. Due to this determination, we consolidate the Joint Venture. See Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies for further discussion.
The following discussion should be read together with our financial statements and related notes contained in this Annual Report. Results for the year ended December 31, 2020 are not necessarily indicative of results that may be attained in the future.
Recent Developments
Business Activities - HemeScreen
During late Q3-2020, we launched the HemeScreen Reagent Rental (HSRR) program. Capitalizing on the well documented significant reductions in both time and material in running the genetic test, the Company created a turn-key test offering for office based oncologists, large oncology practices and local hospitals. The HSRR program offers our patent-pending HemeScreen technology coupled with an attractive equipment lease, training and test validation. Through this program, the oncology practice leases to own the diagnostic equipment from the Company that ordinarily they could not afford and also enters into a reagent rental contract with the Company. The HSRR program enables the practice to generate in-house testing revenue instead of sending out the same tests to large commercial reference laboratories as well as allowing the oncology practice to benefit from obtaining faster results; thus ultimately providing better patient care. During the fourth quarter of 2020 the Company signed three accounts. These practices are now in the training and validation periods and we expect recurring revenues from these customers in the first quarter 2021. Through our announced partnership with ION, the Company has accelerated its marketing efforts as ION is a US-based oncology distributor providing services to more than 5,000 oncology accounts nationwide. To date in 2021, co-marketing efforts have accelerated and four regional oncology accounts have signed onto the HSRR program.
Business Activities - COVID Testing
During Q4 2020 the Company announced it entered into an agreement with a South Korean company to market and distribute an FDA-authorized COVID-19 serology antibody test that has recently received EUA (Emergency Use Authorization). Distribution of the product will take place in the U.S. as well as in other markets worldwide. The EUA allows the Company to distribute to all Point of Care facilities and any healthcare provider that has a National Provider Identifier (“NPI”) number.
Code of Conduct
On March 1, 2021, certain stylistic, technical and administrative amendments to the Company’s Code of Business Conduct and Ethics applicable to directors, officers and employees of the Company and its subsidiaries, were approved by the Board, upon recommendation from the Governance and Nominating Committee.
The foregoing description of the amendment to the Company’s Code of Business Conduct and Ethics is qualified in its entirety by reference to the Company’s Code of Business Conduct and Ethics, as amended on March 1, 2021, which is available for review or download in the Corporate Governance section of the Company’s website, www.precipiodx.com.
We expect that any further amendments to the Code of Business Conduct and Ethics, or any waivers of its requirements, will also be disclosed on the Company’s website.
Going Concern
The consolidated financial statements have been prepared using accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) applicable for a going concern, which assume that the Company will realize its assets and discharge its liabilities in the ordinary course of business. The Company has incurred substantial operating losses and has used cash in its operating activities for the past several years. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had a net loss of $10.6 million, negative working capital of $0.5 million and net cash used in operating activities of $7.4 million. The
Company’s ability to continue as a going concern over the next twelve months from the date the consolidated financial statements were issued is dependent upon a combination of achieving its business plan, including generating additional revenue, and raising additional financing to meet its debt obligations and paying liabilities arising from normal business operations when they come due.
To meet its current and future obligations the Company has taken the following steps to capitalize the business and successfully achieve its business plan:
● On March 26, 2020, the Company entered into a second agreement (the “LP 2020 Purchase Agreement”) with Lincoln Park Capital Fund LLC (“Lincoln Park”), pursuant to which Lincoln Park has agreed to purchase from the Company up to an aggregate of $10.0 million of common stock of the Company (subject to certain limitations) from time to time over the term of the LP 2020 Purchase Agreement. The extent we rely on Lincoln Park as a source of funding will depend on a number of factors including, the prevailing market price of our common stock and the extent to which we are able to secure working capital from other sources. As of the date of the consolidated financial statements were issued, we have already received approximately $8.8 million from the LP 2020 Purchase Agreement from the sale of 4,980,000 shares of common stock to Lincoln Park from April 1, 2020 through the date the consolidated financial statements were issued, leaving the Company an additional $1.2 million to draw subsequent to the filing of this Annual Report. See Note 11 Stockholders’ Equity for further discussion on Lincoln Park agreements;
● During 2020, the Company received $0.8 million in funds from the PPP Loan and on February 11, 2021, the Company filed its application for loan forgiveness. There is no assurance that the Company will obtain forgiveness of the PPP Loan in whole or in part, however, the Company believes it used all of the PPP Loan amount for qualifying expenses and may be granted forgiveness during 2021; and
● The Company filed with the SEC a registration statement on Form S-3 on March 27, 2020, as amended on April 9, 2020, to register an indeterminate number of shares of common stock and preferred stock, such indeterminate principal amount of debt securities and such indeterminate number of warrants to purchase common stock, preferred stock or debt securities as shall have an aggregate initial offering price not to exceed $50 million. This registration statement was declared effective by the SEC on April 13, 2020 and allows the Company, from time to time, to offer up to $50 million of any combination of the securities described in the Form S-3 in one or more offerings. In order for the Company to utilize the effective S-3, it will have to file subsequent prospectus supplement(s) with regard to the securities it will offer, as applicable from time to time. As of the date of issuance of this Form 10-K, no subsequent prospectus supplements to this effect have been filed by the Company.
Notwithstanding the aforementioned circumstances, there remains substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for the next twelve months from the date the consolidated financial statements were issued. There can be no assurance that the Company will be able to successfully achieve its initiatives summarized above in order to continue as a going concern. The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming the Company will continue as a going concern and do not include any adjustments that might result should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern as a result of the outcome of this uncertainty.
Outlook - COVID-19 related
The COVID-19 outbreak, which spread worldwide in the first quarter of 2020, has caused significant business disruption. The extent of the impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on the Company's operational and financial performance will depend on certain developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak, and impact on the Company's customers, employees and vendors, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. These uncertainties could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations. We have been actively monitoring the COVID-19 situation and its impact on the global economy and the Company. As the global pandemic evolves, we will continue to monitor the extent to which COVID-19 impacts our revenues, expenses and liquidity.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Net Sales. Net sales were as follows:
Net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $6.1 million, an increase of $3.0 million, as compared to the same period in 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, patient diagnostic service revenue had an increase of $2.9 million as compared to the same period in 2019 due to an increase in cases processed. We billed 3,677 cases during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 1,672 cases during the same period in 2019, or a 120% increase in cases. Case volume increased in 2020 as the Company increased its customer base by 26%; coupled with a steady increase in ordering volume from existing customers. Unless the states have another complete lockdown, as the country experienced in the early months of the COVID-19 pandemic, we believe the 2020 organic growth will be sustained. Patient diagnostic service revenue accounted for 89% and 80% of our total net sales for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019, other revenues increased by $0.2 million and contract diagnostic service revenue decreased by $0.1 million.
Cost of Sales. Cost of sales includes material and supply costs for the patient tests performed and other direct costs (primarily personnel costs, pathologist interpretation costs and rent) associated with the operations of our laboratory. Cost of sales increased by $2.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. The increase included an increase in patient diagnostic costs offset by a decrease in contract diagnostic costs which are in line with the changes in related revenues discussed above.
Gross Profit. Gross profit and gross margins were as follows:
Gross margin was 19% of total net sales, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 7% of total net sales for the same period in 2019 and the gross profit was approximately $1.2 million and $0.2 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The gross margin increased during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year period, as a result of increases in case volume and revenue. We operate a fully staffed CLIA and CAP certified clinical pathology and molecular laboratory. As such, it is necessary to maintain appropriate staffing levels to provide industry standard laboratory processing and reporting to ordering physicians. The increase in case volume enabled our laboratory to yield economies of scale and to leverage fixed expenses. We anticipate case volume to increase in 2021 and for our costs per case to improve as additional economies of scale are possible.
Operating Expenses. Operating expenses primarily consist of personnel costs, professional fees, travel costs, facility costs and depreciation and amortization, including any intangible asset impairment. Our operating expenses decreased by $0.9 million to $10.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $11.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease is the result of a decrease in intangible asset impairment of $1.6 million and a decrease in general and administrative costs of $0.1 million. The decreases were partially offset by an increase of $0.8 million in sales and marketing costs, which is primarily increased personnel costs related to our increase in patient diagnostic service revenues.
Other Income (Expense). We recorded net other expense, of $1.5 million and $2.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The current year period net expense of $1.5 million includes $0.3 million of interest expense from the amortization of debt discounts, net of accretion of debt premiums, related to convertible notes, $0.2 million of other interest expense and $1.2 million in expense for loss on extinguishment of convertible notes which was recorded in conjunction with the March 2020 Amendment. The expenses were partially offset by $0.2 million of other income and gains on settlements of liabilities. Approximately $0.1 million of the other income is funds we received from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (“HHS”). As part of the CARES Act, HHS distributed funds to healthcare providers that received Medicare fee-for-service reimbursements in 2019. The payments from HHS are not loans and will not be required to be repaid.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net other expense of approximately $2.3 million included expense from warrant and derivative revaluations of $1.1 million, a loss on issuance of convertible notes of $1.9 million, a loss on litigation of $0.3 million and net interest expense of approximately $0.5 million. These expense items were partially offset by gains on settlements of liabilities of $1.4 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our working capital positions at December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
During the year ended December 31, 2020 we received gross proceeds of $8.9 million from sale of 5,770,654 shares of our common stock and $0.8 million from the PPP Loan. We also converted $2.2 million of convertible notes, including interest, into 3,908,145 shares of our common stock.
Analysis of Cash Flows - Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Net Change in Cash. Cash increased by $1.8 million and $0.5 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Cash Flows Used in Operating Activities. The cash flows used in operating activities of $7.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 included a net loss of $10.6 million, an increase in accounts receivable of $1.6 million, an increase in inventories and other assets of $0.2 million and a decrease in accounts payable and operating lease liabilities of $0.5 million. These were partially offset by an increase in accrued expenses and other liabilities of $0.7 million and non-cash adjustments of $4.8 million. The non-cash adjustments included $1.3 million for the change in provision for losses on doubtful accounts. We routinely provide a reserve for doubtful accounts as a result of having limited in-network payer contracts. Non-cash adjustments also included $1.2 million for loss on extinguishment of convertible notes, which resulted from a March 2020 amendment to certain Bridge Notes whereby, among other things, the floor price at which conversions may occur was amended from $2.25 to $0.40. See Note 6 - Convertible Notes for further discussion. The other non-cash adjustments to net loss of approximately $2.3 million include, among other things, depreciation and amortization, warrant revaluations and stock based compensation. The cash flows used in operating activities in the year ended December 31, 2019 included the net loss of $13.2 million, an increase in accounts receivable of $0.8 million, a decrease in accounts payable of $1.9 million and a decrease in operating lease liabilities of $0.2 million. These were partially offset by a decrease in other assets of $0.4 million and non-cash adjustments of $6.6 million.
Cash Flows Used In Investing Activities. Cash flows used in investing activities were $0.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, resulting from purchases of property and equipment partially offset by proceeds from sales of fixed assets.
Cash Flows Provided by Financing Activities. Cash flows provided by financing activities totaled $9.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which included proceeds of $8.9 million from the issuance of common stock and proceeds of $0.8 million from the PPP Loan. These proceeds were partially offset by payments on our long-term debt and finance lease obligations of $0.4 million. Cash flows provided by financing activities totaled $9.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which included proceeds of $6.6 million from the issuance of common stock, $1.6 million from the exercise of warrants and $2.1 million from the issuance of convertible notes. These proceeds were partially offset by payments on our long-term debt and convertible notes of $0.5 million and payments for our finance lease obligations and deferred financing costs of $0.1 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
At each of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
At December 31, 2020, our contractual obligations and other commitments were as follows:
(1) See Note 5 - "Long-Term Debt" to our accompanying consolidated financial statements included with this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(2) See Note 8 - "Leases" to our accompanying consolidated financial statements included with this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(3) These amounts represent purchase commitments, including all open purchase orders.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are based upon the Company’s consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The Company’s significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 of the notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included with this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain accounting estimates are particularly important to the understanding of the Company’s financial position and results of operations and require the application of significant judgment by the Company’s management and can be materially affected by changes from period to period in economic factors or conditions that are outside the control of management. The Company’s management uses its judgment to determine the appropriate assumptions to be used in the determination of certain estimates. Those estimates are based on historical operations, future business plans and projected financial results, the terms of existing contracts, the observance of trends in the industry, information provided by
customers and information available from other outside sources, as appropriate. The following discusses the Company’s critical accounting policies and estimates:
Revenue Recognition
The Company derives its revenues from diagnostic testing - histology, flow cytometry, cytology and molecular testing; clinical research from bio-pharma customers, state and federal grant programs; and from biomarker testing from bio-pharma customers.
Service revenues are comprised of patient diagnostic services for cancer as well as contract diagnostic services for pharmacogenomics trials. Service revenue is recognized upon completion of the testing process and when the diagnostic result is delivered to the ordering physician and/or customer. Net patient service revenue is reported at the estimated net realizable amounts from patients, third-party payers and others for services rendered, including retroactive adjustment under reimbursement agreements with third-party payers. Revenue under third-party payer agreements is subject to audit and retroactive adjustment. Provisions for third-party payer settlements are provided in the period in which the related services are rendered and adjusted in the future periods, as final settlements are determined.
Revenue from clinical research grant is recognized over time as the service is being performed using a proportional performance method. The Company uses an "efforts based" method of assessing performance. If the arrangement requires the performance of a specified number of similar acts (i.e. test), then revenue is recognized in equal amounts as each act is completed.
Other revenues are comprised of the Company’s ICP technology kit sales to bio-pharma customers, clinical research, HemeScreen and COVID-19 antibody tests.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, service revenue represented 96% of our consolidated revenues and other revenues represented 4%. For the year ended December 31, 2019, service revenue represented 99% of our consolidated revenues and other revenues represented 1%.
Allowance for Contractual Discounts
We are reimbursed by payers for services we provide. Payments for services covered by payers average less than billed charges. We monitor revenue and receivables from payers and record an estimated contractual allowance for certain revenue and receivable balances as of the revenue recognition date to properly account for anticipated differences between amounts estimated in our billing system and amounts ultimately reimbursed by payers. Accordingly, the total revenue and receivables reported in our financial statements are recorded at the amounts expected to be received from these payers. For service revenue, the contractual allowance is estimated based on several criteria, including unbilled claims, historical trends based on actual claims paid, current contract and reimbursement terms and changes in customer base and payer/product mix. The billing functions for the remaining portion of our revenue are contracted and fixed fees for specific services and are recorded without an allowance for contractual discounts.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
The allowance for doubtful accounts is based on estimates of losses related to receivable balances. The risk of collection varies based upon the service, the payer (commercial health insurance and government) and the patient’s ability to pay the amounts not reimbursed by the payer. We estimate the allowance for doubtful accounts based upon several factors including the age of the outstanding receivables, the historical experience of collections, adjusting for current economic conditions and, in some cases, evaluating specific customer accounts for the ability to pay. Collection agencies are employed and legal action is taken when we determine that taking collection actions is reasonable relative to the probability of receiving payment on amounts owed. Management judgment is used to assess the collectability of accounts and the ability of our customers to pay. Judgment is also used to assess trends in collections and the effects of systems and business process changes on our expected collection rates. We review the estimation process quarterly and make changes to the estimates as necessary. When it is determined that a customer account is uncollectible, that balance is written off against the existing allowance.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts Receivable results from diagnostic services provided to self-pay and insured patients, project based testing services, clinical research and miscellaneous product sales. The services provided by the Company are generally due within 30 days from the invoice date. Accounts receivable are reduced by an allowance for doubtful accounts. In evaluating the collectability of accounts receivable, the Company analyzes and identifies trends for each of its sources of revenue to estimate the appropriate allowance for doubtful accounts. For receivables associated with self-pay patients, including patients with insurance and a deductible and copayment, the Company records an allowance for doubtful accounts in the period of services on the basis of past experience of patients unable or unwilling to pay for service fee for which they are financially responsible. For receivables associated with services provided to patients with third-party coverage, the Company analyzes contractually due amounts and provides an allowance, if necessary. The difference between the standard rates and the amounts actually collected after all reasonable collection efforts have been exhausted is charged against the allowance for doubtful accounts.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date, based on the estimated fair value of the award, and is recognized as expense over the grantee’s requisite vesting period on a straight-line basis. For the purpose of valuing stock options granted to our employees, directors and officers, we use the Black-Scholes option pricing model. To determine the risk-free interest rate, we utilized the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of the grant with a term consistent with the expected term of our awards. The expected term of the options granted is in accordance with Staff Accounting Bulletins 107 and 110, and is based on the average between vesting terms and contractual terms. The expected dividend yield reflects our current and expected future policy for dividends on our common stock. The expected stock price volatility for our stock options was calculated by examining the trading history for our common stock. We will continue to analyze the expected stock price volatility and expected term assumptions and will adjust our Black-Scholes option pricing assumptions as appropriate
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We assess the recoverability of our long-lived assets, which include property and equipment and definite-lived intangible assets, whenever significant events or changes in circumstances indicate impairment may have occurred. If indicators of impairment exist, projected future undiscounted cash flows associated with the asset are compared to our carrying amount to determine whether the asset’s value is recoverable. Any resulting impairment is recorded as a reduction in the carrying value of the related asset in excess of fair value and a charge to operating results.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2018, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2018-13 “Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820)”, which modifies certain disclosure requirements in Topic 820, such as the removal of the need to disclose the amount of and reason for transfers between Level 1 and Level 2 of the fair value hierarchy, and several changes related to Level 3 fair value measurements. The Company adopted this guidance on January 1, 2020. The adoption of this guidance was not material to our consolidated financial statements.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-15 “Intangibles-Goodwill and Other-Internal Use Software (Subtopic 350-40)”, which aligns the requirements for capitalizing implementation costs incurred in a cloud computing hosting arrangement that is a service contract with the requirements for capitalizing implementation costs incurred to develop or obtain internal use software. The Company adopted this guidance on January 1, 2020. The adoption of this guidance was not material to our consolidated financial statements.
Recently Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06 “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity.” This ASU amends the guidance on convertible instruments and the
derivatives scope exception for contracts in an entity’s own equity and improves and amends the related EPS guidance for both Subtopics. The ASU will be effective for annual reporting periods after December 15, 2023 and interim periods within those annual periods and early adoption is permitted in annual reporting periods ending after December 15, 2020. The Company is currently assessing the potential impact that the adoption of this ASU will have on its consolidated financial statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12 “Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes”, which is intended to improve consistent application and simplify the accounting for income taxes. This ASU removes certain exceptions to the general principles in Topic 740 and clarifies and amends existing guidance. This standard is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim reporting periods within those annual reporting periods, with early adoption permitted. The Company is currently evaluating the impact of adoption of this ASU and does not expect the adoption of this new standard to have a material impact on its consolidated financial statements.
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13 “Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments”, which replaces current methods for evaluating impairment of financial instruments not measured at fair value, including trade accounts receivable and certain debt securities, with a current expected credit loss model. This ASU, as amended, is effective for the Company for reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2022. The Company is currently assessing the potential impact that the adoption of this ASU will have on its consolidated financial statements.
Impact of Inflation
We do not believe that price inflation or deflation had a material adverse effect on our financial condition or results of operations during the periods presented.