ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Forward-Looking Statements” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on July 10, 2019 for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of the IPO and the sale of the Private Warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete an initial business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations (other than searching for a target for our initial business combination after our IPO) nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from July 10, 2019 (inception) through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, including those necessary to prepare for the IPO. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest earned on investments held since the IPO. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 and the period from July 10, 2019 (inception) through December 31, 2019, we had net losses of $18,208 and $1,450, respectively, which consisted of formation and operational costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On December 30, 2020, we consummated the IPO of 15,000,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $150,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the sale of 6,000,000 Private Warrants, at a price of $1.00 per Private Warrant, in a private placement to our initial stockholders, generating gross proceeds of $6,000,000.
Following the IPO, a total of $151,500,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $3,543,017 in transaction costs, including $3,000,000 in cash underwriting fees and $543,017 of other offering costs.
On December 29, 2020, the underwriters notified the Company of their intent to fully exercise their over-allotment option. Closing of the over-allotment option occurred on January 5, 2021, when the Company consummated the sale of an additional 2,250,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, and the sale of an additional 675,000 Private Warrants, at $1.00 per Private Warrant, generating total gross proceeds of $23,175,000. A total of $22,725,000 of the net proceeds was deposited into the trust account, bringing the aggregate proceeds held in the trust account to $174,225,000. Transaction costs related to the underwriters’ exercise of their over-allotment option were $450,000, consisting of underwriting fees. As a result of the underwriters’ election to exercise their over-allotment option in full, 562,500 founder shares are no longer subject to forfeiture.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $30,735. Net loss of $18,208 was affected by changes in operating assets and liabilities, which used $12,527 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash held in the trust account of $151,500,000, which excludes an additional $22,725,000 of net proceeds deposited on January 5, 2021. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the funds held in the trust account, to complete our initial business combination. We may withdraw, from time to time, any interest earned on the funds in the trust account that we may need to pay our tax obligations. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we did not withdraw any interest income from the trust account. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $1,071,253 of cash held outside of the trust account. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account for identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates, performing business due diligence on prospective target businesses, traveling to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses, reviewing corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, selecting the target business to acquire and structuring, negotiating and consummating the initial business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an initial business combination, our initial stockholders, officers, directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. In the event that the initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Such loans would be evidenced by promissory notes. The notes would either be paid upon consummation of our initial business combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $500,000 of the notes may be converted upon consummation of our business combination into additional private warrants to purchase shares of common stock at a conversion price of $1.00 per private warrant. The warrants would be identical to the Private Warrants. If we do not complete a business combination, the loans will only be repaid with funds not held in the trust account, to the extent available. Loans made by Chardan Capital Markets or any of its related persons will not be convertible into private warrants, and Chardan Capital Markets and its related persons will have no recourse with respect to their ability to convert their loans into private warrants. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such working capital loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial business combination or to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such initial business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our initial business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account. In addition, following our initial business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay Chardan Capital Markets, LLC a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, utilities, secretarial and administrative support services. As of December 31, 2020, there were no amounts incurred under this agreement.
The Company granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the date of the IPO to purchase up to 2,250,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments, if any, at the IPO price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On January 5, 2021, the closing of the underwriters’ over-allotment option occurred. The underwriters were paid cash underwriting discount of $0.20 per Unit, or $3,450,000 in the aggregate, upon the closing of the IPO and the over-allotment option.
The Company has engaged Chardan Capital Markets, LLC as an advisor in connection with an initial business combination to assist the Company in holding meetings with its stockholders to discuss the potential initial business combination and the target business’s attributes, introduce the Company to potential investors that are interested in purchasing the Company’s securities in connection with the potential initial business combination, assist the Company in obtaining stockholder approval for the initial business combination and assist the Company with its press releases and public filings in connection with initial business combination. The Company will pay Chardan Capital Markets, LLC a marketing fee for such services upon the consummation of an initial business combination in an amount equal to, in the aggregate, 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the IPO, including proceeds from the exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option. As a result, Chardan Capital Markets, LLC will not be entitled to such fee unless the Company consummates its initial business combination.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
The Company accounts for its common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. The Company’s common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2020, common stock subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the Company’s balance sheet.
Net Income (Loss) per Common Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Net income per common share, basic and diluted for redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the trust account, net of applicable franchise and income taxes, by the weighted average number of redeemable common stock outstanding for the period. Net loss per common share, basic and diluted for non-redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing the net income, less income attributable to redeemable common stock, by the weighted average number of non-redeemable common stock outstanding for the period presented.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.