ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Dollar Amounts in Thousands, Except Per Share Data, or as Otherwise Noted)
Cautionary Statement
You should read the following discussion and analysis in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto contained in Part IV, Item 15 of this report. Certain statements in this report, including statements regarding our business strategies, operations, financial condition, and prospects are forward-looking statements. Use of the words “anticipates,” “believes,” “could,” “estimates,” “expects,” “intends,” “may,” “plans,” “potential,” “predicts,” “projects,” “should,” “will,” “would,” “will likely continue,” “will likely result” and similar expressions that contemplate future events may identify forward-looking statements.
The information contained in this section is not a complete description of our business or the risks associated with an investment in our common stock. We urge you to carefully review and consider the various disclosures made by us in this report and in our other reports filed with the SEC, which are available on the SEC’s website at http://www.sec.gov. The section entitled “Risk Factors” set forth in Part I, Item 1A of this report, and similar discussions in our other SEC filings, describe some of the important factors, risks and uncertainties that may affect our business, results of operations and financial condition and could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied by these or any other forward-looking statements made by us or on our behalf. You are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which are based on current expectations and reflect management’s opinions only as of the date thereof. We do not assume any obligation to revise or update forward-looking statements. Finally, our historic results should not be viewed as indicative of future performance.
Overview
We are a leading online provider of aftermarket auto parts, including replacement parts, hard parts, and performance parts and accessories. Our proprietary product database maps our SKUs to product applications based on vehicle makes, models and years. We principally sell our products to individual consumers through our flagship website at www.carparts.com and online marketplaces. Our corporate website is located at www.carparts.com/investor. The inclusion of our website addresses in this report does not include or incorporate by reference into this report any information on our websites.
We believe by disintermediating the traditional auto parts supply chain and selling products directly to customers online allows us to efficiently deliver products to our customers. Our mission is getting drivers back on the road and our strategy consists of the Right Part, Right Time, Right Place. Industry-wide trends that support our strategy and future growth include:
1.Number of SKUs required to serve the market. The number of automotive SKUs has grown dramatically over the last several years. In today’s market, unless the consumer is driving a high volume produced vehicle and needs a simple maintenance item, the part they need is not typically on the shelf at a brick-and-mortar store. We believe our user-friendly flagship website provides customers with a favorable alternative to the brick-and-mortar shopping experience by offering a comprehensive selection of approximately 820,000 SKUs with detailed product descriptions, attributes and photographs combined with the flexibility of fulfilling orders using both drop-ship and stock-and-ship methods.
2.U.S. vehicle fleet expanding and aging. The average age of U.S. light vehicles, an indicator of auto parts demand, remained near record-highs at 11.9 years during 2020, according to the U.S. Auto Care Association. In addition, IHS, a market analytics firm, found that the total number of light vehicles in operation in the U.S. has increased to record levels, and should continue to rise through 2021. We believe an increasing vehicle base and rising average age of vehicles will have a positive impact on overall aftermarket parts demand because older vehicles generally require more repairs. In many cases we believe these older vehicles are driven
by DIY car owners who are more likely to handle any necessary repairs themselves rather than taking their car to the professional repair shop.
3.Growth of online sales. The U.S. Auto Care Association estimated that overall revenue from online sales of auto parts and accessories would reach over $17 billion by 2023. Improved product availability, lower prices and consumers’ growing comfort with digital platforms are driving the shift to online sales. We believe that we are well positioned for the shift to online sales due to being a leading source for aftermarket automotive parts through online marketplaces and our flagship website.
Impact of COVID-19
The challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic on the United States and global economy increased significantly in March and some challenges continued through the end of fiscal year 2020. Since the onset of the pandemic, our top priority remains the health and safety of our employees as most have continued to work from home, in addition to ensuring our customers continue receiving our high-quality, personalized service. Our distribution centers had no significant disruptions and remain operational while our safety protocols direct employees onsite to continue to adhere to, and follow, the COVID-19 safety guidelines recommended from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
COVID-19 had only minimal disruptions on our business as sales for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021 were unfavorably impacted primarily in mid to late March 2020 during the initial stages of COVID-19 stay-at-home orders. However, the ultimate extent of the effects from the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company, our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows will be dependent on evolving developments which are uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time. See the “Risk Factors” section set forth in Part I, Item 1A for further discussion of risks related to COVID-19.
Cybersecurity Matters
On June 28, 2020, we detected a ransomware attack on our network that disrupted access to some of our systems. We immediately took steps to isolate the affected systems and contain the disruption to our information technology infrastructure, including taking some systems offline as a precautionary measure. Our IT team subsequently restored and recovered the affected IT systems to full functionality. We engaged third party consultants and law enforcement to investigate the incident and to provide remediation and regulatory assistance. We believe there has not been any, current or expected future, material impact to our business, results of operations or financial condition because of this ransomware attack. In order to mitigate the likelihood of similar future events, we have implemented enhanced security features and monitoring procedures.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
We believe that our performance and future success depend on a number of factors that present significant opportunities for us but also pose risks and challenges, including those discussed below and in the “Risk Factors” section set forth in Part I, Item 1A.
Acquiring New Customers
We believe there is substantial opportunity to continue acquiring new customers. The automotive aftermarket parts industry is still very underpenetrated online compared to other verticals and industries. We believe consumers are becoming more comfortable buying auto parts online and we anticipate continued growth acceleration. Our ability to attract and acquire new customers will depend on a number of factors, including the effectiveness and pricing of our products, increasing and optimizing our product catalog, technological improvements to our website, and the effectiveness of our marketing efforts. However, with the right tools and solutions, and by leveraging our core competencies, we see this as a great opportunity to disrupt the automotive aftermarket parts industry.
Supply Chain And Shipping Optimization
Over the last two years, we have added new distribution centers in order to shorten the customer order delivery time to meet our customers’ evolving delivery expectations and in turn optimizing our outbound freight costs. As we navigate the current global supply chain landscape, our ability to optimize our supply chain sourcing will be key in managing the rising costs of importing parts from overseas. While we seek to continue to optimize our supply chain for both inbound and outbound shipping, we may incur increased freight expenses due to the current global supply chain disruption.
Executive Summary
For fiscal year 2020, the Company’s operations generated net sales of $443,884, compared to $280,657 for fiscal year 2019, representing an increase of 58.2%. The Company incurred a net loss of $1,513 for fiscal year 2020 compared to a net loss of $31,548 for fiscal year 2019. The Company incurred a net loss before interest expense, net, income tax provision, depreciation and amortization expense, amortization of intangible assets, share-based compensation expense, and in 2019, costs related to our customs issues and employee transition costs ("Adjusted EBITDA"), of $16,025 in fiscal year 2020 compared to $4,532 in fiscal year 2019. Refer to the section below titled “Non-GAAP measures” for information regarding our use of Adjusted EBITDA and a reconciliation from net loss.
Net sales increased in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019 primarily due to an increase in our online sales offset by a decrease in our offline sales. Our online sales, which include our e-commerce and online marketplace sales channels, contributed 95.5% of total net sales and our offline sales, which consist of our Kool-Vue® and wholesale operations, contributed 4.5% of total net sales. Our online sales increased by $168,034, or 65.6%, to $424,085 compared to the same period last year due to an increase in e-commerce sales, primarily driven by our sales growth from our flagship website, www.carparts.com. Our offline sales decreased by $4,807, or 19.5%, to $19,799 compared to the same period last year primarily due to a decrease in sales from our wholesale operations. Gross profit increased by 84.5% to $155,366. Gross margin increased 500 basis points to 35.0% in fiscal year 2020 compared to 30.0% in fiscal year 2019. The increase in gross profit and gross margin was primarily due to the shift to more house brands, favorable channel and product mix, partially offset by higher inbound and outbound freight costs and surcharges from carriers.
Total expenses, which primarily consisted of cost of sales and operating expense, increased in fiscal year 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. The components of cost of sales and operating costs are described in further detail under “Components of Results of Operations” below.
Non-GAAP measures
Regulation G, “Conditions for Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures,” and other provisions of the Exchange Act, as amended, define and prescribe the conditions for use of certain non-GAAP financial information. We provide EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, which are non-GAAP financial measures. EBITDA consists of net loss before (a) interest expense, net; (b) income tax provision; (c) depreciation and amortization expense; and (d) amortization of intangible assets; while Adjusted EBITDA consists of EBITDA before share-based compensation expense, and in 2019, costs related to our customs issues and employee transition costs.
The Company believes that these non-GAAP financial measures provide important supplemental information to management and investors. These non-GAAP financial measures reflect an additional way of viewing aspects of the Company’s operations that, when viewed with the GAAP results and the accompanying reconciliation to corresponding GAAP financial measures, provide a more complete understanding of factors and trends affecting the Company’s business and results of operations.
Management uses Adjusted EBITDA as one measure of the Company’s operating performance because it assists in comparing the Company’s operating performance on a consistent basis by removing the impact of stock compensation expense and in 2019, the costs associated with the customs issue, as well as other items that we do not believe are representative of our ongoing operating performance. Internally, this non-GAAP measure is also used by management for planning purposes, including the preparation of internal budgets; for allocating resources to enhance financial
performance; and for evaluating the effectiveness of operational strategies. The Company also believes that analysts and investors use Adjusted EBITDA as a supplemental measure to evaluate the ongoing operations of companies in our industry.
This non-GAAP financial measure is used in addition to and in conjunction with results presented in accordance with GAAP and should not be relied upon to the exclusion of GAAP financial measures. Management strongly encourages investors to review the Company’s consolidated financial statements in their entirety and to not rely on any single financial measure. Because non-GAAP financial measures are not standardized, it may not be possible to compare these financial measures with other companies’ non-GAAP financial measures having the same or similar names. In addition, the Company expects to continue to incur expenses similar to the non-GAAP adjustments described above, and exclusion of these items from the Company’s non-GAAP measures should not be construed as an inference that these costs are unusual, infrequent or non-recurring.
The table below reconciles net loss to Adjusted EBITDA for the periods presented (in thousands):
(1) We incurred employee transition costs related to the transition of our executive management team including severance, recruiting, hiring bonus and relocation costs.
(2) We incurred port and carrier fees and legal costs associated with our customs related issues. Refer to “Note 8 -Commitments and Contingencies” of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details.
Components of Results of Operations
Net Sales. Online and offline sales represent two different sales channels for our products. Online is our primary sales channel as we generate net sales primarily from e-commerce sales of auto parts to individual consumers through our flagship website www.carparts.com, and online marketplaces. Online marketplaces consist primarily of sales of our products on online marketplace websites, where we sell through online storefronts that we maintain on third-party owned websites such as eBay and Amazon. Our offline sales channel represents our distribution of products directly to commercial customers by selling auto parts to collision repair shops. Our offline sales channel also includes both stock ship distribution as well as drop ship programs for automotive warehouse distributors and other online resellers. The product mix includes the majority of our house brands stock ship parts, which include the replacement collision parts and our Kool-Vue® mirror line.
Cost of Sales. Cost of sales consists of the direct costs associated with procuring parts from suppliers and delivering products to customers. These costs include direct product costs, outbound freight and shipping costs, warehouse supplies and warranty costs, partially offset by purchase discounts. Depreciation and amortization expenses are excluded from cost of sales and included in operating expense.
Operating Expense. Operating expense consists of marketing, general and administrative, fulfillment, and technology expense. We also include share-based compensation expense in the applicable operating expense category
based on the respective equity award recipient’s function. Marketing expense consists of online advertising spend, television advertising, internet commerce facilitator fees and other advertising costs, as well as payroll and related expenses associated with our customer service and marketing personnel. General and administrative expense consists primarily of administrative payroll and related expenses, merchant processing fees, legal and professional fees and other administrative costs. Fulfillment expense consists primarily of payroll and related costs associated with our warehouse employees and our purchasing group, facilities rent, building maintenance, depreciation and other costs associated with inventory management and our wholesale operations. Technology expense consists primarily of payroll and related expenses of our information technology personnel, the cost of hosting our servers, communications expenses and internet connectivity costs, computer support and software development amortization expense. Marketing expense, general and administrative expense, and fulfillment expense also includes depreciation and amortization expense.
Other Income, Net. Other income, net primarily consists of miscellaneous income or expense and interest income comprised primarily of interest income on investments.
Interest Expense. Interest expense consists primarily of interest expense on our outstanding revolving loan and letters of credit balances, deferred financing cost amortization and finance lease interest.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the fiscal years presented, expressed as a percentage of net sales:
Fifty-Three Weeks Ended January 2, 2021 Compared to the Fifty-Two Weeks Ended December 28, 2019
Net Sales and Gross Margin
Net sales increased $163,227 for fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019. Our net sales consisted of online sales, representing 95.5% of the total for fiscal year 2020 (compared to 91.2% in fiscal year 2019), and offline sales, representing 4.5% of the total for fiscal year 2020 (compared to 8.8% in fiscal year 2019). The net sales increase was due to an increase of $168,034, or 65.6%, in online sales, offset by a decrease of $4,807, or 19.5%, in offline sales. Our
online sales channel increase was driven by an increase in e-commerce sales primarily driven by sales growth from our flagship website, www.carparts.com. Our offline sales channel decreased primarily due to decreased sales to our wholesale customers.
Gross profit increased $71,143, or 84.5%, in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019. Gross margin increased 500 basis points to 35.0% in fiscal year 2020 compared to 30.0% in fiscal year 2019. The increase in gross profit and gross margin was primarily due to the shift to more house brands, favorable channel and product mix, partially offset by higher inbound and outbound freight costs and surcharges from carriers.
Operating Expense
Operating expense increased $62,598, or 67.7%, for fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019 primarily due to an increase in marketing expense, fulfillment expense and technology expense. The increase in marketing expense was primarily due to an increase in marketing spend. The increase in fulfillment expense was primarily due to a higher number of inventory receipts and fulfilled orders processed as well as additional expenses incurred from our Las Vegas, Nevada distribution center that opened in the third quarter of 2019. The increase in technology expense was primarily due to higher personnel costs.
Total Other Expense, Net
Total other expense, net decreased $360, or 19.3%, for fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019. Total other expense decreased during fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019 primarily due to a decrease in interest expense attributable to paying off the trade letters of credit balances during the third quarter of 2020, offset by an increase in interest expense attributable to an increase in capital assets for the distribution centers.
Income Tax Provision
The Company accounts for income taxes in accordance with ASC 740 - Income Taxes (“ASC 740”). Under the provisions of ASC 740, management is required to evaluate whether a valuation allowance should be established against its deferred tax assets based on the consideration of all available evidence using a “more likely than not” standard. Realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon taxable income in prior carryback years, estimates of future taxable income, tax planning strategies, and reversal of existing taxable temporary difference. ASC 740 provides that forming a conclusion that a valuation allowance is not needed is difficult when there is negative evidence such as cumulative losses in recent years or losses expected in early future years. As of January 2, 2021, when revaluating all available evidence, including (1) recent history of operating losses, (2) inability to objectively estimate future income and (3) lack of (i) tax
planning strategies, (ii) income in carryback periods and (iii) reversing existing temporary differences, management considered it appropriate to maintain a valuation allowance (from which such valuation allowance was recorded in fiscal year 2019) in the amount of $30,516 against deferred tax assets that were not more likely than not to be realized.
As of each reporting date, the Company’s management considers new evidence, both positive and negative, that could impact management’s view with regard to future realization of deferred tax assets. As we continue to assess our operations, to the extent our results and expectations of core earnings continue, we may be in a position to release additional valuation allowance in the future.
As of January 2, 2021, the Company had no material unrecognized tax benefits, interest or penalties related to federal and state income tax matters. As January 2, 2021, the Company’s federal and state NOL carryforwards were $83,386 and $76,120, respectively. Federal NOL carryforwards of $1,295 were acquired in the acquisition of WAG which are subject to Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”) and limited to an annual usage limitation of $135. The Company’s federal NOL carryforwards begin to expire in 2029, while the Company’s state NOL carryforwards being to expire in 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
During the fifty-three weeks ended January 2, 2021, we primarily funded our operations with cash and cash equivalents generated from operations, proceeds from our public equity offering that occurred in August 2020 (see further discussion in “Note 5 - Stockholders’ Equity and Share-Based Compensation ” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements), and borrowings under our credit facility. We had cash and cash equivalents of $35,802 as of January 2, 2021, representing a $33,529 increase from $2,273 of cash and cash equivalents as of December 28, 2019. Based on our current operating plan, we believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, investments, cash flows from operations and available funds under our credit facility will be sufficient to finance our operations through at least the next twelve months (see “Debt and Available Borrowing Resources” and “Funding Requirements” below).
As of January 2, 2021, our credit facility provided for a revolving commitment of up to $30,000 subject to a borrowing base derived from certain of our receivables, inventory and property and equipment (see “Debt and Available Borrowing Resources” below).
Working Capital
As of January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019, our working capital was $67,396 and $2,427, respectively. The increase in working capital is primarily due to an increase in cash and cash equivalents mainly attributable to our public equity offering that occurred in August 2020 as well as an increase in inventory purchases.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities
Net cash (used in) provided by operating activities for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019 was ($19,068) and $6,877, respectively. The decrease was primarily due to an increase in inventory attributable to higher
demand for online auto parts and supplying our new distribution center in Texas that opened in the fourth quarter of 2020, as well as the decrease in deferred income tax, offset primarily by a lower net loss and an increase in share-based compensation expense.
Investing Activities
For the fiscal years ended January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019, net cash used in investing activities was primarily the result of additions to property and equipment ($9,758 and $6,160, respectively), which are mainly related to capitalized website and software development costs.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities was $62,361 and ($465) for the fiscal years ended January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019, respectively. The main reason attributable for the shift to net cash provided was primarily due to common stock issuances from the August 2020 public equity offering.
Debt and Available Borrowing Resources
Total debt was $13,010 as of January 2, 2021 compared to $11,056 as of December 28, 2019 and primarily consists of right-of-use obligations-finance.
The Company maintains an asset-based revolving credit facility ("Credit Facility") that provides for, among other things a revolving commitment in an aggregate principal amount of up to $30,000, which is subject to a borrowing base derived from certain receivables, inventory and property and equipment. Our Credit Facility also provides for an option to increase the aggregate principal amount from $30,000 to $40,000 subject to lender approval. As of January 2, 2021, our outstanding revolving loan balance was $0. The outstanding standby letters of credit balance as of January 2, 2021 was $1,550, and we had $0 of our trade letters of credit outstanding in accounts payable in our consolidated balance sheet. We used the trade letters of credit in the ordinary course of business to satisfy certain vendor obligations.
On December 18, 2019, the Company and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. (“JPMorgan”) entered into the Eleventh Amendment (the “Amendment”) which amended the Credit Agreement previously entered into by the Company, certain of its domestic subsidiaries and JPMorgan on April 26, 2012 and the Pledge and Security Agreement previously entered into by the Company, certain of its domestic subsidiaries and JPMorgan on April 26, 2012. Pursuant to the Amendment, among other changes, the maturity date of the Credit Agreement was extended from April 26, 2020 to December 16, 2022, the net orderly liquidation value inventory advance rate was increased from 90% to 95% for a six-month period following the effective date of the Amendment, and the Company’s $5,000 basket for sales and dispositions of property in connection with Permitted Acquisitions (as defined in the Credit Agreement) was made available in full following the effective date of the Amendment.
On January 17, 2020, the Company and JPMorgan entered into the Twelfth Amendment to Credit Agreement and Fifth Amendment to Pledge and Security Agreement (the “Twelfth Amendment”), which amended the Credit Agreement previously entered into by the Company, certain of its domestic subsidiaries and JPMorgan on April 26, 2012 and the Pledge and Security Agreement previously entered into by the Company, certain of its domestic subsidiaries and JPMorgan on April 26, 2012. Pursuant to the Twelfth Amendment, letters of credit will be made available to the Company, subject to certain customary restrictions and conditions, in an aggregate amount not to exceed $25,000, an increase from $20,000.
The other amendments to the Credit Agreement made under the Twelfth Amendment were as follows:
● Solely until March 31, 2020 and for purposes of the covenant testing and cash dominion triggers in the Credit Agreement, the facility will incorporate elements of the borrowing base above the $30,000 available to borrow.
● Until March 31, 2020, the Company will be subject to reporting on a weekly basis with respect to the borrowing base and other metrics.
● Customary LIBOR successor provisions were added to the Credit Agreement.
Loans drawn under the credit facility bear interest at a per annum rate equal to either (a) LIBOR plus an applicable margin of 1.25% to 1.75% per annum based on the Company’s fixed charge coverage ratio, or (b) a “alternate base rate” subject to a reduction by 0.25% to 0.75% per annum based on the Company’s fixed charge coverage ratio. As of January 2, 2021, the Company’s LIBOR based interest rate was 1.44% (on $0 principal) and the Company’s prime based rate was 3.0% (on $0 principal). A commitment fee, based upon undrawn availability under the Credit Facility bearing interest at a rate of 0.25% per annum, is payable monthly. Under the terms of the Credit Agreement, cash receipts are deposited into a lock-box, which are at the Company’s discretion unless the “cash dominion period” is in effect, during which cash receipts will be used to reduce amounts owing under the Credit Agreement. The cash dominion period is triggered in an event of default or if excess availability is less than the $3,600 for three consecutive business days, and will continue until, during the preceding 45 consecutive days, no event of default existed and excess availability has been greater than $3,600 at all times (with the trigger subject to adjustment based on the Company’s revolving commitment). The Company’s required excess availability related to the “Covenant Testing Trigger Period” (as defined under the Credit Agreement) under the revolving commitment under the Credit Agreement is less than $3,000 for the period commencing on any day that excess availability is less than $3,000 for three consecutive business days, and continuing until excess availability has been greater than or equal to $3,000 at all times for 45 consecutive days (with the trigger subject to adjustment based on the Company’s revolving commitment). The Company’s excess availability was $26,627 as of January 2, 2021. The credit facility matures on December 16, 2022.
Certain of the Company’s domestic subsidiaries are co-borrowers (together with the Company, the “Borrowers”) under the Credit Agreement, and certain other domestic subsidiaries are guarantors (the “Guarantors” and, together with the Borrowers, the “Loan Parties”) under the Credit Agreement. The Borrowers and the Guarantors are jointly and severally liable for the Borrowers’ obligations under the Credit Agreement. The Loan Parties’ obligations under the Credit Agreement are secured, subject to customary permitted liens and certain exclusions, by a perfected security interest in (a) all tangible and intangible assets and (b) all of the capital stock owned by the Loan Parties (limited, in the case of foreign subsidiaries, to 65% of the capital stock of such foreign subsidiaries). The Borrowers may voluntarily prepay the loans at any time. The Borrowers are required to make mandatory prepayments of the loans (without payment of a premium) with net cash proceeds received upon the occurrence of certain “prepayment events,” which include certain sales or other dispositions of collateral, certain casualty or condemnation events, certain equity issuances or capital contributions, and the incurrence of certain debt.
The Credit Agreement contains customary representations and warranties and customary affirmative and negative covenants applicable to the Company and its subsidiaries, including, among other things, restrictions on indebtedness, liens, fundamental changes, investments, dispositions, prepayment of other indebtedness, mergers, and dividends and other distributions.
Events of default under the Credit Agreement include: failure to timely make payments due under the Credit Agreement; material misrepresentations or misstatements under the Credit Agreement and other related agreements; failure to comply with covenants under the Credit Agreement and other related agreements; certain defaults in respect of other material indebtedness; insolvency or other related events; certain defaulted judgments; certain ERISA-related events; certain security interests or liens under the loan documents cease to be, or are challenged by the Company or any of its subsidiaries as not being, in full force and effect; any loan document or any material provision of the same ceases to be in full force and effect; and certain criminal indictments or convictions of any Loan Party. As of January 2, 2021, the Company was in compliance with all covenants under the Credit Agreement.
Our Credit Facility requires us to satisfy certain financial covenants which could limit our ability to react to market conditions or satisfy extraordinary capital needs and could otherwise restrict our financing and operations. If we are unable to satisfy the financial covenants and tests at any time, we may as a result cease being able to borrow under the Credit Facility or be required to immediately repay loans under the Credit Facility, and our liquidity and capital resources and ability to operate our business could be severely impacted, which would have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations. In those events, we may need to sell assets or seek additional equity or additional debt financing or attempt to modify our existing Credit Agreement. There can be no assurance that we would be able to raise such additional financing or engage in such asset sales on acceptable terms, or at all, or that we would be able to modify our existing Credit Agreement.
On August 8, 2019, the Company entered into a financing arrangement with a third-party financial institution related to the development of the Company’s third warehouse which is located in Las Vegas, Nevada. The financing arrangement matures in April 2022 and has an effective interest rate of approximately 7.70% per annum. The Company paid off the outstanding notes payable balance during fiscal year 2020 and as of January 2, 2021, the total outstanding balance was $0.
See additional information in “Note 4 - Borrowings” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, of this report.
Funding Requirements
Based on our current operating plan, we believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents, investments, cash flows from operations and available debt or equity financing will be sufficient to finance our operational cash needs through at least the next twelve months. Our future capital requirements may, however, vary materially from those now planned or anticipated. Changes in our operating plans, lower than anticipated net sales or gross margin, increased expenses, continued or worsened economic conditions, worsening operating performance by us, or other events, including those described in “Risk Factors” included in Part II, Item 1A may force us to sell assets or seek additional debt or equity financings in the future, including the issuance of additional common stock under a registration statement. There can be no assurance that we would be able to raise such additional financing or engage in asset sales on acceptable terms, or at all. If we are not able to raise adequate additional financing or proceeds from asset sales, we will need to defer, reduce or eliminate significant planned expenditures, restructure or significantly curtail our operations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no significant off-balance sheet arrangements.
Seasonality
We believe our business is subject to seasonal fluctuations. We have historically experienced higher sales of collision parts in winter months when inclement weather and hazardous road conditions typically result in more automobile collisions. Engine parts and performance parts and accessories have historically experienced higher sales in the summer months when consumers have more time to undertake elective projects to maintain and enhance the performance of their automobiles and the warmer weather during that time is conducive for such projects. We expect the historical seasonality trends to continue to have a material impact on our financial condition and results of operations during the reporting periods in any given year.
Inflation
Inflation has not had a material impact upon our operating results, and we do not expect it to have such an impact in the near future. We cannot assure you that our business will not be affected by inflation in the future.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See “Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Nature of Operations” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Part IV, Item 15 of this report.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, net sales, costs and expenses, and related disclosures. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Actual results could differ from those estimates under different assumptions and conditions. We believe that of our significant accounting policies, which are described in Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Nature of Operations” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, the following accounting policies and estimates set forth below involve a greater degree of judgment or complexity.
Valuation of Inventory - Inventory Reserves. Inventory primarily consists of finished goods. We purchase inventory from suppliers both domestically and internationally, primarily in Taiwan and China. Inventory is accounted for using the first-in first-out (“FIFO”) method and valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value. We recognize provisions for obsolete and slow-moving inventory primarily based on judgments about expected disposition of inventory, generally, through sales, or liquidations of obsolete inventory, and expected recoverable values based on currently-available or historical information. If actual market conditions are less favorable than those anticipated by management, additional write-offs to reduce the value of our inventory may be required.
Income Taxes - Realization of Deferred Tax Assets. The Company accounts for income taxes in accordance with ASC 740 - Income Taxes (“ASC 740”). Under ASC 740, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amount of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. When appropriate, a valuation allowance is established to reduce deferred tax assets, which include tax credits and loss carryforwards, to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. The ability to realize deferred tax assets depends on the ability to generate sufficient taxable income within the carryforward periods provided for in the tax law for each applicable tax jurisdiction. We primarily consider the following possible sources of taxable income when assessing the realization of our deferred tax assets:
● Future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences;
● Future taxable income exclusive of reversing temporary differences and carryforwards;
● Tax-planning strategies.
The assessment regarding whether a valuation allowance is required or should be adjusted/released also considers, among other matters, the nature, frequency and severity of recent losses, forecasts of future profitability, the duration of statutory carryforward periods, our experience with tax attributes expiring unused and tax planning alternatives. In making such judgments, significant weight is given to evidence that can be objectively verified.
Concluding that a valuation allowance is not required is difficult when there is significant negative evidence that is objective and verifiable, such as cumulative losses in recent years. We utilized a three-year analysis of actual results as the primary measure of cumulative losses in recent years. In addition, the near- and medium-term financial outlook is considered when assessing the need for a release of our valuation allowance.
The valuation of deferred tax assets requires judgment and assessment of the future tax consequences of events that have been recorded in the financial statements or in the tax returns, and our future profitability represents our best
estimate of those future events. Changes in our current estimates, due to unanticipated events or otherwise, could have a material effect on our financial condition and results of operations.
We utilize a two-step approach to recognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if the weight of available evidence indicates it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount which is more than 50% likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement. We consider many factors when evaluating and estimating our tax positions and tax benefits, which may require periodic adjustments and which may not accurately forecast actual outcomes. The Company’s policy is to record interest and penalties as income tax expense.