ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
We are a clinical stage biopharmaceutical company, focused on the development and commercialization of novel therapeutics and innovative approaches aimed at intercepting and preventing immune-mediated diseases. Since our inception, we have devoted substantially all of our efforts to business planning, research and development, pre-commercial activities, recruiting management and technical staff, acquiring operating assets, partnering and raising capital. We have not yet commenced any revenue-generating operations, do not have any positive cash flows from operations and we will need to raise additional capital to finance our operations.
We have not generated any revenue to date and, through December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $177.6 million. We have financed our operations primarily through equity offerings.
In April 2017, we completed a private placement of 11,381,999 shares of Series A Convertible Redeemable Preferred Stock at $2.50 per share. We received net proceeds of $26.7 million. In connection with the Series A Convertible Redeemable Preferred stock sale, we issued warrants to purchase 558,740 shares of Series A Convertible Redeemable Preferred Stock with an exercise price of $2.50 per share with a seven-year term.
In July 2018, we issued and sold an aggregate of 15,969,563 shares of common stock in our IPO at a public offering price of $4.00 per share. In connection with the IPO, we issued to MDB, the underwriter in the IPO, and its designees warrants to purchase 1,596,956 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $5.00 per share. We received net proceeds from the IPO of $59.3 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of approximately $3.7 million and other offering expenses of approximately $0.8 million. Upon the closing of the IPO, all of our shares of Series A Convertible Redeemable Preferred Stock outstanding at the time of the IPO were automatically converted into 11,381,999 shares of common stock. In addition, the warrants issued in connection with the Series A Convertible Redeemable Preferred Stock also converted to warrants for the purchase of 558,740 shares of our common stock.
In September 2019, we completed an underwritten public offering in which we sold 5,750,000 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $8.00 per share. The 5,750,000 shares sold included the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase 750,000 shares at a price of $8.00 per share. Concurrent with the underwritten public offering, we sold 2,500,000 shares of common stock to Amgen. at the public offering price of $8.00 per share in a private placement pursuant to the terms of our License and Collaboration Agreement with Amgen. Aggregate net proceeds from the underwritten public offering and the concurrent private placement were $62.7 million, net of approximately $2.8 million in underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses of $0.5 million.
In August 2019, we established an ATM program through which we may sell, from time to time at our sole discretion, up to $50.0 million of shares of our common stock. We have sold 725,495 shares of our common stock for aggregate net proceeds of approximately $9.9 million, net of $0.3 million in sales commissions, under the ATM program as of December 31, 2020, all of which occurred during the quarter ended June 30, 2020.
In June 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering in which we sold 7,590,000 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $14.50 per share. The 7,590,000 shares sold included the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase 990,000 shares at a price of $14.50 per share. We received net proceeds from the underwritten public offering of $103.3 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of approximately $6.6 million and other offering expenses of $0.2 million.
In January 2021, we completed an underwritten public offering in which we sold 6,250,000 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $16.00 per share. In February 2021, the underwriters partially exercised their option to purchase an additional 587,500 shares at a price of $16.00 per share. In the aggregate, total net proceeds from this underwritten public offering was $102.3 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of approximately $6.6 million and other offering expenses of $0.5 million.
We expect that over the next several years we will continue to incur losses from operations as we increase our expenditures in research and development in connection with our regulatory submissions, clinical trials and other development activities, as well as costs to support our commercialization efforts to launch teplizumab, if we receive regulatory approval in the United States. If adequate funds are not available to us on a timely basis, or at all, we may be required to terminate or delay certain development activities.
Financial operations overview
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of clinical studies, the cost of manufacturing our drug candidates for clinical study, regulatory costs, other internal operating expenses, and the cost of conducting preclinical activities. Expenses also include the cost of salaries, benefits and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel serving in our research and development functions. In addition, our research and development expenses include payments to third parties, as well as the fair value of equity issuances to third parties for the license rights to products in development (prior to marketing approval). Our expenses related to clinical trials are primarily related to activities at contract research organizations (“CROs”) and other consultants that design, obtain regulatory approval, and conduct clinical trials on our behalf. Our expenses related to the production of drug substance or drug product for our clinical trials and development programs are primarily related to activities performed by licensors, strategic partners or contract manufacturing organizations (“CMOs”) and other consultants on our behalf. Our development efforts from inception through December 31, 2020 were principally related to the acquisition and development of our clinical programs.
All research and development expenses are charged to operations as incurred in accordance with ASC 730, Research and Development. We account for non-refundable advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities as expenses when the service has been performed or when the goods have been received, rather than when the payment is made.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries, benefits and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for our personnel serving in our executive, business development, pre-commercial and finance and accounting functions. General and administrative expenses also include professional fees for marketing and other pre-commercial activities, legal, including patent-related expenses, consulting, insurance, board of director fees, tax and accounting services. We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase significantly in the future as a result of the build out of our commercial organization and pre-commercial activities for teplizumab.
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest income earned on our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liability
Change in fair value of warrant liability represents the re-measurement of liability classified warrants using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model at each financial reporting period. The fair value was affected by changes in inputs to the model including the fair value of our Series A Convertible Redeemable Preferred Stock, expected stock price volatility, the estimated term until exercise, and the risk-free interest rate.
Upon the completion of the IPO in July 2018, the warrants issued in connection with the Series A Convertible Redeemable Preferred Stock converted to warrants for the purchase of 558,740 shares of our common stock. The liability associated with these warrants was revalued just prior to the completion of the IPO, with the change in the fair value of the warrant liability charged to earnings. The warrant liability was then reclassified to additional paid-in capital upon the completion of the IPO in July 2018, as the warrants no longer contain redemption provisions outside our control.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Comparison of years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $66.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $30.0 million, compared to $36.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase related primarily to increased costs for our teplizumab program, including manufacturing activities, the PROTECT study, and BLA submission activities. Specifically, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred $21.3 million in manufacturing costs for teplizumab, including production costs for GMP and process performance qualification (“PPQ”) batches of drug supply and drug product. Also contributing to the increase were costs for the PROACTIVE study (PRV-015), which was initiated in August 2020. These costs were offset by a decrease in clinical development expenses for the PRINCE study (PRV-6527) and the PREVAIL study (PRV-3279), each of which were substantially completed in 2019. Research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 also included $11.7 million and $5.1 million in personnel costs, including stock-based compensation of $5.6 million and $1.3 million in each respective year. The increase in stock-based compensation relates to the increase in headcount as well as the vesting of certain performance-based metrics related primarily to the completion of CMC activities and submission of the BLA for teplizumab.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $33.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $25.3 million, compared to $8.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. General and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were comprised of the following:
Pre-commercial expenses were $16.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and primarily consisted of $11.7 million in external costs for our pre-commercial activities such as marketing and market access, and $4.6 million in personnel costs, including stock-based compensation of $1.7 million. There were no pre-commercial expenses during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Other general and administrative expenses were $17.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and primarily consisted of $9.0 million in personnel costs, including stock-based compensation of $5.9 million, $5.0 million in professional fees and legal expenses, and approximately $2.0 million in insurance and other public company costs. Other general and administrative expenses were $8.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and were primarily comprised of $3.5 million in personnel costs, including stock-based compensation of $1.5 million, $2.7 million in professional fees and legal expenses, and approximately $1.3 million in insurance and other public company costs.
The increase in general and administrative stock-based compensation in 2020 relates to the increase in headcount as well as the vesting of certain performance-based metrics related primarily to the completion of CMC activities and submission of the BLA for teplizumab.
Interest Income
Interest income was $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in interest income during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily related to an overall reduction in interest rates in 2020, which is largely a result of changes in the economic environment related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Income Tax Benefit
We recorded an income tax benefit of $0.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, which related to proceeds from the sale of certain of our prior year New Jersey net operating losses. We did not record any income tax benefit or provision during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Comparison of years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $36.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $13.8 million, compared to $22.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily included external clinical development expenses of $22.6 million for teplizumab, PRV-6527, PRV-300, and PRV-3279, development costs of $6.4 million for PRV-101 and internal personnel costs of $5.1 million, including stock-based compensation of $1.3 million.
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2018 included external clinical development expenses of $10.7 million for PRV-6527, PRV-300 and teplizumab, development costs of $4.1 million for PRV-101, non-cash product acquisition costs of $4.0 million, which represented the fair value of warrants issued in connection with the acquisition of teplizumab and PRV-3279 in May 2018, and internal personnel costs of $2.9 million, including stock-based compensation of $0.6 million.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $8.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $3.8 million, compared to $4.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily included $3.5 million in personnel costs, including stock-based compensation of $1.5 million, $2.7 million in professional fees and legal expenses, and $1.3 million in insurance and other public company costs. General and administrative expenses were $4.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 and were primarily comprised of $1.7 million in personnel costs, including stock-based compensation of $0.5 million, $1.5 million in professional fees and legal expenses, and $0.6 million in insurance and other costs associated with being a public company.
Change in fair value of warrant liability
Change in fair value of warrant liability was a loss of approximately $0.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2018. This loss represents the change in fair value of our warrant liability using a Black-Scholes option-pricing model with updated assumptions as of July 18, 2018, the date just prior to the completion of our IPO, and was primarily impacted by a change in the fair value of our Series A Convertible Redeemable Preferred Stock.
Upon the completion of the IPO in July 2018, the warrants issued in connection with the Series A Convertible Redeemable Preferred Stock converted to warrants for the purchase of 558,740 shares of our common stock. The warrant liability was then reclassified to additional paid-in capital upon the completion of the IPO in July 2018, as the warrants no longer contain redemption provisions outside our control. As such, we did not record any gain or loss related to the warrant liability during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Interest Income
Interest income was $1.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $0.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in interest income in 2019 related primarily to an increase in average cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balances that resulted from the net proceeds from our IPO in July 2018 and our underwritten public offering and concurrent private placement in September 2019.
Income Tax Benefit
We did not record any income tax benefit or provision during the year ended December 31, 2019. We recorded an income tax benefit of $0.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2018, which related to the proceeds from the sale of certain of our prior year New Jersey net operating losses.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Overview
There is considerable time and cost associated with developing a potential drug or pharmaceutical product to the point of regulatory approval and commercialization. We have funded our operations to date through offerings of equity securities. We expect to continue to incur losses, as we plan to continue to fund development activities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $121.8 million. We currently have invested our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities primarily in money market funds and corporate debt securities.
In January 2021, we completed an underwritten public offering in which we sold 6,250,000 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $16.00 per share. In February 2021, the underwriters partially exercised their option to purchase an additional 587,500 shares at a price of $16.00 per share. In the aggregate, total net proceeds from this underwritten public offering was $102.3 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of approximately $6.6 million and other offering expenses of $0.5 million.
We will need to raise additional capital to fund our operations, to develop and commercialize teplizumab, PRV-015, PRV-3279 and PRV-101 and to develop, acquire, or in-license other products. We currently plan to raise additional capital through equity offerings, debt, or potential out-licensing transactions. Such additional funding will be necessary to continue to develop our product candidates, to pursue the license or purchase of other technologies, to commercialize our product candidates or to purchase other products. We may seek to sell common or preferred equity or convertible debt securities, enter into a credit facility or another form of third-party funding, or seek other debt financing. In addition, we may consider raising additional capital to fund operating activities, to expand our business, to pursue strategic investments, to take advantage of financing opportunities, or for other reasons. The sale of equity and convertible debt securities may result in dilution to our stockholders and those securities may have rights senior to those of our common stock. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of preferred stock, convertible debt securities or other debt financing, these securities or other debt could contain covenants that would restrict our operations. Any other third-party funding arrangement could require us to relinquish valuable rights. We may require additional capital beyond our currently anticipated amounts. Additional capital may not be available on reasonable terms, or at all. If we are unable to obtain sufficient additional funds when required, we may be forced to delay, restrict or eliminate all or a portion of our development programs, dispose of assets or technology or cease operations.
Our cash requirements for 2021 will be impacted by a number of factors, the most significant of which are expenses related to teplizumab, including costs to build out our commercial infrastructure and other pre-commercial activities for teplizumab, the PROTECT clinical trial, manufacturing activities for teplizumab and any potential milestone payments that may become due upon a potential regulatory approval of teplizumab by the FDA. Other factors include costs related to our Phase 2b clinical study of PRV-015, our first-in-human safety study of PRV-101 and the timing of our planned Phase 2a study of PRV-3279.
Based on our current business plans, management believes that our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities on hand at December 31, 2020, coupled with the funds raised in our January 2021 common stock offering, are sufficient to meet our obligations for at least the next 12 months from the issuance of these financial statements.
Cash Flows
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $76.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and primarily related to cash used to fund clinical development, manufacturing, and pre-commercial activities for teplizumab, clinical development activities for PRV-015, development activities for PRV-101, and increased personnel costs to support our clinical programs and the build out of our corporate and commercial infrastructure. Our working capital was $109.8 million as of December 31, 2020.
Net cash used in operating activities was $36.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and primarily related to cash used to fund clinical development activities for teplizumab, PRV-6527, PRV-3279 and PRV-300, development activities for PRV-101, and increased personnel costs to support our clinical programs and our public company infrastructure.
Net cash used in operating activities was $22.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 and primarily related to cash used to fund clinical development activities for PRV-6527, PRV-300 and teplizumab, development activities for PRV-101, and increased personnel costs to support our recently acquired programs and our new public company infrastructure.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was $25.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and primarily related to the proceeds received from the maturity of marketable securities totaling $55.0 million offset by purchases of marketable securities totaling $28.7 million and net capital expenditures associated with the build out of our new corporate headquarters and information systems infrastructure of $1.1 million.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $46.2 million and relates to the purchase of marketable securities during the period.
There was no cash used in or provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $114.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and primarily related to net proceeds received from our underwritten public offering in June 2020 of $103.3 million, net proceeds received from the sale of our common stock under our ATM program of $9.9 million, as well as $1.1 million received from stock option exercises during the period.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $62.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and primarily related to the net proceeds we received from the completion of our underwritten public offering and concurrent private placement in September 2019.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $59.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 and primarily related to the net proceeds we received from the completion of our IPO in July 2018.
Commitments and Contractual Obligations
The table below presents a summary of our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
(1) Purchase obligations represent our commitments under binding forecasts, and purchase orders (inclusive of cancellation fees), including those provided under our agreement(s) with AGC. The actual amounts incurred will be determined based on the amount of goods purchased and the pricing then in effect under the applicable arrangement.
(2) Operating lease obligations represent the gross minimum cash rent payments under our lease in Red Bank, NJ.
(3) This table does not include (a) any milestone payments which may become payable to third parties under license and collaboration agreements as the timing and likelihood of such payments are not known with certainty, (b) any royalty payments to third parties as the amounts, timing and likelihood of such payments are not known, and (c) contracts that are entered into in the ordinary course of business that are not material in the aggregate in any period presented above.
We have entered into a number of license, collaboration, acquisition and other agreements with third parties. For further details regarding our significant contracts, and the commitments and contractual obligations contained within each contract, please refer to the section titled Significant Contracts and Agreements Related to Research and Development Activities within Item 1. above.
In July 2020, we entered into an agreement to lease approximately 7,000 square feet of office space in Red Bank, NJ, for which the initial lease term expires approximately 64 months from the lease commencement date, which occurred in October 2020, with base annual lease payments of approximately $0.2 million.
In addition, in the course of normal business operations, we have agreements with contract service providers to assist in the performance of our research and development and manufacturing activities. Expenditures to CROs, CMOs and other clinical development related vendors represent significant costs in clinical development. Subject to required notice periods and our obligations under binding purchase orders, we can elect to discontinue the work under these agreements at any time. We could also enter into additional collaborative research, contract research, manufacturing, and supplier agreements in the future, which may require upfront payments and even long-term commitments of cash.
We also have employment agreements with certain employees which require the funding of a specific level of payments, if certain events, such as a change in control or termination without cause, occur.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources. We do not have any interest in special purpose entities, structured finance entities or other variable interest entities.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States requires us to make estimates and assumptions affecting the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, and expenses and the disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. We use our historical experience and other relevant factors when developing our estimates and assumptions and we continually evaluate these estimates and assumptions. The amounts of assets and liabilities reported in our balance sheets and the amounts of expenses reported in our statements of comprehensive loss are affected by estimates and assumptions, which are used for, but not limited to, the accounting for research and development, stock-based compensation and accrued expenses. The accounting policies discussed below are considered critical to an understanding of our financial statements because their application places the most significant demands on our judgment. Actual results could differ from our estimates. For additional accounting policies, see Note 3 to our Financial Statements- Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, which outlines our application of significant accounting policies.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of salaries, benefits and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel serving our development functions, and other internal operating expenses, the cost of clinical studies, and the cost of our drug candidates for clinical study. In addition, research and development expenses include payments to third parties for the development and manufacturing of our product candidates and the estimated fair value for the issuance of equity for the license rights to products in development (prior to marketing approval). Our expenses related to clinical trials are primarily related to activities at CROs that design, gain approval for and conduct clinical trials on our behalf. Such amounts are then recognized as an expense as the related goods are delivered or the services are performed.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued expenses. This process involves reviewing quotations and contracts, identifying services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed or when contractual milestones are met. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. The significant estimates in our accrued research and development expenses are related to expenses incurred with respect to CROs, CMOs and other vendors in connection with research and development and manufacturing activities.
We base our expenses related to CROs and CMOs on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotations and contracts with such vendors that conduct research and development and manufacturing activities on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the applicable research and development or manufacturing expense. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or prepaid expense accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and could result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. There have been no material changes in estimates for the periods presented.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize stock-based compensation expense for awards of equity instruments based on the grant-date fair value of those awards. The grant-date fair value of the award is recognized as compensation expense ratably over the requisite service period, which generally equals the vesting period of the award. We also grant performance-based stock options. The grant-date fair value of the performance-based stock options is recognized as compensation expense once it is probable that the performance condition will be achieved. We record actual forfeitures in the period the forfeiture occurs.
In June 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-07, Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting, which supersedes ASC 505-50 and expands the scope of ASC 718 to include all share-based payments arrangements related to the acquisition of goods and services from both employees and nonemployees. During the third quarter of 2018, we early adopted ASU 2018-07. After the adoption of ASU 2018-07, the measurement date for non-employee awards is the date of grant. Compensation expense for non-employees is recognized, without changes to the fair value of the award, over the requisite service period, which is the vesting period of the respective award. The adoption of ASU 2018-07 did not have a material impact our financial statements or footnote disclosures.
Prior to the third quarter of 2018, we accounted for awards of equity instruments issued to non-employees in accordance with ASC Topic 505-50 “Equity-Based Payment to Non-Employees” and accordingly the value of the stock compensation to non-employees was based upon the measurement date as determined at either a) the date at which a performance commitment was reached, or b) at the date at which the necessary performance to earn the equity instruments was complete, which was normally the end of the vesting period. At the end of each financial reporting period prior to completion of the service, the fair value of these awards was remeasured using updated assumption inputs in the Black-Scholes option-pricing model.
We used the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to estimate the fair value of option awards with the following weighted-average assumptions for the period indicated:
The weighted-average valuation assumptions were determined as follows:
● Risk-free interest rate: we base the risk-free interest rate on the interest rate payable on United States Treasury securities in effect at the time of grant for a period that is commensurate with the assumed expected option term.
● Expected annual dividends: the estimate for annual dividends is 0%, because we have not historically paid, and do not expect for the foreseeable future to pay, a dividend.
● Expected stock price volatility: the expected volatility used is based on historical volatilities of similar entities within our industry which were commensurate with our expected term assumption.
● Expected term of options: the expected term of options represents the period of time options are expected to be outstanding. The expected term of the options granted to employees is derived from the “simplified” method as described in Staff Accounting Bulletin 107 relating to stock-based compensation, whereby the expected term is an average between the vesting period and contractual period due to our limited operating history.
Stock-based compensation expense is included in both research and development expenses and general and administrative expenses in the Statements of Comprehensive Loss.
Determination of Fair Value of Common Stock
Prior to our IPO, there was no public market for our common stock. The estimated fair value of our common stock had been determined by our board of directors as of the date of each option grant and quarter end, with input from management, considering our most recently available third-party valuations of common stock. These factors included, but were not limited to: our most recently available valuations of our common stock by an unrelated third party; the price at which we sold shares of our convertible redeemable preferred stock to outside investors in arms-length transactions; the rights, preferences and privileges of our convertible preferred stock relative to those of our common stock; our results of operations, financial position and capital resources; current business conditions and projections; the lack of marketability of our common stock; the hiring of key personnel and the experience of management; the risk inherent in the development of our products; our stage of development and material risks related to our business; the fact that the option grants involved illiquid securities in a private company; and the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as our IPO or sale, in light of prevailing market conditions.
We determined the estimated fair value of our common stock at various dates prior to our IPO using contemporaneous valuations performed in accordance with the guidance outlined in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants’ Accounting and Valuation Guide, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation. We determined that the probability-weighted expected return method (“PWERM”), was the most appropriate method available under this guidance for allocating our enterprise value to determine the estimated fair value of our common stock. A PWERM is a scenario-based analysis that estimates value per share based on the probability-weighted present value of expected future investment returns, considering each of the possible outcomes available to us, as well as the economic and control rights of each share class.
Our common stock valuations as of April 25, 2017, June 30, 2017, September 11, 2017, September 30, 2017, December 1, 2017, December 31, 2017, March 1, 2018, March 31, 2018, May 7, 2018, June 30, 2018 and July 18, 2018 were prepared using the PWERM.
Our board of directors and management developed best estimates based on application of these approaches and the assumptions underlying these valuations, giving careful consideration to the advice from our third-party valuation expert. Such estimates involved inherent uncertainties and the application of significant judgment. As a result, if factors or expected outcomes change and we use significantly different assumptions or estimates, our equity-based compensation could be materially different.
Subsequent to the completion of our IPO, our board of directors determines the fair market value of our common stock based on its closing price as reported on the date of grant on the primary stock exchange on which our common stock is traded.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 3, “Significant Accounting Policies”, in the accompanying notes to financial statements, which is incorporated herein by reference.