Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis is intended to help investors understand our business, financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and capital resources. You should read this discussion together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The statements in this discussion regarding industry outlook, our expectations regarding our future performance, liquidity and capital resources and other non-historical statements in this discussion are forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, the risks and uncertainties described in “Risk Factors” and “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements.
COVID-19 Pandemic
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company has taken certain actions to continue to execute under our contracts with customers and allow our people to work safely. A substantial majority of our workforce transitioned to work-from-home status during the latter part of the quarter ended March 31, 2020, and these practices remain in effect as of the date of this filing. To date, we have experienced no material disruption in our work as a consequence of these changes in our work practices.
The Company has experienced an impact in the volume of work in both the Federal Solutions and Critical Infrastructure segments where customers have restricted access to certain project sites. We have not seen any substantive cancellations of previously awarded contracts. In the Federal Solutions segment, we have had some existing contracts extended. We continue to see several potential contract awards pushed out to a future date.
The Company is receiving limited benefits associated with the CARES Act related to its work on certain US national security projects; however, the curtailment of work under these projects and the CARES Act benefits are not likely to have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations. The reimbursement period for Section 3610 of the CARES Act extends until March 31, 2021.
The Company has provided additional disclosure around liquidity and capital resources which can be found in the “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section in Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in this Form 10-K.
The Company anticipates substantially all of the Company’s subcontractors and material suppliers will be able to fulfill their contractual obligations and we do not expect a material impact from non-performance.
The ultimate impact from the COVID-19 pandemic is difficult to predict. While many uncertainties exist, we currently anticipate no material change in our financial condition or results of operations
PARSONS CORPORATION Enabling a safer, smarter, and more interconnected world. Federal Solutions Technology-driven solutions for defense and intelligence customers SEGMENTS Critical Infrastructure Engineered solutions for complex physical and digital infrastructure challenges FINANCIAL SNAPSHOT $4B FY 2019 Revenue Critical Infrastructure52% Federal Solutions48% $4.3BFY 2019 Contract Awards Critical Infrastructure41% Federal Solutions59% KEY FACTS AND FIGURES 75Years of History ~ 16KEmployees 11%Revenue Growth (FY 2019) 1.1XTTM Book-to-Bill $8.0BBacklog as of 12/31/2019
Overview
We are a leading innovative technology provider in the global defense, intelligence and critical infrastructure markets. We provide software and hardware products, technical services and integrated solutions to support our customers’ missions. We have developed significant expertise and differentiated capabilities in key areas of cybersecurity, intelligence, missile defense, C5ISR, space, geospatial, and connected communities. By combining our talented team of professionals and advanced technology, we help solve complex technical challenges to enable a safer, smarter and more interconnected world.
We operate in two reporting segments, Federal Solutions and Critical Infrastructure. Our Federal Solutions business provides advanced technical solutions to the U.S. government. Our Critical Infrastructure business provides integrated engineering and management services for complex physical and digital infrastructure to state and local governments and large companies.
Our employees provide services pursuant to contracts that we are awarded by the customer and specific task orders relating to such contracts. These contracts are often multi-year, which provides us backlog and visibility on our revenues for future periods. Many of our contracts and task orders are subject to renewal and rebidding at the end of their term, and some are subject to the exercise of contract options and issuance of task orders by the applicable government entity. In addition to focusing on increasing our revenues through increased contract awards and backlog, we focus our financial performance on margin expansion and cash flow.
Key Metrics
We manage and assess the performance of our business by evaluating a variety of metrics. The following table sets forth selected key metrics (in thousands, except Book-to-Bill):
(1)
Difference between our backlog of $8.1 billion and our remaining unsatisfied performance obligations, or RUPO, of $5.2 billion, each as of December 31, 2020, is due to (i) unissued task orders and unexercised option years, to the extent their issuance or exercise is probable, as well as (ii) contract awards, to the extent we believe contract execution and funding is probable.
Awards
Awards generally represent the amount of revenue expected to be earned in the future from funded and unfunded contract awards received during the period. Contract awards include both new and re-compete contracts and task orders. Given that new contract awards generate growth, we closely track our new awards each year.
The following table summarizes the total value of new awards for the periods presented below (in thousands):
The change in new awards from year to year is primarily due to ordinary course fluctuations in our business. The volume of contract awards can fluctuate in any given period due to win rate and the timing and size of the awards issued by our customers. In Federals Solutions, large awards in 2019 were the primary driver of changes in awards between 2020, 2019 and 2018. Awards in Critical infrastructure were lower in 2019 due to potential awards being pushed out to 2020.
Backlog
We define backlog to include the following two components:
•
Funded-Funded backlog represents the revenue value of orders for services under existing contracts for which funding is appropriated or otherwise authorized less revenue previously recognized on these contracts.
•
Unfunded-Unfunded backlog represents the revenue value of orders for services under existing contracts for which funding has not been appropriated or otherwise authorized less revenue previously recognized on these contracts.
Backlog includes (i) unissued task orders and unexercised option years, to the extent their issuance or exercise is probable, as well as (ii) contract awards, to the extent we believe contract execution and funding is probable.
The following table summarizes the value of our backlog at the respective dates presented (in thousands):
(1)
Difference between our backlog of $8.1 billion and our RUPO of $5.2 billion, each as of December 31, 2020, is due to (i) unissued task orders and unexercised option years, to the extent their issuance or exercise is probable, as well as (ii) contract awards, to the extent we believe contract execution and funding is probable.
Our backlog includes orders under contracts that in some cases extend for several years. For example, the U.S. Congress generally appropriates funds for our U.S. federal government customers on a yearly basis, even though their contracts with us may call for performance that is expected to take a number of years to complete. As a result, our federal contracts typically are only partially funded at any point during their term. All or some of the work to be performed under the contracts may remain unfunded unless and until the U.S. Congress makes subsequent appropriations and the procuring agency allocates funding to the contract.
We expect to recognize $2.7 billion of our funded backlog at December 31, 2020 as revenues in the following twelve months. However, our U.S. federal government customers may cancel their contracts with us at any time through a termination for convenience or may elect to not exercise option periods under such contracts. In the case of a termination for convenience, we would not receive anticipated future revenues, but would generally be permitted to recover all or a portion of our incurred costs and fees for work performed. See “Risk Factors-Risks Relating to Our Business-We may not realize the full value of our backlog, which may result in lower than expected revenue.”
The changes in backlog in our Federal Solutions segment between 2019 and 2020 included contributions of $0.2 billion from business acquisitions. The change in backlog in our Critical Infrastructure segment between 2019 and 2020 was primarily from ordinary course fluctuations in our business and the impacts related to awards discussed above. The changes in backlog in our Federal Solutions segment between 2018 and 2019 included contributions of $0.3 billion from business acquisitions. Backlog in our Critical Infrastructure segment, in 2019, was impacted primarily by a number of potential awards being pushed out to 2020. Our backlog will fluctuate in any given period based on the volume of awards issued in comparison to the revenue generated from our existing contracts.
Book-to-Bill
Book-to-bill is the ratio of total awards to total revenue recorded in the same period. Our management believes our book-to-bill ratio is a useful indicator of our potential future revenue growth in that it measures the rate at which we are generating new awards compared to the Company’s current revenue. To drive future revenue growth, our goal is for the level of awards in a given period to exceed the revenue booked. A book-to-bill ratio greater than 1.0 indicates that awards generated in a given period exceeded the revenue recognized in the same period, while a book-to-bill ratio of less than 1.0 indicates that awards generated in such period were less than the revenue recognized in such period. The following table sets forth the book-to-bill ratio for the periods presented below:
Factors and Trends Affecting Our Results of Operations
We believe that the financial performance of our business and our future success are dependent upon many factors, including those highlighted in this section. Our operating performance will depend upon many variables, including the success of our growth strategies and the timing and size of investments and expenditures that we choose to undertake, as well as market growth and other factors that are not within our control.
Government Spending
Changes in the relative mix of government spending and areas of spending growth, with shifts in priorities on homeland security, intelligence, defense-related programs, infrastructure and urbanization, and continued increased spending on technology and innovation, including cybersecurity, artificial intelligence, connected communities and physical infrastructure, could impact our business and results of operations. Cost-cutting and efficiency initiatives, current and future budget restrictions, spending cuts and other efforts to reduce government spending could cause our government customers to reduce or delay funding or invest appropriated funds on a less consistent basis or not at all, and demand for our solutions or services could diminish. Furthermore, any disruption in the functioning of government agencies, including as a result of government closures and shutdowns, could have a negative impact on our operations and cause us to lose revenue or incur additional costs due to, among other things, our inability to deploy our staff to customer locations or facilities as a result of such disruptions.
Federal Budget Uncertainty
There is uncertainty around the timing, extent, nature and effect of Congressional and other U.S. government actions to address budgetary constraints, caps on the discretionary budget for defense and non-defense departments and agencies, and the ability of Congress to determine how to allocate the available budget authority and pass appropriations bills to fund both U.S. government departments and agencies that are, and those that are not, subject to the caps. Additionally, budget deficits and the growing U.S. national debt increase pressure on the U.S. government to reduce federal spending across all federal agencies, with uncertainty about the size and timing of those reductions. Furthermore, delays in the completion of future U.S. government budgets could in the future delay procurement of the federal government services we provide. A reduction in the amount of, or delays, or cancellations of funding for, services that we are contracted to provide to the U.S. government as a result of any of these impacts or related initiatives, legislation or otherwise could have a material adverse effect on our business and results of operations.
Regulations
Increased audit, review, investigation and general scrutiny by government agencies of performance under government contracts and compliance with the terms of those contracts and applicable laws could affect our operating results. Negative publicity and increased scrutiny of government contractors in general, including us, relating to government expenditures for contractor services and incidents involving the mishandling of sensitive or classified information, as well as the increasingly complex requirements of the U.S. Department of Defense and the U.S. intelligence community, including those related to cybersecurity, could impact our ability to perform in the markets we serve.
Competitive Markets
The industries we operate in consist of a large number of enterprises ranging from small, niche-oriented companies to multi-billion-dollar corporations that serve many government and commercial customers. We compete on the basis of our technical expertise, technological innovation, our ability to deliver cost-effective multi-faceted services in a timely manner, our reputation and relationships with our customers, qualified and/or security-clearance personnel, and pricing. We believe that we are well positioned to take advantage of the markets in which we operate because of our proven track record, long-term customer relationships, technology innovation, scalable and agile business offerings and world class talent. Our ability to effectively deliver on project engagements and successfully assist our customers affects our ability to win new contracts and drives our financial performance.
Acquired Operations
Polaris Alpha
On May 31, 2018, we acquired Polaris Alpha for $489.1 million. Polaris Alpha is an advanced, technology-focused provider of innovative mission solutions for national security, intelligence and other U.S. federal customers. The acquisition was funded by cash on-hand and borrowings under our revolving credit facility (the “Revolving Credit Facility”). The financial results of Polaris Alpha have been included in our consolidated results of operations from May 31, 2018 onward.
OGSystems
On January 7, 2019, we acquired OGSystems for $292.4 million. OGSystems provides geospatial intelligence, big data analytics and threat mitigation for defense and intelligence customers. The acquisition was funded by cash on-hand and borrowings under our Term Loan and Revolving Credit Facility. The financial results of OGSystems have been included in our consolidated results of operations from January 7, 2019 onward.
QRC Technologies
On July 31, 2019, we acquired QRC Technologies for $214.1 million. QRC Technologies provides design and development of open-architecture radio-frequency products. The acquisition was funded by cash on-hand and borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility. The financial results of QRC Technologies have been included in our consolidated results of operations from July 31, 2019 onward.
Braxton Science & Technology Group, LLC
On November 19, 2020, we acquired Braxton for $310.9 million. Braxton operates at the forefront of satellite operations, ground system automation, flight dynamics, and spacecraft and antenna simulation for the U.S. Department of Defense and Intelligence Community. The acquisition was funded by cash on-hand. The financial results of Braxton have been included in our consolidated results of operations from November 19, 2020 onward.
Seasonality
Our results may be affected by variances as a result of weather conditions and contract award seasonality impacts that we experience across our businesses. The latter issue is typically driven by the U.S. federal government fiscal year-end, September 30. While not certain, it is not uncommon for U.S. government agencies to award task orders or complete other contract actions in the weeks before the end of the U.S. federal government fiscal year in order to avoid the loss of unexpended U.S. federal government fiscal year funds. In addition, we have also historically experienced higher bid and proposal costs in the months leading up to the U.S. federal government fiscal year-end as we pursue new contract opportunities expected to be awarded early in the following U.S. federal government fiscal year as a result of funding appropriated for that U.S. federal government fiscal year. Furthermore, many U.S. state governments with fiscal years ending on June 30 tend to accelerate spending during their first quarter, when new funding becomes available. We may continue to experience this seasonality in future periods, and our results of operations may be affected by it.
Taxes
Historically, we had elected to be taxed under the provisions of Subchapter “S” of the Internal Revenue Code for federal tax purposes. As a result, our income had not been subject to U.S. federal income taxes or state income taxes in those states where the “S” Corporation status was recognized. No provision or liability for federal or state income tax had been provided in our consolidated financial statements, prior to the IPO on May 8, 2019, except for those states where the “S” Corporation status was not recognized or where states imposed a tax on “S” Corporations. The provision for income tax in the historical periods prior to the IPO consists of these state taxes and from certain foreign jurisdictions where we are subject to tax.
In connection with the IPO, our “S” Corporation status terminated, and we are now treated as a “C” Corporation under Subchapter C of the Internal Revenue Code. The revocation of the our “S” Corporation election had a material impact on our results of operations, financial condition and cash flows. The effective tax rate has increased, and net income has decreased as compared to our “S” Corporation tax years, since we are now subject to both U.S. federal and state corporate income taxes on its earnings.
Results of Operations
Revenue
Our revenue consists of both services provided by our employees and pass-through fees from subcontractors and other direct costs. Our Federal Solutions segment derives revenue primarily from the U.S. federal government and our Critical Infrastructure segment derives revenue primarily from government and commercial customers.
We recognize revenue for work performed under cost-plus, time-and-materials and fixed-price contracts as follows:
Under cost-plus contracts, we are reimbursed for allowable or otherwise defined costs incurred, plus a fee. The contracts may also include incentives for various performance criteria, including quality, timeliness, safety and cost-effectiveness. In addition, costs are generally subject to review by clients and regulatory audit agencies, and such reviews could result in costs being disputed as non-reimbursable under the terms of the contract.
Under time-and-materials contracts, hourly billing rates are negotiated and charged to clients based on the actual time spent on a project. In addition, clients reimburse actual out-of-pocket costs for other direct costs and expenses that are incurred in connection with the performance under the contract.
Under fixed-price contracts, clients pay an agreed fixed-amount negotiated in advance for a specified scope of work.
Refer to “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates” and “Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Polices” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a further description of our policies on revenue recognition.
The table below presents the percentage of total revenue for each type of contract.
The amount of risk and potential reward varies under each type of contract. Under cost-plus contracts, there is limited financial risk, because we are reimbursed for all allowable costs up to a ceiling. However, profit margins on this type of contract tend to be lower than on time-and-materials and fixed-price contracts. Under time-and-materials contracts, we are reimbursed for the hours worked using the predetermined hourly rates for each labor category. In addition, we are typically reimbursed for other direct contract costs and expenses at cost. We assume financial risk on time-and-materials contracts because our labor costs may exceed the negotiated billing rates. Profit margins on well-managed time-and-materials contracts tend to be higher than profit margins on cost-plus contracts as long as we are able to staff those contracts with people who have an appropriate skill set. Under fixed-price contracts, we are required to deliver the objectives under the contract for a pre-determined price. Compared to time-and-materials and cost-plus contracts, fixed-price contracts generally offer higher profit margin opportunities because we receive the full benefit of any cost savings, but they also generally involve greater financial risk because we bear the risk of any cost overruns. In the aggregate, the contract type mix in our revenue for any given period will affect that period’s profitability. Over time, we have experienced a relatively stable contract mix.
Our recognition of profit on long-term contracts requires the use of assumptions related to transaction price and total cost of completion. Estimates are continually evaluated as work progresses and are revised when necessary. When a change in estimated cost or transaction price is determined to have an impact on contract profit, we record a positive or negative adjustment to revenue.
In 2020, 2019 and 2018, no single contract accounted for more than 5% of our revenue.
Joint Ventures
We conduct a portion of our business through joint ventures or similar partnership arrangements. For the joint ventures we control, we consolidate all the revenues and expenses in our consolidated statements of income (including revenues and expenses attributable to noncontrolling interests). For the joint ventures we do not control, we recognize equity in earnings of unconsolidated joint ventures. Our revenues included $172.2 million in 2020, $157.3 million in 2019, and $144.7 million in 2018 related to services we provided to our unconsolidated joint ventures.
Operating costs and expenses
Operating costs and expenses primarily include direct costs of contracts and indirect, general and administrative expenses. Costs associated with compensation-related expenses for our people and facilities, which includes ESOP contribution expenses, are the most significant component of our operating expenses. In 2020, 2019 and 2018, we made annual contributions to the ESOP in the amount of 8% of the participants’ cash compensation for the applicable year. Total ESOP contribution expense was $55.3 million for 2020, $53.6 million for fiscal 2019, and $45.2 million for fiscal 2018, and is recorded in “Direct cost of contracts” and “Indirect, general and administrative expenses.” We expect operating
expenses to increase due to our anticipated growth. However, on a forward-looking basis, we generally expect these costs to decline as a percentage of our total revenue as we realize the benefits of scale.
Direct costs of contracts consist of direct labor and associated fringe benefits, indirect overhead, subcontractor and materials (“pass-through costs”), travel expenses and other expenses incurred to perform on contracts.
Indirect, general and administrative expenses (“IG&A”) include salaries and wages and fringe benefits of our employees not performing work directly for customers, facility costs and other costs related to these indirect functions.
Other income and expenses
Other income and expenses primarily consist of interest income, interest expense, other income, net and interest and other expense associated with claim on long-term contract.
Interest income primarily consists of interest earned on U.S. government money market funds.
Interest expense consists of interest expense incurred under our Senior Notes, Convertible Senior Notes, and Credit Agreement.
Other income, net primarily consists of gain or loss on sale of assets, sublease income and transaction gain or loss related to movements in foreign currency exchange rates.
Included in other income and expenses in 2018 are amounts related to the settlement of a lawsuit in favor of a joint venture in which the Company was the managing partner. With regard to the lawsuit, during the second half of fiscal 2013, a California state court issued a number of preliminary judgments with the final judgment being rendered in early fiscal 2014 in favor of the plaintiff in a lawsuit against the joint venture. We recorded a loss of $98.8 million for fiscal 2013 as a result of these judgments, which included the reversal of $55.1 million in previously recognized revenue. Post-judgment interest was accrued through May 2018 when a total of $133.1 million was accrued in “Provision for contract losses of consolidated joint ventures” on our consolidated balance sheet. On February 28, 2018, the California Court of Appeals vacated the judgement, and in doing so, the appellate court remanded the case to the trial court for the sole purpose of entering a new and final judgement in our favor. On April 9, 2018, the appellate court ruling was appealed by the counterparty to the California Supreme Court. On June 13, 2018, the California Supreme Court denied the counterparty’s appeal. As a result, in the second quarter of 2018 we reversed $133.1 million accrued in “Provision for contract losses on consolidated joint ventures” on our consolidated balance sheet, resulting in a net gain of $129.7 million on our consolidated statements of income, of which $55.1 million was recorded as an increase in revenue with the remainder recorded as other income.
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019
The following table sets forth our results of operations for fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019 as a percentage of revenue.
Revenue
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year decreased $35.9 million. This decrease was primarily due to a decrease in revenue in our Critical Infrastructure segment of $59.9 million partially offset by an increase in our Federal Solutions segment of $24.0 million. See “-Segment Results” below for further discussion.
Direct costs of contracts
Direct cost of contracts decreased in 2020 primarily due to a decrease of $86.4 million in our Critical Infrastructure segment. The decrease was primarily attributable to decrease in business volume on contracts with significant pass-through costs and cost reductions.
Equity in earnings of unconsolidated joint ventures
Equity in earnings of unconsolidated joint ventures decreased in fiscal 2020 primarily due to a $15.5 million write-down on a project in the Critical Infrastructure segment during 2020, offset in part by increases associated with the timing of the completion of joint ventures and the starting of new joint ventures as part of ordinary course timing fluctuations in our business.
Indirect, general and administrative expenses
The decrease in IG&A expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 as compared to December 31, 2019 relates primarily to a decline in compensation cost associated with equity-based awards that settle primarily in cash. The compensation cost associated with these awards totaled $9.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $65.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Cash settled awards are remeasured to an updated fair value at each reporting period until the award is settled. Compensation cost is trued-up at each reporting period for changes in fair value pro-rated for the portion of the requisite service period rendered.
The significant decrease in compensation cost related to these cash settled equity-based awards for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019 is due primarily to lower share prices over the last 60 trading days of 2020 as compared to the comparable period in 2019, as well as the higher grant price of active awards in 2020. The substantial compensation cost for the year ended December 31, 2019 was due to the significant difference in the fair value of a share of our common stock under Parsons ESOP valuation at December 31, 2018 compared to the fair value of a share of our common stock in the public market at December 31, 2019. See Item 5 of Part II for ranges in the share price of our common stock since the consummation of the IPO and “Note 19-Fair Value of Financial Instruments” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of how the ESOP share value was determined. See “Note 1-Description of Operations” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more detail regarding our IPO. The plans in which these awards were granted have been frozen and the Company does not currently intend to grant any further cash settled equity-based awards.
Excluding the compensation costs discussed above, IG&A for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 was $719.3 million and $715.7 million, respectively.
The increase in IG&A of $3.6 million, exclusive of equity compensation cost, was primarily due to additional expenses of $23.8 million associated with business acquisitions, $3.9 million due to a tax law change and $5.0 million related to strategic growth initiatives and public company operating costs. These increases were partially offset by a $18.4 million reduction in transaction-related costs related primarily to our initial public offering in 2019, and a $10.1 million reduction in intangible asset amortization.
Total other (expense) income
Interest expense decreased in 2020 primarily due a decrease in interest rates year-over-year. The amounts in other income (expense), net, are primarily related to transaction gains and losses on foreign currency transactions and sublease income.
Income tax expense
Income tax expense increased in fiscal 2020 primarily due to the nonrecurring tax items included in 2019 for tax benefits associated with the remeasurement of our net deferred tax assets as a result of our conversion from “S” Corporation to a “C” Corporation.
Our effective tax rate was 26.3% and income tax expense was $42.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. As described in “Note 14 - Income Taxes,” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, in connection with our IPO on May 8, 2019, we converted from an “S” Corporation to a “C” Corporation. On a pro forma basis, if we had been taxed as a “C” Corporation for the year ended December 31, 2019, the pro forma effective tax rate would have been 36.9%, and our pro forma income tax expense would have been $24.8 million. The most significant items contributing to the change in the effective tax rate relates to a change in jurisdictional earnings, federal research tax credits and a nonrecurring item included in 2019 associated with equity compensation. The difference between the statutory U.S. federal income tax rate of 21% and the effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily relates to state income taxes and a recorded valuation allowance on foreign tax credits, partially offset by benefits related to income attributable to noncontrolling interest and federal research tax credits.
The termination of the “S” Corporation status was treated as a change in tax status for Accounting Standards Codification 740, Income Taxes. These rules require that the deferred tax effects of a change in tax status to be recorded to income from continuing operations on the date the “S” Corporation status terminates. At December 31, 2019, the Company had recorded a deferred tax benefit of $93.9 million for the estimated effect of the change in tax status, relating to the recognition of net deferred tax assets for temporary differences in existence on the date of conversion to a “C” Corporation. This estimated amount was adjusted to $90.0 million upon filing of the 2019 tax returns. This adjustment is included in income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Year ended December 31, 2019 compared to year ended December 31, 2018
The following table sets forth our results of operations for 2019 and 2018 as a percentage of revenue.
Revenue
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2018 included $55.1 million related to the settlement of a claim that was resolved in favor of the Company on June 13, 2018, in our Critical Infrastructure segment. See “Results of Operations-Other income and expenses” above for a description of this matter. Excluding the claim settlement, revenue increased $449.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 when compared to the prior year, primarily due to an increase in revenue in our Federal Solutions segment of $408.9 million and an increase in our Critical Infrastructure segment of $40.5 million. See “-Segment Results” below for further discussion.
Direct costs of contracts
Direct cost of contracts increased in fiscal 2019 primarily due to an increase of $289.6 million in our Federal Solutions segment and an increase of $38.5 million in our Critical Infrastructure segment. The increase in our Federal Solutions segment was due primarily to business acquisitions, which added $239.4 million, and $50.2 million from an increase in business volume on existing contracts, offset by the completion of a significant contract. The change in our Critical Infrastructure segment was primarily due to an increase in business volume on existing contracts, along with normal course fluctuations in the winding down and starting up of contracts.
Equity in earnings of unconsolidated joint ventures
Equity in earnings of unconsolidated joint ventures increased in fiscal 2019 primarily due to increased activity under a number of the Company’s existing joint ventures, offset by the completion of a significant joint venture during the year.
Indirect, general and administrative expenses
IG&A for the years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018 include $65.7 million and $16.5 million, respectively, of compensation cost related to equity-based awards that primarily settle in cash. Cash settled awards are remeasured to an updated fair value at each reporting period until the award is settled. Compensation cost is trued-up at each reporting period for changes in fair value pro-rated for the portion of the requisite service period rendered.
The significant increase in compensation cost related to these cash settled equity-based awards for the year ended December 31, 2019 is due to the significant difference in the fair value of a share of our common stock under Parsons ESOP valuation at December 31, 2018 compared to the fair value of a
share of our common stock in the public market at December 31, 2019. See Item 5 of Part II for ranges in the share price of our common stock since the consummation of the IPO and “Note 19-Fair Value of Financial Instruments” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of how the ESOP share value is determined. See “Note 1-Description of Operations” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more detail regarding our IPO. The plans in which these awards were granted have been frozen and the Company does not currently intend to grant any further cash settled equity-based awards.
Excluding the compensation costs discussed above, IG&A for the years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018 were $715.7 million and $580.9 million, respectively.
The increase in IG&A of $134.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 when compared to the prior year was primarily due to our Federal Solutions segment, most of which is related to additional expenses of $47.8 million from business acquisitions, $50.9 million from the amortization of intangible assets related to our acquisitions and $11.2 million in acquisition-related expenses. The remaining increase of $24.9 million is related to additional bid and proposal costs and an increase in corporate functional group costs.
Total other income (expense)
Interest income is related to interest earned on cash balances held. Interest expense is primarily due to debt related to our business acquisitions. During the year ended December 31, 2019, our term loan of $150 million was paid off and the amount of debt outstanding under our revolving credit facility was reduced. The amounts in other income (expense), net are primarily related to transaction gains and losses on foreign currency transactions and sublease income.
The amount presented in gain associated with claim on long-term contract for the year ended December 31, 2018 relates to a lawsuit against a joint venture in which we are the managing partner. See “Results of Operations-Other income and expenses” above for a description of this matter, which was resolved in favor of the company on June 13, 2018.
Income tax expense benefit
Income tax expense decreased in fiscal 2019 primarily due to the revaluation of our deferred tax assets and liabilities as a result of our conversion from “S” Corporation to a “C” Corporation, partially offset by the impact of the increase in overall pre-tax earnings subject to taxation as a result of our conversion to a “C” Corporation.
As described in “Note 14 - Income Taxes,” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, in connection with our IPO on May 8, 2019, we converted from an “S” Corporation to a “C” Corporation. On a pro forma basis, if we had been taxed as a “C” Corporation for the years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018, the pro forma effective
tax rate would have been 36.89% and 28.77%, respectively, and our pro forma income tax expense would have been $24.8 million and $74.8 million, respectively. The most significant item contributing to the change in the effective tax rate relates to a change in jurisdictional earnings. The difference between the statutory U.S. federal income tax rate of 21% and the effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily relates to foreign earnings which are subject to foreign income taxes at rates that exceed the U.S. income tax rate.
The termination of the “S” Corporation status was treated as a change in tax status for Accounting Standards Codification 740, Income Taxes. These rules require that the deferred tax effects of a change in tax status to be recorded to income from continuing operations on the date the “S” Corporation status terminates. Through the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded a deferred tax benefit of $93.9 million for the estimated effect of the change in tax status, relating to the recognition of net deferred tax assets for temporary differences in existence on the date of conversion to a “C” Corporation.
Segment Results
We evaluate segment operating performance using segment revenue and segment Adjusted EBITDA attributable to Parsons Corporation. Adjusted EBITDA attributable to Parsons Corporation is Adjusted EBITDA excluding Adjusted EBITDA attributable to noncontrolling interests. See “Selected Financial Data” for a discussion of our definition of Adjusted EBITDA, how we use this metric, why we present this metric and the material limitations on the usefulness of this metric. See “Note 21-Segments Information” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion regarding our segment Adjusted EBITDA attributable to Parsons Corporation.
The following table shows Adjusted EBITDA attributable to Parsons Corporation for each of our reportable segments and Adjusted EBITDA attributable to noncontrolling interests:
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019
Federal Solutions
The increase in Federal Solutions revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the corresponding period last year was primarily due to incremental revenue from business acquisitions, which added $27.7 million.
The decrease in Federal Solutions Adjusted EBITDA attributable to Parsons Corporation for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year was primarily due to an increase in IG&A, partially offset by an increase in business volume from business acquisitions and higher project margins.
Critical Infrastructure
The decrease in revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the corresponding period last year was primarily related to a decrease in business volume on contracts with pass-through revenue, along with normal course net fluctuations in the winding down and starting up of contracts.
The increase in Critical Infrastructure Adjusted EBITDA attributable to Parsons for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the corresponding period last year was primarily due to improved project margins offset in part by a decrease in equity in earnings.
Year ended December 31, 2019 compared to year ended December 31, 2018
Federal Solutions
The increase in Federal Solutions revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the previous year was primarily due to incremental revenue from business acquisitions, which added $317.4 million. Federal Solutions organic revenue grew $91.5 million, which included significant incentive fee recognition and an increase in business volume on existing contracts, offset by the completion of a significant contract.
The increase in Federal Solutions Adjusted EBITDA attributable to Parsons Corporation for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the previous year was primarily due to business acquisitions, an increase in business volume on existing contracts, and generally higher profit margins driven by significant incentive fee recognition. These increases were partially offset by an increase in IG&A, driven by an increase in bid and proposal costs and a greater allocation of corporate IG&A in line with the segment’s growing share of overall business, as well as the completion of a significant contract.
Critical Infrastructure
As discussed above, Critical Infrastructure revenue for the year ended December 31, 2018 included $55.1 million related to the settlement of a claim that was resolved in favor of the Company. Excluding the claim settlement, revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the previous year increased $44.2 million. This increase in revenue was primarily related to an increase in business volume under existing contracts, along with normal course fluctuations in the winding down and starting up of contracts.
The increase in Critical Infrastructure Adjusted EBITDA attributable to Parsons for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the previous year was primarily due to an increase in business volume, a decrease in IG&A, primarily due to a lower allocation of corporate IG&A in line with the segment’s share of overall business, and an increase in equity in earnings of unconsolidated joint ventures.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We currently finance our operations and capital expenditures through a combination of internally generated cash from operations, our Senior Notes, Convertible Senior Notes, and periodic borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility. Prior to November 3, 2019, we financed our operations, capital expenditures and redemptions of ESOP through a combination of internally generated cash from operations, our Senior Notes, and periodic borrowings under our Revolving Credit facility. After November 3, 2019, all shares held by the ESOP are redeemable by participants in shares of our common stock once vesting and eligibility requirements have been met. See “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates” elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of the ESOP and related IPO matters.
Generally, cash provided by operating activities has been adequate to fund our operations. Due to fluctuations in our cash flows and growth in our operations, it may be necessary from time to time in the future to borrow under our Credit Agreement to meet cash demands. Our management regularly monitors certain liquidity measures to monitor performance. We calculate our available liquidity as a sum of cash and cash equivalents from our consolidated balance sheet plus the amount available and unutilized on our Credit Agreement.
There are likely to be certain impacts in our ability to collect accounts receivable as a result of the economic impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic. Accounts receivable reflect amounts due from both commercial and government customers. Our commercial customers are comprised principally of large, well-known and well-established companies. Our government customers are comprised principally of national, state and local agencies in the U.S. and Middle East. We have not seen and do not expect there to be a material risk of non-payment from either our government agency or commercial customers. We have experienced payment delays due to administrative limitations from both types of customers.
We believe we have adequate liquidity and capital resources to fund our operations, support our debt service and support our ongoing acquisition strategy for at least the next twelve months based on the liquidity from cash provided by our operating activities, cash and cash equivalents on-hand and our borrowing capacity under our Revolving Credit Facility. We do not anticipate that the COVID-19 pandemic-related economic impacts will impair our ability to continue to maintain compliance with its debt covenants or access available borrowing capacity from our banks.
Cash Flows
Cash received from customers, either from the payment of invoices for work performed or for advances in excess of revenue recognized, is our primary source of cash. We generally do not begin work on contracts until funding is appropriated by the customers. Billing timetables and payment terms on our contracts vary based on a number of factors, including whether the contract type is cost-plus, time-and-materials, or fixed-price. We generally bill and collect cash more frequently under cost-plus and time-and-materials contracts, as we are authorized to bill as the costs are incurred or work is performed. In contrast, we may be limited to bill certain fixed-price contracts only when specified milestones, including deliveries, are achieved. A number of our contracts may provide for performance-based payments, which allow us to bill and collect cash prior to completing the work.
Billed accounts receivable represents amounts billed to clients that have not been collected. Unbilled accounts receivable represents amounts where the Company has a present contractual right to bill but an invoice has not been issued to the customer at the period-end date.
Accounts receivable is the principal component of our working capital and is generally driven by revenue growth. Accounts receivable includes billed and unbilled amounts. The total amount of our accounts receivable can vary significantly over time, but is generally sensitive to revenue levels. We experience delays in collections from time to time from Middle East customers. Net days sales outstanding, which we refer to as net DSO, is calculated by dividing (i) accounts receivable (net of project accruals, billings in excess of revenue and accounts payable) by (ii) average revenue per day (calculated by dividing trailing twelve months revenue by the number of days in that period). We focus on collecting outstanding receivables to reduce Net DSO and working capital. Net DSO was 64 days at December 31, 2020, 55 days at December 31, 2019 and 52 days at December 31, 2018. Our working capital (current assets less current liabilities) was $705.7 million at December 31, 2020, $382.0 million at December 31, 2019 and $482.6 million at December 31, 2018.
Our cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash increased by $206.0 million to $487.2 million at December 31, 2020 from $195.4 million at December 31, 2019. This compares to a decrease in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash of $85.8 million to $195.4 million at December 31, 2019 from $281.2 million at December 31, 2018.
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash over the periods presented (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities consists primarily of net income adjusted for noncash items, such as: equity in earnings of unconsolidated joint ventures, contributions of treasury stock, depreciation and amortization of property and equipment and intangible assets, provisions for doubtful accounts, amortization of deferred gains, and impairment charges. The timing between the conversion of our billed and unbilled receivables into cash from our customers and disbursements to our employees and vendors is the primary driver of changes in our working capital. Our operating cash flows are primarily affected by our ability to invoice and collect from our clients in a timely manner, our ability to manage our vendor payments and the overall profitability of our contracts.
Net cash provided by operating activities increased $68.9 million to $289.2 million during 2020 compared to $220.2 million during 2019. The increase in net cash provided by operating activities is primarily due to a $115.9 million change in net income after adjusting for non-cash items and a change in the use of cash related to our working capital accounts of $10.6 million (primarily from accounts receivable, contract assets, prepaid expenses and current assets, offset by accrued expenses and contract liabilities). Under the CARES Act, the Company received a net cash benefit of $35.2 million from the deferral of social security taxes otherwise due from April 10, 2020 through the year ended December 31, 2020. One-half of the deferred amount is due no later than December 31, 2021 and the second half no later than December 31, 2022. These positive changes in operating cash flows were offset, in part, by a $57.6 million change in other long-term liabilities, primarily driven by the payment of long-term employee incentives. Net DSOs increased from 55 days to 64 days primarily driven by the change in our working capital accounts discussed above.
Net cash provided by operating activities decreased $64.4 million to $220.2 million during 2019 compared to $284.6 million during 2018. The decrease in net cash provided by operating activities is primarily due to a change in the use of cash related to our working capital accounts of $64.1 million (primarily driven by growth in accounts receivable and contract assets net of contract liabilities), and a $8.8 million change in net income after adjusting for non-cash items. These negative changes in operating cash flows were offset, in part, by a $8.6 million change in other long-term liabilities, primarily related to our insurance reserves. Net DSOs increased from 52 days to 55 days primarily driven by the change in our working capital accounts discussed above.
In connection with our IPO on May 8, 2019, the Company converted from an “S” Corporation to a “C” Corporation as described in “Note 14 - Income Taxes” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. As a “C” Corporation we are now subject to U.S. Income Taxes. During 2019 the Company made $60.5 million in tax payments compared with $17.1 million in tax payments during 2018.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities consists primarily of cash flows associated with capital expenditures and business acquisitions.
Net cash used in investing activities decreased $224.4 million during 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to the use of $287.5 million, net of cash acquired, for the acquisition of OGSystems and the use of $208.2 million, net of cash acquired, for the acquisition of QRC Technologies in 2019, compared to $302.4 million, net of cash acquired, for the acquisition of Braxton in 2020.
Net cash used in investing activities increased $67.5 million during 2019 compared to 2018, primarily due to an increase in cash used for capital expenditures of $38.3 million, principally related to our office space, investments in unconsolidated joint ventures of $19.9 million, and payments for acquisitions, net of cash acquired of $13.7 million.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities is primarily associated with proceeds from debt, the repayment thereof, distributions to noncontrolling interests and payments to the ESOP in connection with the redemption of ESOP participants’ interests prior to the 180-day lock-up period which ended November 3, 2019. We spent $0 in 2020, $6.3 million in 2019, and $125.8 million in 2018 in connection with the redemption of ESOP participants’ interests. With a public market for our common stock, cash is no longer required for ESOP redemptions after November 3, 2019. Participants now receive distributions of their ESOP interests in shares of our common stock.
Net cash provided by financing activities increased $82.2 million to $348.2 million in 2020 compared to $266.0 million in 2019. 2020 activities include $348.5 million of net proceeds from the issuance of Convertible Senior Notes. 2019 activities are primarily comprised of $536.9 million of net proceeds from the IPO, offset in part by net repayments under our revolving credit agreement of $180 million and payment of the IPO dividend of $52.1 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities increased $210.6 million in 2019 compared to 2018, primarily due to $536.9 million of net proceeds from the IPO and a reduction of $119.5 million in the purchases of treasury stock related to redemptions of ESOP interests in 2019. These changes in cash flow provided by financing activities were offset, in part, by a change in net repayments under our revolving credit agreement of $360.0 million, payment of the IPO dividend of $52.1 million, an increase of $23.4 million in distributions to noncontrolling interests and a decrease of $10.6 million in contributions by noncontrolling interests.
Letters of Credit
We also have in place several secondary bank credit lines for issuing letters of credit, principally for foreign contracts, to support performance and completion guarantees. Letters of credit commitments outstanding under these bank lines aggregated $193.1 million as of December 31, 2020. Letters of credit outstanding under the Credit Agreement total $44.9 million.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations that require us to make future cash payments as of December 31, 2020. For contractual obligations, we included payments that we have an unconditional obligation to make.
(1)
Consists of our principal and interest obligations under Senior Notes. See “Note 12-Debt and Credit Facilities” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding our debt and related matters.
(2)
In August 2020, the Company issued an aggregate $400.0 million of 0.25% Convertible Senior Notes due 2025, unless earlier converted, redeemed, or repurchased. Contractual obligation consists of principal and interest. See “Note 12-Debt and Credit Facilities” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding our debt and related matters.
In the normal course of business, we enter into agreements with subcontractors and vendors to provide products and services that we consume in our operations or that are delivered to our clients. These products and services are not considered unconditional obligations until the products and services are actually delivered, at which time, we record a liability for our obligation.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our significant accounting policies are described in “Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Management makes estimates and judgments in preparing our consolidated financial statements. These estimates and judgments affect the reported amounts of certain assets and liabilities and the revenues and expenses reported for the periods presented in the consolidated financial statements. Although such estimates and assumptions are based on information available through the date of the issuance of our consolidated financial statements, actual results could differ significantly from those estimates and assumptions. Our estimates, judgments and assumptions are evaluated periodically and adjusted accordingly.
We believe that the following items are the most critical accounting policies and estimates that involved significant judgment as we prepared our financial statements. We consider an accounting policy or estimate to be critical if the policy or estimate requires assumptions to be made that were uncertain at the time they were made and if changes in these assumptions could have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations.
Revenue Recognition and Cost Estimation
On December 30, 2017, the Company adopted Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, (“ASC 606”), using the modified retrospective method, which provides for a cumulative effect adjustment to retained earnings beginning in fiscal 2018 for those uncompleted contracts impacted by the adoption of the new standard. The difference between the recognition criteria under ASC-606 and our previous recognition practices under ASC 605-35 was recognized through a cumulative adjustment of $4.7 million that was made to the opening balance of accumulated deficit as of December 30, 2017. The cumulative effect of adopting ASC 606 was primarily due to combining certain deliverables that were previously considered separate deliverables into a single performance obligation and the transition of certain cost-type contracts into the cost-to-cost measure of progress method. Consistent with the modified retrospective transition approach, the comparative fiscal 2017 period was not adjusted to conform to the current period presentation. The following are the significant policies and practices as applied to our business.
In our industry, recognition of revenue and profit on long-term contracts requires the use of assumptions and estimates related to total contract revenue, total cost at completion, and the measurement of progress towards completion. Estimates are continually evaluated as work progresses and are revised when necessary. When a change in estimate is determined to have an impact on contract revenue or profit, we record a positive or negative adjustment to the consolidated statements of income.
A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer and is the unit of account in ASC 606. The transaction price of a contract is allocated to each distinct performance obligation and recognized as revenue when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied. To the extent a contract is deemed to have multiple performance obligations, we allocate the transaction price of the contract to each performance obligation using our best estimate of the standalone selling price of each distinct good or service in the contract. We determine the relative standalone selling price utilizing observable prices for the sale of the underlying goods or services. Contracts are considered to have a single performance obligation if the promise to transfer the individual goods or services is not separately identifiable from other promises in the contracts or is not distinct in the context of the contract, which is mainly because we provide a significant service of integrating a complex set of tasks and components into a single project or capability. Engineering and construction contracts are generally accounted for as a single performance obligation, while our engineering and construction supervision contracts are accounted for as two separate performance obligations. When providing construction supervision services, we are not liable for the construction of the asset, but have an overall responsibility to oversee, coordinate, measure, and evaluate the quality of construction work and the performance of the construction contractor on behalf of the customer. Customers are generally billed as we satisfy our performance obligations and payment terms typically range from 30 to 120 days from the invoice date. Billings under certain fixed-price contracts may be based upon the achievement of specified milestones, while some arrangements may require advance customer payment. Our contracts generally do not include a significant financing component.
The transaction price for our contracts may include variable consideration, which includes increases to the transaction price for approved and unpriced change orders, claims and incentives, and reductions to transaction price for liquidated damages. We recognize adjustments in estimated profit on contracts under the cumulative catch-up method. Under this method, the impact of the adjustment on profit recorded to-date is recognized in the period the adjustment is identified. If at any time the estimate of contract profitability indicates an anticipated loss on the contract, we recognize the total loss in the quarter it is identified.
Claims revenue is related to amounts in excess of agreed contract price that we seek to collect from clients or others for customer-caused delays, errors in specifications and designs, contract terminations, change orders that are either in dispute or are unapproved as to both price and scope, or other causes of unanticipated additional contract costs, including factors outside of our control, where we therefore believe we are entitled to additional compensation. Claims revenue, when recorded, is only recorded to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur. We include certain unapproved claims in the transaction price when the claims are legally enforceable, we consider collection to be probable and believe we can reliably estimate the ultimate value. We continue to engage in negotiations with our customers on our outstanding claims. However, these claims may be resolved at amounts that differ from our current estimates, which could result in increases or decreases in future estimated contract profits or losses. Costs related to claims are recognized when they are incurred.
Change orders, which are a normal and recurring part of our business, are generally not distinct and are accounted for as part of the existing contract. The effect of a change order that is not distinct on the transaction price and our measure of progress for the performance obligation to which it relates is recognized on a cumulative catch-up basis. To the extent change orders included in the transaction price are not resolved in our favor, there could be reductions in, or reversals of previously reported amounts of, revenues and profits, and charges against current earnings. Costs relating to change orders are recognized when they are incurred.
We recognize revenue for most of our contracts over time as performance obligations are satisfied, as we are continuously transferring control to the customer. Typically, revenue is recognized over time using an input measure (i.e., costs incurred to date relative to total estimated costs at completion) to measure progress.
We often enter into contracts in which the amount billed to the customer corresponds directly with the amount of work performed. These contract types qualify for the “right to invoice” practical expedient method of measuring progress, in which the right to consideration corresponds directly with the value to the customer of our performance to date. For these contracts, revenue is recognized in the amount that we have the right to invoice.
Provisions for anticipated losses on contracts, including those arising from disputes and other contingencies, are recorded in the period such loss becomes known; provisions not ultimately required are released as disputes or contingencies are resolved.
Contract costs include labor and materials, amounts payable to subcontractors, direct overhead costs and equipment expense (primarily depreciation, fuel, maintenance and repairs). All contract costs are recorded as incurred. Changes to estimated contract costs, either due to unexpected events or revisions to management’s initial estimates, for a given project are recognized in the period in which they are determined.
Leases
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-02 “Leases (Topic 842)”, which is a new standard related to leases to increase transparency and comparability among organizations by requiring the recognition of right-of-use (ROU) assets obtained in exchange for lease liabilities on the balance sheet. Most prominent among the changes in the standard is the recognition of ROU assets and lease liabilities by lessees for those leases classified as operating leases. Under the standard, disclosures are required to meet the objective of enabling users of financial statements to assess the amount, timing, and uncertainty of cash flows arising from leases.
The Company elected to adopt the standard, and available practical expedients, effective January 1, 2019. These practical expedients allowed the Company to keep the lease classification assessed under the previous lease accounting standard (ASC 840) without reassessment under the new standard, and allowed all separate lease components, including non-lease components, to be accounted for as a single lease component for all existing leases prior to adoption of the new standard. Furthermore, the Company made an accounting policy election to not recognize a lease liability and ROU asset for leases with lease terms of twelve months or less.
The Company adopted this new standard under the modified retrospective transition approach without adjusting comparative periods in the financial statements, as allowed under Topic 842, and implemented internal controls and key system functionality to enable the preparation of financial information on adoption.
The standard had a material impact on our consolidated balance sheets but did not have an impact on the consolidated income statements. The most significant impact was the recognition of ROU assets and lease liabilities for operating leases, while accounting for finance leases remained substantially unchanged.
As a result of the adoption, we recorded a cumulative-effect adjustment to retained earnings of $52.6 million, net of a deferred tax asset adjustment of $0.7 million, representing the unamortized portion of a deferred gain previously recorded as a sale-leaseback transaction associated with the sale of an office building in 2011. We concluded the transaction resulted in the transfer of control of the office building to the buyer-lessor at market terms and would have qualified as a sale under Topic 842 with gain recognition in the period the sale was recognized.
We determine if an arrangement is a lease at inception. Operating leases are included in operating lease ROU assets and current and long-term operating lease liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets. Finance leases are included in other noncurrent assets, accrued expenses and other current liabilities and other long-term liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets.
ROU assets represent our right to use an underlying asset for the lease term and lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Operating lease ROU assets and liabilities are recognized at commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. As most of our leases do not provide an implicit interest rate, incremental borrowing rates are used based on the information available at commencement date in determining the present value of lease payments. The operating lease ROU asset also includes any lease payments made and excludes lease incentives. Lease terms may include options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise that option. Lease expense for operating lease payments is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
We have lease agreements with lease and non-lease components, which are generally accounted for separately. For certain equipment leases, such as vehicles, we account for the lease and non-lease components as a single lease component. Additionally, for certain equipment leases, we apply a portfolio approach to effectively account for the operating lease ROU assets and liabilities.
We have operating and finance leases for corporate and project office spaces, vehicles, heavy machinery and office equipment. Our leases have remaining lease terms of one year to 10 years, some of which may include options to extend the leases for up to five years, and some of which may include options to terminate the leases up to the seventh year.
Business Combinations
The cost of an acquired company is assigned to the tangible and intangible assets purchased and the liabilities assumed on the basis of their fair values at the date of acquisition. The determination of fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires us to make estimates and use valuation techniques when a market value is not readily available. Any excess of purchase price over the fair value of tangible and intangible assets acquired and obligations assumed is allocated to goodwill. Goodwill typically represents the value paid for the assembled workforce and enhancement of our service offerings. Transaction costs associated with business combinations are expensed as incurred. The determination of fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires the Company to make estimates and use valuation techniques when a market value is not readily available. The Company adjusts the preliminary purchase prices allocation, as necessary, during the measurement period of up to one year after the acquisition closing date as the Company obtains more information as to facts and circumstances existing at the acquisition date.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill is not amortized but is subject to an annual impairment test. Interim testing for impairment is performed if indicators of potential impairment exist. For purposes of impairment testing, goodwill is allocated to the applicable reporting units based on the current reporting structure. When evaluating goodwill for impairment, we may decide to first perform a qualitative assessment, or “step zero” impairment test, to determine whether it is more likely than not that impairment has occurred. If we do not perform a qualitative assessment, or if we determine that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of our reporting units exceeds their carrying amounts, we perform a quantitative assessment and calculate the estimated fair value of the respective reporting unit. If the carrying amount of a reporting unit’s goodwill exceeds the fair value of that goodwill, an impairment loss is recognized.
Our decision to perform a qualitative impairment assessment in a given year is influenced by a number of factors, including the significance of the excess of our estimated fair value over carrying value at the last quantitative assessment date, the amount of time in between quantitative fair value assessments, and the date of the applicable acquisitions, if any.
In 2019, we changed the date of its annual goodwill impairment testing from November 30 to October 1. This change results in better alignment of our annual impairment test with our annual budgeting cycle and provides a more reliable measurement using our interim closing processes. The change had no effect on our consolidated financial statements for the current or historical periods.
We perform a goodwill impairment test on an annual basis for each reporting unit that requires certain assumptions and estimates be made regarding industry economic factors and future profitability. For the years ended December 31, 2020, December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018, we performed a quantitative analysis for all of our reporting units. It was determined that the fair value of each of our reporting units substantially exceeded their carrying values. As a result, no goodwill impairments were identified for those periods.
The goodwill impairment test involves determination of the fair value of our reporting units. This process requires significant judgments and estimates, including assumptions about our strategic plans for operations as well as the interpretation of current economic indicators. Development of the present value of future cash flow projections includes assumptions and estimates derived from a review of our expected revenue growth rates, profit margins, business plans, cost of capital and tax rates. We also make certain assumptions about future market conditions, market prices, interest rates and changes in business strategies. Changes in assumptions or estimates could materially affect the determination of the fair value of a reporting unit. This could eliminate the excess of fair value over carrying value of a reporting unit entirely and, in some cases, result in impairment. Such changes in assumptions could be caused by a loss of one or more significant contracts, reductions in government or commercial client spending, or a decline in the demand for our services due to changing economic conditions. In the event that we determine that our goodwill is impaired, we would be required to record a non-cash charge that could result in a material adverse effect on our results of operations or financial position.
We use the Income Approach and Market Approach (Guideline Transaction and Guideline Company Method) to determine the fair value of reporting units. The Income Approach utilizes the discounted cash flow method, which focuses on the expected cash flow of the reporting unit. In applying this approach, the cash flow is calculated for a finite period of years. Beyond the finite period, a terminal value is developed using a sustainable long-term annual growth rate estimate. Then the finite period cash flows and the terminal value are discounted to present value to arrive at an indication of fair value. We utilized internal financial projections through fiscal 2025. The Market Approach utilizes market comparable transactions and comparable companies to calculate the estimated fair value. The guideline company approach focuses on comparing the reporting unit to select reasonably similar (or ”guideline”) publicly traded companies. Under this method, valuation multiples are derived from the median of the operating data of selected guideline companies and applied to the operating data of the reporting unit to arrive at an indicative value. In the similar transactions approach, consideration is given to prices paid in recent transactions that have occurred in the reporting unit's industry or in related industries. For the Federal Solutions reporting unit, only the Guideline Company Method is used as the Federal Solutions reporting unit has gone through multiple acquisitions during the past two years, thus making Guideline Transaction Method difficult to apply. For the Critical Infrastructure reporting unit, both the Guideline Transaction Method and Guideline Company Method are utilized to calculate the estimated fair value. Equal weighing is given to each of the methods used to estimate the fair value of reporting units. Our last review at October 1, 2020 (i.e. the first day of our fourth quarter in fiscal 2020), indicated that we had no impairment of goodwill, and all of our reporting units had estimated fair values that were in excess of their carrying values, including goodwill. We had no reporting units that had estimated fair values that exceeded their carrying values by less than 75%.
Intangible assets with finite lives arise from business acquisitions and are amortized based on the period over which the contractual or economic benefit of the intangible assets are expected to be realized or on a straight-line basis over the useful lives of the underlying assets, ranging from one to ten years. These primarily consist of customer relationships, backlog, and covenants not to compete. We assess the recoverability of the unamortized balance of our intangible assets when indicators of impairment are present based on expected future profitability and undiscounted expected cash flows and their contribution to overall operations. Should the review indicate that the carrying value is not fully recoverable, the excess of the carrying value over the fair value of the intangible assets would be recognized as an impairment loss.
Consolidation of Joint Ventures and Variable Interest Entities
We participate in joint ventures, which include partnerships and partially owned limited liability corporations, to bid, negotiate and complete specific projects. We are required to consolidate these joint ventures if we hold the majority voting interest or if we meet the criteria under the consolidation model as described below.
A variable interest entity, or “VIE”, is an entity with one or more of the following characteristics: (a) the total equity investment at risk is not sufficient to permit the entity to finance its activities without additional financial support; (b) as a group, the holders of the equity investment at risk lack the ability to make certain decisions, the obligation to absorb expected losses or the right to receive expected residual returns; or (c) an equity investor has voting rights that are disproportionate to its economic interest and substantially all of the entity’s activities are on behalf of the investor with disproportionately low voting rights. Our VIEs may be funded through contributions, loans and/or advances from the joint venture partners or by advances and/or letters of credit provided by clients. Certain VIEs are directly governed, managed, operated and administered by the joint venture partners. Others have no employees and, although these entities own and hold the contracts with the clients, the services required by the contracts are typically performed by the joint venture partners or by other subcontractors.
We are required to perform an analysis to determine whether we are the primary beneficiary of our VIEs. We are deemed to be the primary beneficiary of a VIE if we have (i) the power to direct the activities of the VIE that most significantly impact the VIE’s economic performance; and (ii) the obligation to absorb losses or the right to receive benefits that could potentially be significant to the VIE.
Many of the joint ventures we enter into are deemed to be VIEs because they lack sufficient equity to finance the activities of the joint venture. We use a qualitative approach to determine if we are the primary beneficiary of the VIE, which considers factors that indicate a party has the power to direct the activities that most significantly impact the joint venture’s economic performance. In determining whether we are the primary beneficiary of the VIE, significant assumptions and judgments include the following: (1) identifying the significant activities and the parties that have the power to direct them; (2) reviewing the governing board composition and participation ratio; (3) determining the equity, profit and loss ratio; (4) determining the management-sharing ratio; (5) reviewing employment terms, including which joint venture partner provides the project manager; and (6) reviewing the funding and operating agreements. We analyze each joint venture initially to determine if it should be consolidated or unconsolidated into our financial statements:
•
A joint venture is consolidated into our financial statements if we are the primary beneficiary of a VIE or hold the majority of voting interests of a non-VIE (and no significant participative rights are available to the other partners).
•
A joint venture is not consolidated into our financial statements if we are not the primary beneficiary of a VIE, or do not hold the majority of voting interest of a non-VIE.
We account for our unconsolidated joint ventures using the equity method of accounting. Under this method, we recognize our proportionate share of the net earnings of these joint ventures as “Equity in earnings (loss) of unconsolidated joint ventures”. Our maximum exposure to loss as a result of our investments in unconsolidated variable interest entities is typically limited to the aggregate of the carrying value of the investment and future funding commitments in these entities.
ESOP
On May 8, 2019, we consummated the IPO. At the IPO date, shares held by the ESOP were subject to a 180-day lock-up period which concluded on November 3, 2019.
We contribute shares of our own stock to the ESOP each year. Shares held by the ESOP or committed to be contributed to the ESOP were presented as temporary equity at December 31, 2018 as they included a cash redemption feature that was not solely within our control. At the conclusion of the 180-day lock-up period, ESOP distributions are no longer made in cash and are now made in shares of
our common stock. Accordingly, at December 31, 2019, shares held by the ESOP were reclassified from temporary equity to permanent equity.
Throughout the year, as employee services are rendered, we record compensation expense based on salaries of eligible employees. Contributions of our common stock to the ESOP are made annually in amounts determined by our board of directors and are held in trust for the sole benefit of the participants. Shares allocated to a participant’s account are fully vested after three years of credited service, or in the event(s) of reaching age 65, death or disability while an active employee.
A participant’s interest in their ESOP account is redeemable upon certain events, including retirement, death, termination due to permanent disability, a severe financial hardship following termination of employment, certain conflicts of interest following termination of employment, or the exercise of diversification rights. Prior to the IPO, participants’ interests were redeemable in cash based on share prices established by the ESOP Trustee. Subsequent to the IPO and during the 180-day lock-up period, participants’ interests were redeemable in cash based on quoted prices of a share of our common stock on the NYSE. Subsequent to the 180-day lock-up period, distributions from the ESOP of participants’ interests are made in our common stock based on quoted prices of a share of our common stock on the NYSE. A participant will be able to sell such shares of common stock in the market, subject to any requirements of the federal securities laws.
Valuation of Common Stock
Prior to our IPO, our share price was determined using a combination of income- and market-based methods that utilized unobservable Level 3 inputs, including significant assumptions such as forecasted revenue and operating margins, working capital requirements and weighted average cost of capital. Given the absence of a public trading market for our common stock, for all purposes related to the fair market value of our common stock, we historically used the per share price of our common stock as established by the ESOP Trustee, taking into account, among other things, the advice of a third-party valuation consultant for the ESOP Trustee, as well as the ESOP Trustee’s knowledge of the Company as of December 31 for each calendar year. Subsequent to the IPO, the share price is based on quoted prices of the Company’s common stock on the NYSE.
Equity-Based Compensation
We measures the value of services received from employees and directors in exchange for an equity-based award based on the grant date fair value. We issue equity-based awards that settle in shares of our common stock. Prior to the IPO, we issued equity-based awards that settle in cash. Cash settled awards are subsequently remeasured to an updated fair value at each reporting period until the award is settled. Awards containing performance measures are adjusted at each reporting period for the number of shares expected to be earned. Compensation cost for cash settled and performance awards are trued-up at each reporting period for changes in fair value and expected shares pro-rated for the portion of the requisite service period rendered. We recognize compensation costs for these awards on either a straight-line or accelerated basis over the vesting period of the award in “Indirect, general and administrative expenses” in the consolidated statements of income.
Self-Insurance
We are self-insured for a portion of our losses and liabilities primarily associated with workers’ compensation, general, professional, automobile, employee matters, certain medical plans, and project specific liability claims. Losses are accrued based upon our estimates of the aggregate liability for claims incurred using historical experience and certain actuarial assumptions, as provided by an independent actuary. The estimate of self-insurance liability includes an estimate of incurred but not reported claims, based on data compiled from historical experience.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See the information set forth in “Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a material current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenue or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Commitments and Contingencies
We are subject to certain claims and assessments that arise in the ordinary course of business. Additionally, Parsons has been named as a defendant in lawsuits alleging personal injuries as a result of contact with asbestos products at various project sites. We believe that any significant costs relating to these claims will be reimbursed by applicable insurance and do not expect any of these claims to have a material adverse effect on our financial condition or results of operations. We record a liability when we believe that it is both probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated. Management judgment is required to determine the outcome and the estimated amount of a loss related to such matters. Management believes that there are no claims or assessments outstanding which would materially affect our consolidated results of operations or our financial position.