Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Investors should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with the section titled “Selected Consolidated Financial Data” and the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed in the section titled” Risk Factors” and in other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. See also the section titled “Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” in this report. Our fiscal year end is the first Sunday after January 30.
Overview
Data is foundational to our customers' digital transformation and we are focused on delivering innovative and disruptive technology and data storage solutions that enable customers to maximize the value of their data. In our first decade, we completely changed customers' expectations of what they should see from storage arrays and storage vendors, making flash storage widely available to enterprise organizations and revolutionizing the customer experience with our Evergreen Storage subscription model that radically simplified and reduced total cost of storage ownership. Today, we are changing the expectations for data and storage management by providing customers a cloud experience with flexible on-demand data services consumption through delivery of a Modern Data Experience that empowers organizations to run their operations as a true, automated, storage as-a-service model seamlessly across multiple clouds.
Our solutions support a wide range of structured and unstructured data, at scale and across any data workloads on-premise, in the cloud, or hybrid environments and include mission-critical production, test/development, analytics, disaster recovery, and backup/recovery.
Our Modern Data Experience vision begins with our portfolio of products and subscription services that is transforming and modernizing storage operations for our customers. Our Modern Data Experience vision extends to an innovative and highly-integrated data platform of products and subscription services, consisting of Cloud Data Infrastructure (integrated hardware and software appliances which run in on-premise data centers), Cloud Data Services (software services which run natively in major public cloud infrastructures), and Cloud Data Management (software hosted data management services to manage our entire platform).
Revenue Drivers
We generate the majority of our revenues from our Cloud Data Infrastructure, including FlashArray and FlashBlade, and subscription services which primarily includes our Evergreen Storage subscription, Pure as-a-Service (PaaS), and Cloud Block Store.
Portworx Acquisition
In October 2020, we expanded our data services capabilities for containerized, cloud-native applications with the acquisition of Portworx Inc. (Portworx), a privately-held container storage company that provides a Kubernetes data services platform. Cloud-native databases, analytics applications and artificial intelligence (AI) frameworks, such as Cassandra, MongoDB, Postgres, Kafka, Elasticsearch, Spark, and Tensorflow, are the tools upon which customers build their modern data pipelines. By integrating Portworx container data services, which includes storage, data protection, data security and disaster recovery/backup, with our data platforms, this acquisition further enhances our Modern Data Experience by expanding our support for these cloud-native applications on any infrastructure, on-premise or in the cloud environment at any scale.
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
The Coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic, which resulted in authorities implementing preventive measures to contain or mitigate the outbreak of the virus, such as travel bans and restrictions, limitations on business activity, quarantines and shelter-in-place orders continues to have an impact globally. In response to the pandemic, we made some changes to our business at the outset that included instituting a global work-from-home policy beginning in March 2020 that resulted in limited disruptions in our work operations during fiscal 2021. After a brief acceleration of our business from increased demand of mission critical IT needs as customers shifted to work at home and online, we experienced a sharp deceleration as customers assessed both their business prospects and plans for digital transformation. This was then followed by a gradual stabilization in our business during the second half of fiscal 2021 as customers increasingly adapted to the COVID-19 environment. Partially offsetting the headwinds from COVID-19 were reduced operating expenses in the areas of travel and marketing costs. In addition, we effected certain restructuring activities to streamline our operations, such as limited workforce realignments and vacating certain office leases.
We continue to actively monitor, evaluate and respond to developments relating to COVID-19. Since the impact of the pandemic on our operational and financial performance remains highly unpredictable, our past results may not be indicative of future performance. Given the uncertainty, we are unable to predict the full extent and duration of the impact of COVID-19 on customer demand, our global supply chains and our business, operations and financial results. To the extent the pandemic continues to disrupt economic activity globally we, like other businesses, would not be immune at it could adversely affect our business, operations and financial results. See "Risk Factors" in Part I, Item 1A. for additional details.
Change in Fiscal Year End
In September 2019, we adopted a 52/53 week fiscal year consisting of four 13-week quarters ending on the first Sunday after January 30 which for fiscal 2020 was February 2, 2020 and for fiscal 2021 was January 31, 2021. The updated calendar will occasionally include a 14-week fourth quarter, which will first occur in fiscal year 2022, starting on November 1, 2021 and ending on February 6, 2022.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We derive revenue primarily from the sale of our Cloud Data Infrastructure, including FlashArray and FlashBlade products and subscription services which includes our Evergreen Storage subscription, and our unified subscription that includes PaaS and Cloud Block Store. Subscription services also include our professional services offerings such as installation and implementation consulting services.
Provided that all other revenue recognition criteria have been met, we typically recognize product revenue upon transfer of control to our customers and the satisfaction of our performance obligations. Products are typically shipped directly by us to customers, and our channel partners do not stock our inventory. We expect our product revenue may vary from period to period based on, among other things, the timing and size of orders and delivery of products and the impact of significant transactions.
We generally recognize revenue from subscription services ratably over the contractual service period and professional services as delivered. We expect our subscription services revenue to increase and continue to grow faster than our product revenue as more customers choose to consume our technologies as a service and our existing subscription customers renew and expand their consumption and service levels.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of product revenue primarily consists of costs paid to our third-party contract manufacturers, which includes the costs of our raw material components, and personnel costs associated with our manufacturing operations. Personnel costs consist of salaries, bonuses and stock-based compensation expense. Our cost of product revenue also includes allocated overhead costs, inventory write-offs, amortization of intangible assets pertaining to developed technology, and freight. Allocated overhead costs consist of certain employee benefits and facilities-related costs. We expect our cost of product revenue to increase in absolute dollars as our product revenue increases.
Cost of subscription services revenue primarily consists of personnel costs associated with delivering our subscription and professional services, part replacements, allocated overhead costs and depreciation of infrastructure used to deliver our subscription services. We expect our cost of subscription services revenue to increase in absolute dollars, as our subscription services revenue increases.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of research and development, sales and marketing and general and administrative expenses. Salaries and personnel-related costs, including stock-based compensation expense, are the most significant component of each category of operating expenses. Operating expenses also include allocated overhead costs for employee benefits and facilities-related costs.
Research and Development. Research and development expenses consist primarily of employee compensation and related expenses, prototype expenses, depreciation associated with assets acquired for research and development, third-party engineering and contractor support costs, as well as allocated overhead. We expect our research and development expense to increase in absolute dollars and it may decrease as a percentage of revenue.
Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of employee compensation and related expenses, sales commissions, marketing programs, travel and entertainment expenses as well as allocated overhead. Marketing programs consist of advertising, events, corporate communications and brand-building activities. We expect our sales and marketing expense to increase in absolute dollars and it may decrease as a percentage of revenue as we continue to realize efficiencies from scaling our business.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of employee compensation and related expenses for administrative functions including finance, legal, human resources, IT and fees for third-party professional services as well as amortization of intangible assets pertaining to defensive technology patents and allocated overhead. We expect our general and administrative expense to increase in absolute dollars and it may decrease as a percentage of revenue.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of interest income related to cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, interest expense related to our debt and gains (losses) from foreign currency transactions.
Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes consists primarily of income taxes in certain foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business and state income taxes in the United States. We have recorded no U.S. federal current income tax and provided a full valuation allowance for U.S. deferred tax assets, which includes net operating loss carryforwards and tax credits related primarily to research and development. We expect to maintain this full valuation allowance for the foreseeable future as it is more likely than not that the assets will not be realized based on our history of losses.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented in dollars and as a percentage of total revenue (in thousands):
Revenue
Total revenue increased in fiscal 2021 by $40.7 million, or 2%, compared to fiscal 2020. The decrease in product revenue during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 was largely driven by headwinds caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, despite sales growth from our FlashBlade and FlashArray//C offerings and purchases from new customers. Our customer base grew from over 7,500 at the end of fiscal 2020 to over 8,700 at the end of fiscal 2021. The increase in subscription services revenue was primarily driven by increases in sales of our Evergreen Storage subscription services, and our unified subscription that includes PaaS and Cloud Block Store, as well as increased recognition of deferred subscription services revenue contracts.
Total revenue increased in fiscal 2020 by $283.6 million, or 21%, compared to fiscal 2019 despite being adversely impacted by significant accelerated declines in prices of certain key components that we use in our solutions. The increase in product revenue during fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 was driven by multiple factors including increased sales of our new products such as FlashBlade and FlashArray//C, sales of larger FlashArray systems, increases in repeat purchases from existing customers and purchases from new customers. Our customer base grew from over 5,800 at the end of fiscal 2019 to 7,500 at the end of fiscal 2020. The increase in subscription services revenue was primarily driven by increases in sales of our Evergreen Storage subscription services, and our unified subscription that includes PaaS and Cloud Block Store, as well as increased recognition of deferred subscription services revenue contracts.
During fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal 2020, total revenue in the United States grew by 1% from $1,184.9 million to $1,195.4 million and total rest of the world revenue grew by 7% from $458.5 million to $488.8 million. During fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019, total revenue in the United States grew by 21% from $979.5 million to $1,184.9 million and total rest of the world revenue grew by 21% from $380.4 million to $458.5 million. For further details on revenues by geography, see Note 16 of Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Deferred Revenue
Deferred revenue primarily consists of amounts that have been invoiced but have not yet been recognized as revenue and including performance obligations pertaining to subscription services. The current portion of deferred revenue represents the amounts that are expected to be recognized as revenue within one year of the consolidated balance sheet dates.
Changes in total deferred revenue during the periods presented are as follows (in thousands):
Revenue recognized during fiscal 2020 and 2021 from deferred revenue at the beginning of each respective period was $267.0 million and $353.1 million.
Remaining Performance Obligations
Total contracted but not recognized revenue was $1,093.5 million at the end of fiscal 2021. Contracted but not recognized revenue consists of both deferred revenue and non-cancelable amounts that are expected to be invoiced and recognized as revenue in future periods. Orders that are contracted but have not been fulfilled and that can be canceled by customers are excluded from remaining performance obligations. Cancellable orders received and not fulfilled at the end of fiscal 2021 have increased compared to the end of fiscal 2020. Of the $1,093.5 million contracted but not recognized revenue at the end of fiscal 2021, we expect to recognize approximately 43% over the next 12 months, and the remainder thereafter.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Cost of revenue increased by $25.4 million, or 5%, for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. The decrease in product cost of revenue was primarily attributable to the corresponding decline in product revenue due to headwinds caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by increased costs in our manufacturing operations associated with increased headcount and an increase in the amortization of acquired intangible assets. The increase in subscription services cost of revenue was primarily attributable to higher costs in our customer support organization.
The decline in product gross margin for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 was primarily attributable to lower component costs for certain key raw materials that we use for our solutions and increased sales of larger FlashArray systems in fiscal 2020. The increase in subscription services gross margin for both periods was driven by increased renewals in Evergreen Storage subscriptions and increased sales of unified subscription services.
Cost of revenue increased by $52.4 million, or 11%, for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019. The increase in product cost of revenue was primarily driven by increased sales and, to a lesser extent, by the increased costs in our manufacturing operations associated with increased headcount and an increase in the amortization of intangible assets.
Product cost of revenue and product gross margins during fiscal 2020 benefited from significant price reductions for certain key raw materials that we use for our solutions and sales of our larger FlashArray systems. The increase in subscription services cost of revenue was primarily attributable to costs in our customer support organization as this business grows.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expense increased by $46.8 million, or 11%, during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020, as we continued to innovate and develop technologies to both enhance and expand our solution portfolio. The increase was primarily driven by a $56.5 million increase in employee compensation and related costs, including a $9.6 million increase in stock-based compensation expense. The remainder of the increase was primarily attributable to a $10.1 million increase in outside services expenses, partially offset by a $22.4 million decrease in depreciation expense primarily due to revising our estimated useful lives of test equipment and certain computer equipment and software during fiscal 2021.
Research and development expense increased by $83.7 million, or 24%, during fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019, as we continued to innovate and develop technologies to both enhance and expand our solution portfolio. The increase was primarily driven by a $70.9 million increase in employee compensation and related costs, including a $15.2 million increase in stock-based compensation expense. The remainder of the increase was primarily attributable to a $8.2 million increase in office and facilities related costs, and a $4.4 million increase in outside services expenses.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense decreased by $12.0 million, or 2%, during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020, primarily due to a decrease of $63.0 million in marketing and travel spend as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by an increase of $37.7 million in employee compensation and related costs as we continue to invest in certain areas within sales and marketing and expand our international presence, including an $8.2 million increase in sales commission expense. The remainder of the increase was primarily attributable to a $7.2 million increase in outside services expenses and a $4.2 million increase in subscription costs.
Sales and marketing expense increased by $143.9 million, or 25%, during fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019, as we continue to grow our sales force and expand our international presence. The increase was primarily driven by an increase of $115.5 million in employee compensation and related costs, including a $24.5 million increase in sales commission expense. The remainder of the increase was primarily attributable to a $14.6 million increase in travel related costs, a $9.1 million increase in office and facilities related costs, and a $4.3 million increase in marketing and brand awareness program costs.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense increased by $19.3 million, or 12%, during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. The increase was primarily driven by an increase of $21.4 million in employee compensation and related costs, including a $7.5 million increase in stock-based compensation expense related, in part, to certain performance restricted stock awards, partially offset by a $3.7 million decrease in office and facilities related costs.
General and administrative expense increased by $25.6 million, or 19%, during fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019. The increase was primarily driven by an increase of $11.4 million in employee compensation and related costs. The remainder of the increase was primarily attributable to a $8.0 million increase in office and facilities related costs and an increase of $5.1 million in outside services expenses. The decrease in stock-based compensation was primarily due to lower expense recognized related to certain performance restricted stock awards and increased forfeitures.
Restructuring and Other
During fiscal 2021, we incurred incremental costs of $8.9 million directly related to the COVID-19 pandemic. These costs primarily included the write-off of marketing commitments no longer deemed to have value for the remainder of the fiscal year and estimated non-recoverable costs for internal events that could not be held. In addition, we expensed $9.9 million relating to the cease use of certain lease facilities and recognized $12.2 million in one-time involuntary termination benefit costs related to workforce realignment plans.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net decreased during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily attributable to a decrease in interest income of $9.8 million from our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities resulting from lower interest rate environment and, to a lesser extent, higher interest expense due to borrowings under our revolving line of credit, partially offset by a $6.0 million reduction in net foreign exchange losses.
Other income (expense), net increased during fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 primarily attributable to an increase in interest income of $9.2 million from our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities and a $1.8 million reduction in net foreign exchange losses, partially offset by an increase in interest expense of $6.3 million related to our convertible senior notes (Notes).
Provision for Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes increased during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily attributable to an increase in foreign income taxes and the release of the valuation allowance related to unrealized gains on available-for-sale securities from fiscal 2020.
The provision for income taxes increased during fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 primarily attributable to the fiscal 2019 U.S. valuation allowance release of $3.7 million related to the StorReduce acquisition and higher foreign income taxes during fiscal 2020.
Quarterly Results of Operations
The following sets forth selected unaudited quarterly consolidated statements of operations data for each of the eight quarters in the period ended January 31, 2021, as well as the percentage that each line item represents of our revenue for each quarter. The information for each of these quarters has been prepared on a basis consistent with our audited annual consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report and, in the opinion of management, includes all adjustments of a normal, recurring nature that are necessary for the fair presentation of the results of operations for these periods in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. This data should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report. These historical quarterly operating results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for a full fiscal year or any future period.
_________________________________
(1) Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
(2) Includes expenses related to restructuring and incremental expenses directly related to COVID-19.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At the end of fiscal 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $1,253.5 million. Our cash and cash equivalents primarily consist of bank deposits and money market accounts. Our marketable securities generally consist of highly rated debt instruments of the U.S. government and its agencies, debt instruments of highly rated corporations, debt instruments issued by foreign governments, and asset-backed securities.
We believe our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will be sufficient to fund our operating and capital needs for at least the next 12 months. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors including our sales growth, the timing and extent of spending to support development efforts, the expansion of sales and marketing and international operation activities, the addition or closure of office space, the timing of new product introductions and the continuing market acceptance of our products and services, the volume and timing of our share repurchases, the timing and settlement election of the Notes, and any potential impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business which has resulted in reduced sales and certain of our customers or partners being unable to timely fulfill their payment obligations to us. We may continue to enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services and technologies, including intellectual property rights. For example, we acquired Portworx for $352.9 million in October 2020. We may seek additional equity or debt financing in the future.
Revolving Credit Facility
In August 2020, we entered into a Credit Agreement with a consortium of financial institutions and lenders that provides for a five-year, senior secured revolving credit facility of $300.0 million (Credit Facility). Proceeds from the Credit Facility may be used for general corporate purposes and working capital. The Credit Facility expires, absent default or early termination by us, on the earlier of (i) August 24, 2025 or (ii) 91 days prior to the stated maturity of the convertible senior notes unless, on such date and each subsequent day until the convertible senior notes are paid in full, the sum of our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities and the aggregate unused commitments then available to us exceed $625.0 million. The annual interest rates applicable to loans under the Credit Facility are, at our option, equal to either a base rate plus a margin ranging from 0.50% to 1.25% or LIBOR (based on one, three, or six-month interest periods), subject to a floor of 0%, plus a margin ranging from 1.50% to 2.25%. Interest on revolving loans is payable quarterly in arrears with respect to loans based on the base rate and at the end of an interest period in the case of loans based on LIBOR (or at each three-month interval, if the interest period is longer than three months). We are also required to pay a commitment fee on the unused portion of the commitments ranging from 0.25% to 0.40% per annum, payable quarterly in arrears that commenced on September 30, 2020. Loans under the Credit Facility are collateralized by substantially all of our assets and subject to certain restrictions and two financial ratios measured as of the last day of each fiscal quarter, commencing with the fiscal quarter ending January 31, 2021: a Consolidated Leverage Ratio not to exceed 4.5:1 and an Interest Coverage Ratio not to be less than 3:1.
In September 2020, we drew down $250.0 million under the Credit Facility to fund the acquisition of Portworx which remained outstanding at the end of fiscal 2021. The outstanding loan bore weighted-average interest at the one-month LIBOR of approximately 1.65%. Assuming interest rates remain relatively constant and no repayment, we expect our annual interest expense for the outstanding borrowing under the revolver to be approximately $4.1 million. We were in compliance with all covenants under the Credit Facility at the end of fiscal 2021.
Letters of Credit
At the end of fiscal 2020 and 2021, we had outstanding letters of credit in the aggregate amount of $11.5 million and $6.7 million in connection with our facility leases. The letters of credit are collateralized by restricted cash and mature on various dates through August 2029.
Convertible Senior Notes
In April 2018, we issued $575.0 million of 0.125% convertible senior notes due 2023 (the Notes), in a private placement and received proceeds of $562.1 million, after deducting the underwriters' discounts and commissions. The Notes are unsecured obligations that do not contain any financial covenants or restrictions on the payments of dividends, the incurrence of indebtedness, or the issuance or repurchase of securities by us or any of our subsidiaries. The Notes mature on April 15, 2023 unless repurchased or redeemed by us or converted in accordance with their terms prior to the maturity date. The Notes are convertible for up to 21,884,155 shares of our common stock at an initial conversion rate of approximately 38.0594 shares of common stock per $1,000 principal amount, which is equal to an initial conversion price of approximately $26.27 per share of common stock, subject to adjustment.
Holders may surrender their Notes for conversion at their option at any time prior to the close of business on the business day immediately preceding October 15, 2022, only under specific circumstances. On or after October 15, 2022 until the close of business on the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding the maturity date, holders may convert all or any portion of their Notes at any time regardless of the foregoing conditions. Upon conversion, holders will receive cash, shares of our common stock, or a combination of cash and shares of our common stock, at our election. We intend to settle the principal of the Notes in cash. See further discussion in Note 7 in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
Share Repurchase Program
In August 2019, our board of directors approved a stock repurchase program to repurchase up to $150.0 million of our common stock, which was substantially completed in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021. In February 2021, our board of directors authorized the repurchase of up to an additional $200.0 million of our common stock. The authorization allows us to repurchase shares of our common stock opportunistically and will be funded from available working capital. Repurchases may be made at management’s discretion from time to time on the open market through privately negotiated transactions, transactions structured through investment banking institutions, block purchase techniques, 10b5-1 trading plans, or a combination of the foregoing. The share repurchase program does not obligate us to acquire any of our common stock, has no end date, and may be suspended or discontinued by us at any time without prior notice. During fiscal 2020, we repurchased and retired 867,657 shares of common stock at an average purchase price of $17.29 per share for an aggregate repurchase price of $15.0 million. During fiscal 2021, we repurchased and retired 9,526,556 shares of common stock at an average purchase price of $14.17 per share for an aggregate repurchase price of $135.0 million.
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities during fiscal 2021 was primarily driven by cash collections from sales of our product and subscription services including certain invoices with extended payment terms and deferral of the employer portion of social security payroll tax under the CARES Act, partially offset by payments to our contract manufacturers, employee compensation, and general corporate operating expenditures.
Net cash provided by operating activities during fiscal 2019 and 2020 was primarily driven by cash collections related to the sales of our product and subscription services, partially offset by payments to our contract manufacturers, employee compensation, and general corporate operating expenditures.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities during fiscal 2021 of $418.1 million was driven by net cash paid for our acquisition of Portworx of $339.6 million in October 2020, and capital expenditures of $95.0 million, partially offset by net sales of marketable securities of $21.5 million.
Net cash used in investing activities during fiscal 2020 of $324.7 million resulted from net purchases of marketable securities of $176.3 million, capital expenditures of $87.8 million, and net cash paid for acquisitions of $51.6 million, and intangible assets acquired of $9.0 million.
Net cash used in investing activities during fiscal 2019 of $511.3 million resulted primarily from net purchases of marketable securities of $392.2 million, capital expenditures of $100.2 million and net cash paid for our acquisition of StorReduce of $13.9 million.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of $200.2 million during fiscal 2021 was primarily driven by $251.9 million of net proceeds from borrowings primarily under our revolving line of credit, $59.4 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options, and $32.4 million of proceeds from issuance of common stock under our employee stock purchase plan (ESPP), partially offset by share repurchases of $135.2 million, and $8.3 million in tax withholdings on vesting of equity awards.
Net cash provided by financing activities of $49.2 million during fiscal 2020 was due to $43.3 million of proceeds from issuance of common stock under our ESPP and $42.9 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options, partially offset by repurchases of our common stock for $15.0 million under the share repurchase program, the repayment of $11.6 million of debt assumed in connection with our acquisition of Compuverde, and $10.4 million in tax withholdings on vesting of restricted stock.
Net cash provided by financing activities of $551.9 million during fiscal 2019 was primarily due to $562.1 million of net proceeds from the issuance of the Notes, $47.8 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options and $33.4 million of proceeds from issuance of common stock under our ESPP, partially offset by payment for the purchase of capped calls of $64.6 million, the repurchase of our common stock for $20.0 million in connection with the Notes and the repayment of $6.1 million of debt assumed in connection with our acquisition of StorReduce.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table sets forth our non-cancelable contractual obligations and commitments at the end of fiscal 2021.
_________________________________
(1) Consists of (i) principal and interest payments on our convertible senior notes due 2023, (ii) principal, interest, and unused commitment fees on our August 2020 revolving credit facility based on debt outstanding and rates in effect at January 31, 2021, and (iii) principal and interest on a five year loan.
(2) Represents aggregate future minimum lease payments under non-cancelable operating leases.
(3) Includes primarily non-cancellable inventory purchase commitments, software service and sponsorship contracts, and hosting arrangements.
Purchase orders are not included in the table above as they represent authorizations to purchase rather than binding agreements. The contractual commitment amounts in the table above are associated with agreements that are enforceable and legally binding. Obligations under contracts that we can cancel without a significant penalty are not included in the table above.
In April 2018, we issued $575.0 million of 0.125% convertible senior notes due 2023 in a private placement and received proceeds of $562.1 million, after deducting the underwriters' discounts and commissions. The Notes are unsecured obligations that do not contain any financial covenants or restrictions on the payments of dividends, the incurrence of indebtedness, or the issuance or repurchase of securities by us or any of our subsidiaries. In September 2020, we drew down $250.0 million under a five-year, senior secured $300.0 million revolving credit facility which remained outstanding at the end of fiscal 2021. See further discussion in Note 7 in Part II, Item 8 of this annual report.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Through the end of fiscal 2021, we did not have any relationships with any entities or financial partnerships, such as structured finance or special purpose entities established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other purposes.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses, and related disclosures. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our estimates are based on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ from these estimates.
The critical accounting estimates, assumptions and judgments that we believe have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements are described below.
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue primarily from two sources: (1) product revenue which includes hardware and embedded software and (2) subscription services revenue which includes Evergreen Storage subscriptions, our unified subscription that includes Pure as-a-Service and Cloud Block Store.
Our product revenue is derived from the sale of integrated storage hardware and operating system software. We typically recognize product revenue upon transfer of control to our customers. Products are typically shipped directly by us to customers.
Our subscription services revenue is derived from the services we perform in connection with the sale of subscription services and is recognized ratably over the contractual term, which generally ranges from one to six years. The majority of our product solutions are sold with an Evergreen Storage subscription service agreement, which typically commences upon transfer of control of the corresponding products to our customers. Costs for subscription services are expensed when incurred. In addition, our Evergreen Storage subscription provides our customers with a new controller based upon certain contractual terms. The controller refresh represents a separate performance obligation that is included within the Evergreen Storage subscription service agreement and the allocated revenue is recognized upon shipment of the controller.
Our subscription services also include the right to receive unspecified software updates and upgrades on a when-and-if-available basis, software bug fixes, replacement parts and other services related to the underlying infrastructure, as well as access to our cloud-based management and support platform. We also sell professional services such as installation and implementation consulting services and the related revenue is recognized as services are performed.
We recognize revenue upon the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. This is achieved through applying the following five-step approach:
•Identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer
•Identification of the performance obligations in the contract
•Determination of the transaction price
•Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
•Recognition of revenue when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation
When applying this five-step approach, we apply judgment in determining the customer's ability and intention to pay, which is based on a variety of factors including the customer's historical payment experience and/or published credit and financial information pertaining to the customer. To the extent a customer contract includes multiple promised goods or services, we determine whether promised goods or services should be accounted for as a separate performance obligation. The transaction price is determined based on the consideration which we will be entitled to in exchange for transferring goods or services to the customer. We allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation for contracts that contain multiple performance obligations based on a relative standalone selling price which is determined based on the price at which the performance obligation is sold separately, or if not observable through past transactions, is estimated taking into account available information such as market conditions and internally approved pricing guidelines related to performance obligations.
Business Combinations, Goodwill and Acquisition-Related Intangible Assets
We allocate the purchase price to the intangible and tangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination at their estimated fair values on the date of acquisition, with the excess recorded to goodwill. We use our best estimates and assumptions to assign fair value to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed as well as the useful lives of the acquired intangible assets. Examples of critical estimates in valuing certain intangible assets we have acquired include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows, expected technology life cycle, attrition rates of customers, and discount rates. We estimate the useful lives of each intangible asset based on the expected period over which we anticipate generating economic benefit from the asset. The amounts and useful lives assigned to acquired intangible assets impact the amount and timing of future amortization expense.
While we use our best estimates and assumptions as part of the purchase price allocation process to value assets acquired and liabilities assumed, these estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. As a result, during the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the estimated fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to the consolidated statements of operations.
We use estimates, assumptions, and judgments when assessing the recoverability of goodwill and acquisition-related intangible assets. We test for impairment on an annual basis, or more frequently if a significant event or circumstance indicates the carrying amounts may not be recoverable. We also evaluate the estimated remaining useful lives of acquisition-related intangible assets for changes in circumstances that warrant a revision to the remaining periods of amortization. If the useful life of the intangible asset is shorter than originally estimated, we accelerate the rate of amortization and amortize the remaining carrying value over the new shorter useful life.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to “Recent Accounting Pronouncements” in Note 2 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.