Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion, particularly information with respect to our future results of operations or financial condition, business strategy and plans and objectives of management for future operations, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties as described under the heading “Forward-Looking Statements” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. You should review the disclosure under the heading “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause our actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company dedicated to utilizing our proprietary gene engineering platform technologies to create next generation cell and gene therapeutics with the capacity to cure. We have discovered and are developing a broad portfolio of product candidates in a variety of indications based on our core proprietary platform, including our non-viral piggyBac DNA Delivery System, Cas-CLOVER Site-Specific Gene Editing System and nanoparticle- and AAV-based gene delivery technologies. Our core platform technologies have utility, either alone or in combination, across many cell and gene therapeutic modalities and enable us to engineer our wholly-owned portfolio of product candidates that are designed to overcome the primary limitations of current generation cell and gene therapeutics.
Within cell therapy, we believe our technologies allow us to create product candidates with engineered cells that engraft in the patient’s body and drive lasting durable responses that may have the capacity to result in single treatment cures. Our CAR-T therapy portfolio consists of both autologous and allogeneic, or off-the-shelf, product candidates. We are advancing a broad pipeline with a plan to have multiple CAR-T product candidates in the clinic in 2021 in both hematological and solid tumor oncology indications. Within gene therapy, we believe our technologies have the potential to create next generation therapies that can deliver long-term, stable gene expression that does not diminish over time and that may have the capacity to result in single treatment cures. The following table summarizes our current product candidate portfolio:
We were incorporated in December 2014 and subsequently spun out from Transposagen, a company that has been developing gene engineering technologies since 2003. Since our inception, our operations have focused on organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, in-licensing, developing and acquiring intellectual property rights and establishing and protecting our intellectual property portfolio, developing our gene engineering technologies, identifying potential product candidates and undertaking research and development and manufacturing activities, including preclinical studies and clinical trials of our product candidates, and engaging in
strategic transactions. We do not have any product candidates approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales. We have funded our operations primarily through the sale of equity. Since our inception, we have raised an aggregate of $334.3 million of gross proceeds from the sale of shares of our redeemable convertible preferred stock, received $30.0 million of gross proceeds from borrowings under our loan agreement and received an aggregate of $23.8 million in grant funding from the California Institute of Regenerative Medicine, or CIRM. On July 14, 2020, we completed our IPO pursuant to which we issued and sold 14,000,000 shares of common stock for gross proceeds of $224.0 million. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments of $309.2 million. Since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses and expect to continue to incur significant operating losses for the foreseeable future. Our net losses were $129.8 million and $86.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $281.9 million.
We expect our expenses and losses to increase substantially for the foreseeable future as we continue our development of, and seek regulatory approvals for, our product candidates, including P-BCMA-101 and P-PSMA-101, and begin to commercialize any approved products, as well as hire additional personnel, pay for accounting, audit, legal, regulatory and consulting services, and pay costs associated with maintaining compliance with Nasdaq listing rules and SEC requirements, director and officer insurance, investor and public relations activities and other expenses associated with operating as a public company. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from quarter-to-quarter and year-to-year, depending on the timing of our clinical trials and our expenditures on other research and development activities.
We do not expect to generate any revenues from product sales unless and until we successfully complete development and obtain regulatory approval for P-BCMA-101, P-PSMA-101, or any other product candidates, which will not be for at least the next several years, if ever. If we obtain regulatory approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution. Accordingly, until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our operations through equity offerings, debt financings or other capital sources, including potentially grants, collaborations, licenses or other similar arrangements. However, we may not be able to secure additional financing or enter into such other arrangements in a timely manner or on favorable terms, if at all. Especially in light of the COVID-19 pandemic, we can give no assurances that we will be able to secure such additional sources of funds to support our operations, or, if such funds are available to us, that such additional financing will be sufficient to meet our needs. Our failure to raise capital or enter into such other arrangements when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and could force us to delay, reduce or terminate our research and development programs or other operations, or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
The manufacturing process for our allogeneic product candidates is nearly identical to the process for our autologous product candidates, except for the gene editing and related steps. We work with a number of third-party contract manufacturers for production of our product candidates. We also work with a variety of suppliers to provide our manufacturing raw materials including media, DNA and RNA components. We have completed construction of an internal pilot GMP manufacturing facility in San Diego adjacent to our headquarters to develop and manufacture preclinical materials and clinical supplies of our product candidates for Phase 1 and Phase 2 clinical trials in the future. We commenced operations in this facility in the second half of 2020, but we expect that we will continue to rely on third parties for various manufacturing needs. In the future, we may also build one or more commercial manufacturing facilities for any approved product candidates.
License Agreements
Below is a summary of the key terms for certain of our license agreements. For a more detailed description of these and our other license agreements, see the section titled “Business-License Agreements” and Note 10 to our annual consolidated financial statements.
License Agreement with Janssen Biotech Inc.
On August 3, 2015, we entered into a license agreement with Janssen, or the Janssen Agreement, pursuant to which we obtained exclusive worldwide rights to research, develop, manufacture and commercialize pharmaceutical
products comprising autologous CAR-modified T-cells or any CAR-modified natural killer or CAR-modified natural-killer-like cells expressing certain Centyrin molecules CAR-modified for the treatment or prevention of any disease in humans. This is the binding technology we use in our P-BCMA-101 and P-PSMA-101 product candidates. Under the Janssen Agreement, we also have the right to screen Janssen’s Centyrin library for agents that bind or modify targets of interest for our internal research and development purposes for potential use in a licensed product.
Pursuant to the Janssen Agreement, we paid Janssen an upfront fee of $0.2 million. As of December 31, 2020, we have paid approximately $3.3 million in milestone development fees relating to P-BCMA-101 and approximately $0.7 million in milestone development fees relating to P-PSMA-101. We are required to pay Janssen up to an aggregate of $75.8 million upon the achievement of certain clinical, regulatory and sales milestones for the first licensed product and up to an aggregate of $46.8 million upon the achievement of certain clinical, regulatory and sales milestones for each licensed product thereafter. We are also obligated to pay, on a product-by-product and country-by-country basis, royalties in the low single-digit percentage range on annual net sales, with the royalty rates varying depending on if there is a valid claim present within the licensed patent rights covering the licensed product in the applicable country in which the net sales occur. The royalty rates are subject to reduction upon certain events.
April 2017 Commercial License Agreement with TeneoBio, Inc.
On April 27, 2017, we entered into a commercial license agreement with TeneoBio, or the 2017 TeneoBio Agreement, pursuant to which we obtained exclusive worldwide rights to use and develop pharmaceutical products comprising allogeneic T-cells expressing a CAR molecule containing certain heavy chain sequences provided by TeneoBio for the treatment of human disease. We use this heavy-chain-only binder in our P-BCMA-ALLO1 product candidate.
Pursuant to the 2017 TeneoBio Agreement, we have paid TeneoBio $0.5 million through our selection of the antibodies licensed under the 2017 TeneoBio Agreement. We are required to pay TeneoBio up to an aggregate of $20.5 million upon the first achievement of certain clinical and regulatory milestones for any allogeneic product and up to an aggregate of $20.5 million upon the first achievement of certain clinical and regulatory milestones for any autologous product. We are also obligated to pay, on a product-by-product and country-by-country basis, a royalty in the low single-digit percentage on net sales of any licensed products.
August 2018 Commercial License Agreement with TeneoBio, Inc.
On August 3, 2018, we entered into a commercial license agreement, or the 2018 TeneoBio Agreement, with TeneoBio for the development and use of TeneoBio’s human heavy-chain-only antibodies in CAR-T cell therapies. Under the terms of the 2018 TeneoBio Agreement, we have the option to obtain exclusive rights to research, develop and commercialize up to a certain number of targets from TeneoBio.
Pursuant to the 2018 TeneoBio Agreement, we paid TeneoBio an upfront fee of $4.0 million. We are required to pay additional fees in the low- to mid-six figure dollar range upon (1) selecting exclusivity for a particular target, which restricts TeneoBio from licensing that particular target to a third party for a period of time, (2) continuing exclusivity for any selected target on each anniversary thereafter and (3) exercising our commercial option for each target. We are required to pay TeneoBio up to an aggregate of $31.0 million upon the first achievement of certain clinical and regulatory milestones for each licensed product. We are also obligated to pay, on a product-by-product and country-by-country basis, a low single-digit percentage royalty on net sales of any licensed products. The royalty rate is subject to reduction upon certain events.
October 2019 License Agreement with Genus Oncology, LLC
On October 24, 2019, we entered into a license agreement with Genus, or the Genus Agreement. Pursuant to the Genus Agreement, we paid Genus an upfront fee of $1.5 million and Genus granted us the option, which was exercised in April 2020 for an additional $1.5 million fee, to obtain an exclusive worldwide license under certain patents and a non-exclusive worldwide license under certain know-how controlled by Genus to research, develop and commercialize pharmaceutical products incorporating CAR cells expressing antibodies and derivatives thereof targeting MUC1, or a Genus licensed product, and a non-exclusive worldwide license under certain patents and know-how controlled by Genus to research, develop and commercialize companion diagnostics for the treatment, prevention and palliation of human diseases and conditions. We may use a Genus antibody or derivative thereof targeting MUC1 as a binder in our P-MUC1C-ALLO1 product candidate.
Pursuant to the Genus Agreement, we are also required to pay Genus up to an aggregate of $71.0 million upon first achievement of certain clinical, regulatory and sales milestones for any Genus licensed product and companion diagnostics. We are also obligated to pay, on a product-by-product and country-by-country basis, tiered royalties in the low to mid-single-digit percentage on net sales of any Genus licensed products and related companion diagnostics. The royalty rate is subject to reduction upon certain events.
Acquisition of Vindico
On October 10, 2016, we completed the acquisition of all the outstanding ownership interests in Vindico NanoBiotechnology, Inc., or Vindico, a company with expertise in polymer-based nanoparticle technology for delivery of, for example, gene therapy technologies. We paid $1.1 million in cash and issued an aggregate of 350,522 shares of common stock to the selling shareholders. The common stock was valued at $0.7 million based on the fair value of our common stock at October 10, 2016 or $1.88 per share. We paid additional cash consideration of $0.6 million in 2017.
In connection with the Vindico acquisition, we agreed to pay additional purchase consideration, based on the achievement of a certain developmental milestone using the acquired technology by October 2018, payable in shares of our common stock. In July 2018, we amended the terms of the Vindico merger agreement, which included an extension of contingency period through July 2019, the calculation to determine the number of shares to be settled and an option to settle the contingency in cash under certain circumstances. In July 2019, the developmental milestone was met and pursuant to the terms of the agreement, we subsequently issued 866,125 shares of common stock, valued at $10.6 million to the former Vindico shareholders in August 2019. There is no further consideration due related to the Vindico acquisition.
CIRM Grant Funding
In December 2017, we were granted an award in the amount of $19.8 million from CIRM to support our clinical trial for P-BCMA-101. The terms of the award include an option to repay the grant or convert it to a royalty obligation upon commercialization of the program. Based upon the terms of the agreement, we will record proceeds as a liability when received. As of December 31, 2020, proceeds received from the grant totaled $19.7 million. We may receive up to $0.1 million in future milestone payments.
In September 2018, we were granted an additional award in the amount of $4.0 million from CIRM to support our preclinical studies for P-PSMA-101. As of December 31, 2020, all $4.0 million had been received and no additional future payments were remaining.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of external and internal costs incurred for our research and development activities, including development of our platform technologies, our drug discovery efforts and the development of our product candidates.
External costs include:
•
expenses incurred in connection with the preclinical and clinical development of our product candidates and research programs, including under agreements with third parties, such as consultants, contractors and contract research organizations;
•
the cost of developing and scaling our manufacturing process and manufacturing drug products for use in our preclinical studies and clinical trials, including under agreements with third parties, such as consultants, contractors and contract manufacturing organizations, or CMOs;
•
payments made under third-party licensing agreements; and
•
laboratory supplies and research materials.
Internal costs include:
•
personnel-related expenses, consisting of employee salaries, related benefits and stock-based compensation expense for employees engaged in research and development functions;
•
facilities, depreciation and other expenses, consisting of direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and insurance; and
•
any impairment of indefinite-lived in process research and development, or IPR&D, related assets.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. External expenses are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using information provided to us by our service providers or our estimate of the level of service that has been performed at each reporting date. Upfront payments and milestone payments made for the licensing of technology are expensed as research and development in the period in which they are incurred. Advance payments that we make for goods or services to be received in the future for use in research and development activities are recorded as prepaid expenses or other long-term assets. These amounts are expensed as the related goods are delivered or the services are performed.
At any one time, we are working on multiple research programs. We track external costs by the stage of program, clinical or preclinical. Our internal resources, employees and infrastructure are not directly tied to any one program and are typically deployed across multiple programs. As such, we do not track internal costs on a specific program basis.
Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to CRO activity and manufacturing expenses. We expect that our research and development expenses will increase substantially in connection with our planned preclinical and clinical development activities in the near term and in the future, including in connection with our ongoing Phase 1 exploratory trial and Phase 2 trial of P-BCMA-101 for the treatment of patients with relapsed/refractory multiple myeloma and Phase 1 trial of P-PSMA-101 for the treatment of patients with mCRPC. At this time, we cannot accurately estimate or know the nature, timing and costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the preclinical and clinical development of any of our product candidates. Our development costs may vary significantly based on factors such as:
•
the number and scope of preclinical and IND-enabling studies;
•
per patient trial costs;
•
the number of trials required for approval;
•
the number of sites included in the trials;
•
the countries in which the trials are conducted;
•
the length of time required to enroll eligible patients;
•
the number of patients that participate in the trials;
•
the drop-out or discontinuation rates of patients;
•
potential additional safety monitoring requested by regulatory agencies;
•
the duration of patient participation in the trials and follow-up;
•
the cost and timing of manufacturing our product candidates;
•
the phase of development of our product candidates;
•
the efficacy and safety profile of our product candidates;
•
the extent to which we establish additional licensing agreements; and
•
whether we choose to partner any of our product candidates and the terms of such partnership.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of any of our product candidates could significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. We may never succeed in obtaining regulatory approval for any of our product candidates. We may obtain unexpected results from our clinical trials and preclinical studies.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in executive, finance and administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include direct and allocated facility-related costs as well as professional fees for legal, patent, consulting, investor and public relations, accounting and audit services. We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we increase our headcount to support our continued research activities and development of our product candidates, including P-BCMA-101 and P-PSMA-101, and begin to commercialize any approved products. We also anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase as a result of payments for accounting, audit, legal, regulatory and consulting services, as well as costs associated with maintaining compliance with Nasdaq listing rules and SEC requirements, director and officer insurance, investor and public relations activities and other expenses associated with operating as a public company.
Increase (Decrease) in Contingent Consideration
In connection with our acquisition of Vindico in October 2016, we agreed to pay additional consideration based on the achievement of a certain developmental milestone using the acquired technology. The additional purchase consideration was payable in shares of our common stock. The number of shares of common stock issuable and the associated fair value could vary depending on (1) the price paid by investors in a qualified equity financing prior to the achievement of the milestone and (2) when and if the milestone is reached. We classified this contingent consideration as a liability on our consolidated balance sheets that was remeasured to fair value at each reporting date, and we recognized changes in the fair value of the contingent consideration liability as a component of operating expenses in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. We recognized changes in the fair value of the contingent consideration liability until the milestone was met in July 2019. Upon issuance of the common stock related to the milestone in July 2019, the liability was reclassified to stockholder’s deficit, within additional paid-in capital. For additional detail, see the subsections titled “-Acquisition of Vindico” above.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of (1) interest expense on outstanding borrowings under our loan agreement and (2) amortization of debt discount and debt issuance costs.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists of (1) interest income and (2) miscellaneous income and expense unrelated to our core operations.
Interest income is comprised of interest earned on our invested cash balances in short-term investments. We expect our interest income to decrease based on available market interest rates.
Miscellaneous income and expense unrelated to our core operations is comprised of changes in fair value of warrant liability. We issued warrants to purchase shares of our Series A-1 preferred stock in connection with our loan agreement in July 2017. We issued additional warrants to purchase shares of our Series B preferred stock in connection with the amendment of our loan agreement in August 2018 and in February 2019. We classified these warrants as a liability on our consolidated balance sheets that we remeasured to fair value at each reporting date, and we recognized changes in the fair value of the warrant liability as a component of other income (expense), net in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. We continued to recognize changes in the fair value of the warrant liability until the warrants qualified for equity classification. Upon the closing of the IPO, the preferred stock warrants became exercisable for common stock instead of preferred stock and the fair value of the warrant liability at the date of the IPO was reclassified to additional paid-in-capital. For additional detail, see the subsection titled “-Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates-Valuation of Warrants to Purchase Preferred Stock” below and Note 5 to our annual consolidated financial statements.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Research and Development Expenses
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
(1)
Clinical stage programs include costs related to P-BCMA-101 for the year ending December 31, 2019 and costs related to P-BCMA-101 and P-PSMA-101 for the year ending December 31, 2020.
Research and development expenses were $103.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $60.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in research and development expenses of $43.1 million was primarily due to increases in the following: $15.5 million of personnel expenses related to increased headcount, $13.6 million of external costs related to our clinical stage programs including the ongoing enrollment and manufacturing for the P-BCMA-101 Phase 1 and Phase 2 clinical trial and initiation of the Phase 1 P-PSMA-101 trial, $9.6 million of external costs related to our preclinical programs, and $4.4 million of internal costs related to facilities and other expenses.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $23.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $18.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in general and administrative expenses of $4.5 million was primarily due to an increase of $5.9 million of personnel expenses related to increased headcount and an decrease of $1.4 million of professional fees, largely due to the financing costs expensed in 2019 related to the IPO work completed prior to closing a private round of financing, offset by higher costs incurred in 2020 related to being a public company.
Increase in Contingent Consideration
Our contingent consideration liability relates to the Vindico acquisition, in which we had a contingent obligation to issue shares of our common stock to former Vindico shareholders upon achievement of a proof of concept preclinical milestone. Increase in contingent consideration was $0 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $6.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. In the 2019 period, we recorded an increase in our contingent consideration liability resulting from the successful completion of the milestone in July 2019. Upon issuance of the common stock related to the milestone in July 2019, the liability was reclassified to stockholder’s deficit, within additional paid-in capital.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $3.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $3.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Interest expense consisted of interest on the outstanding principal under our loan and security agreement, which was consistent during the respective periods.
Other Income, Net
Other income was $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to other income of $2.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease in other income of $2.3 million was primarily due to $0.7 million of interest income partially offset by a $0.4 million increase in warrant liability during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $2.0 million of interest income and a $0.5 million decrease of warrant liability during the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in interest income was driven by a decrease in available interest rates for investments.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We were incorporated in December 2014 and subsequently spun out from Transposagen, a company that has been developing gene engineering technologies since 2003. Since our inception in 2014, we have incurred significant operating losses. Our net losses were $129.8 million and $86.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $281.9 million. Our operations have focused on organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, in-licensing and acquiring intellectual property rights and establishing and protecting our intellectual property portfolio, developing our gene engineering technologies, identifying potential product candidates and undertaking research and development and manufacturing activities, including preclinical studies and clinical trials of our product candidates,
and engaging in strategic transactions. Our primary use of cash is to fund operating expenses, which consist primarily of research and development expenditures, and to a lesser extent, general and administrative expenditures. Cash used to fund operating expenses is impacted by the timing of when we pay these expenses, as reflected in the change in our outstanding accounts payable and accrued expenses. We have not yet commercialized any of our product candidates and we do not expect to generate revenue from sales of any product candidates for several years, if at all. We have funded our operations primarily through the sale of equity. Since our inception, we have raised $224.0 million of gross proceeds from the sale of our common stock in our IPO, raised an aggregate of $334.3 million of gross proceeds from the sale of shares of our redeemable convertible preferred stock, received $30.0 million of gross proceeds from borrowings under our loan agreement and received an aggregate of $23.8 million in grant funding from CIRM. We expect that our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities as of December 31, 2020 of $309.2 million will be sufficient to fund our operations for at least the next twelve months from the date of issuance of the financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In the long term we will need additional financing to support our continuing operations and pursue our growth strategy.
Loan Agreement
In July 2017, we entered into a loan and security agreement, or 2017 Loan Agreement, with Oxford. Under the original terms, the facility provided $15.0 million, of which we drew $10.0 million. In August 2018, we entered into an amended and restated agreement with Oxford, or the 2018 Loan Agreement, to, among other things, increase the size of the facility to $30.0 million, modify the interest rate and extend the interest-only payment period and the maturity date. In addition, we concurrently increased the outstanding principal by $10.0 million.
As of August 2018, outstanding borrowings under the 2018 Loan Agreement consisted of a Term A loan, in the amount of $20.0 million.
In February 2019, we drew the remaining available balance under the 2018 Loan Agreement, or Term B loan, in the amount of $10.0 million. The Term A loan and Term B loan (together “Term Loans”) bear interest at a floating per annum rate equal to (1) 6.94% plus (2) the greater of (a) the 30 day U.S. Dollar LIBOR rate reported in The Wall Street Journal on the last business day of the month that immediately precedes the month in which the interest will accrue and (b) 2.00%. As of December 31, 2020, the interest rate applicable to our Term Loans borrowing was 8.9%.
We will be required to make a final payment of 7.5% of the principal balance outstanding, payable on the earlier of (1) the maturity date, (2) acceleration of any Term Loan or (3) the prepayment of the Term Loans.
In June 2020, we entered into a fourth amendment to the 2018 Loan Agreement with Oxford to extend the interest-only payment period and maturity date. All outstanding Term Loans will now mature on June 1, 2024 and will have interest-only payments through December 31, 2021, followed by 30 equal monthly payments of principal and unpaid accrued interest. In addition, in conjunction with the entry into the fourth amendment, we paid Oxford a facility fee of $0.3 million. Our obligations under the 2018 Loan Agreement are secured by a first priority security interest in substantially all of our current and future assets, other than our intellectual property. In addition, we have also agreed not to encumber our intellectual property assets, except as permitted by the 2018 Loan Agreement. While any amounts are outstanding under the 2018 Loan Agreement, we are subject to a number of affirmative and restrictive covenants, including covenants regarding dispositions of property, business combinations or acquisitions, among other customary covenants. We are also restricted from paying dividends or making other distributions or annual payments on our capital stock in excess of $250,000, subject to limited exceptions. In July 2017, the U.K.’s Financial Conduct Authority, which regulates the London Interbank Offered Rate, or LIBOR, announced that it intends to phase out LIBOR by the end of 2021. On November 30, 2020, ICE Benchmark Administration, with the support of the United States Federal Reserve and the FCA, announced plans to consult on ceasing publication of USD LIBOR on December 31, 2021 for only the one week and two month USD LIBOR tenors, and on June 30, 2023 for all other USD LIBOR tenors. Various central bank committees and working groups continue to discuss replacement of benchmark rates, the process for amending existing LIBOR-based contracts, and the potential economic impacts of different alternatives. The Alternative Reference Rates Committee has identified the Secured Overnight Financing Rate, or SOFR, as its preferred alternative rate for USD LIBOR. SOFR is a measure of the cost of borrowing cash overnight, collateralized by U.S. Treasury securities, and is based on directly observable U.S. Treasury-backed repurchase transactions.
We are evaluating the potential impact of the replacement of the LIBOR benchmark interest rate including risk management, internal operational readiness and monitoring the Financial Accounting Standards Board standard-setting process to address financial reporting issues that might arise in connection with the transition from LIBOR to a new benchmark rate.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash and cash equivalents for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
During the year ended December 31, 2020, operating activities used $113.3 million of cash, primarily resulting from our net loss of $129.8 million, offset by non-cash expenses of $10.8 million, and net cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $5.6 million. Non-cash charges consisted primarily of $7.2 million in stock-based compensation, $2.6 million in depreciation expense, $0.8 million of accretion of discount on issued term debt, and $0.4 million from change in fair value of the preferred stock warrant liability offset by $0.2 million in accretion of investment discount, net. Net cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of a $10.3 million increase in accrued liabilities and a $3.1 million decrease in operating lease right-of-use assets offset by a $4.2 million decrease in accounts payable, a $3.3 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets, a $0.2 million increase in other long-term assets, and a $0.1 million decrease in operating lease liabilities.
During the year ended 2019, operating activities used $64.5 million of cash, primarily resulting from our net loss of $86.5 million, offset in part by non-cash charges of $12.6 million. Non-cash charges consisted primarily of a $6.7 million increase in contingent consideration, $3.1 million of stock-based compensation and $1.2 million of depreciation and amortization. Net cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted primarily of a $8.7 million increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities.
Cash Used in Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $204.4 million, consisting of purchases of short-term investments of $295.0 million and purchases of property and equipment of $16.9 million, offset by proceeds from maturities of short-term investments of $107.5 million. The purchase of short-term investments reflects the use of a higher cash balance from the proceeds of the IPO and Series D redeemable convertible preferred stock financing.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in investing activities was $42.5 million, primarily due to the purchase of $71.3 million of short-term investments and $5.2 million of property and equipment purchases, offset in part by $34.0 million of proceeds from the maturities of available-for-sale short-term investments. The purchase of short-term investments reflects the use of a higher cash balance from the proceeds of the Series C redeemable convertible preferred stock financing.
The timing of purchase and sales of our short-term investments is driven by available cash balance and maturity of existing investments. The purchase of property and equipment for all periods related to equipment purchases as we expanded our research and development and manufacturing activities, in addition to corporate office space.
Cash Provided by Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financings activities was $313.9 million, consisting primarily of $205.7 million in net proceeds from the IPO, $104.1 million in net proceeds from the sale of preferred stock and $4.2 million in grant payments from CIRM.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financings activities was $164.4 million, consisting primarily of $149.7 million in net proceeds from the sale of preferred stock, $9.9 million of net proceeds from borrowings under our 2018 Loan Agreement and $4.6 million in grant payments from CIRM.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with contract research organizations, CMOs and other third parties for preclinical research studies, clinical trials and testing and manufacturing services. These contracts do not contain minimum purchase commitments and are cancelable by us upon prior written notice. Payments due upon cancellation consist of payments for services provided or expenses incurred, including noncancelable obligations of our service providers, up to one year after the date of cancellation. These payments are not included in the table above as the amount and timing of such payments are not known.
We have also entered into a several license agreements under which we are obligated to make aggregate milestone payments upon the achievement of specified preclinical, clinical and regulatory milestones as well as royalty payments. We have not included future payments under this agreement in the table above since the payment obligations under this agreement are contingent upon future events, such as our achievement of specified milestones or generating product sales. As of December 31, 2020, we were unable to estimate the timing or likelihood of achieving these milestones or generating future product sales. See the subsection titled “-License Agreements” above.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our financial statements, which are prepared in accordance with accounting principles that are generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, related disclosure of contingent liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of expenses and other income during the reporting period. We continually evaluate our estimates and judgments, the most critical of which are those related to preclinical and clinical study accruals and stock-based compensation costs. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Materially different results can occur as circumstances change and additional information becomes known.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements, we believe the following accounting policies and estimates to be most critical to the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our applicable personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual costs. The majority of our service providers invoice us in arrears for services, however, some require advance payments. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our consolidated financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of the estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to vendors in connection with preclinical development activities, CMOs in connection with the process development and scale-up activities and the production of clinical trial materials and contract research organizations in connection with clinical trials.
We base the expense recorded related to contract research and manufacturing on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with multiple CMOs and contract research organizations that supply materials and conduct services. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the expense. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the estimate, we adjust the accrual or prepaid expense accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have not been any material adjustments to our prior estimates of accrued research and development expenses.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure stock-based awards granted to employees, non-employees and directors based on their fair value on the date of the grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model for options. Compensation expense for those awards is recognized over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. We use the straight-line method to record the expense of awards with service-based vesting conditions. Forfeitures are recognized as they occur.
The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the use of subjective assumptions to determine the fair value of stock-based awards. These assumptions include:
•
Fair value of common stock-Determined based on the quoted market price of our common stock
•
Expected term-The expected term represents the period that stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding. The expected term for option grants is determined using the simplified method. The simplified method deems the expected term to be the midpoint between the vesting date and the contractual life of the stock-based awards.
•
Expected volatility-Since we were a privately held company until July 2020 and do not have significant trading history for our common stock, the expected volatility is estimated based on the average volatility for comparable publicly traded biotechnology companies over a period equal to the expected term of the stock option grants. The comparable companies were chosen based on their similar size, stage in the life cycle or area of specialty. We will continue to apply this process until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of our own stock price becomes available.
•
Risk-free interest rate-The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury zero coupon issues in effect at the time of grant for periods corresponding with the expected term of option.
•
Expected dividend-We have never paid dividends on our common stock and have no plans to pay dividends on our common stock. Therefore, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
As of December 31, 2020, the unrecognized stock-based compensation expense related to employee stock options was $23.0 million and is expected to be recognized as expense over a weighted-average period of approximately 3.0 years. The intrinsic value of all outstanding stock options as of December 31, 2020 was approximately $10.0 million, of which approximately $8.2 million related to vested options and approximately $1.8 million related to unvested options.
Valuation of Warrants to Purchase Preferred Stock
Prior to the IPO, we classified warrants to purchase shares of our Series A-1 preferred stock and Series B preferred stock as a liability on our consolidated balance sheets as these warrants are free-standing financial instruments that may have required us to transfer assets upon exercise. The warrants were initially recorded at fair value on the date of grant, and they were subsequently remeasured to fair value at each balance sheet date. Changes in fair value of the warrants were recognized as a component of other income (expense) in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
We utilized the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which incorporates assumptions and estimates to value the preferred stock warrants. We assessed these assumptions and estimates on a quarterly basis as additional information impacting the assumptions is obtained. Similar to the fair value measurement of our common stock prior to IPO, estimates and assumptions impacting the fair value measurement of our preferred stock warrants included the fair value per share of the underlying Series A-1 preferred stock and Series B preferred stock, the remaining contractual term of the warrants, the expected volatility of the price of the underlying preferred stock, the risk-free interest rate and the expected dividend yield. The most significant assumption in the Black-Scholes option-pricing model impacting the fair value of the preferred stock warrants was the fair value of our preferred stock as of each remeasurement date. We determined the fair value per share of the underlying preferred stock by taking into consideration our most recent sales of our preferred stock as well as additional factors that we deemed relevant (including the various factors analyzed to determine the fair value of our common stock described in the subsection titled “-Determination of Fair Value of Common Stock” above).
Upon the closing of the IPO, the preferred stock warrants became exercisable for common stock instead of preferred stock and the fair value of the warrant liability at the date of the IPO was reclassified to additional paid-in-capital. See Note 5 to our annual consolidated financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Since our inception, we have not engaged in any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act permits an “emerging growth company” such as us to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. We have elected to use this the extended transition period under the JOBS Act until the earlier of the date we (1) are no longer an emerging growth company or (2) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest to occur of: (1) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have more than $1.07 billion in annual revenue; (2) the date we qualify as a “large accelerated filer,” with at least $700.0 million of equity securities held by non-affiliates; (3) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period; and (4) December 31, 2025.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows is disclosed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements.