ITEM 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Forward-Looking Statements
Statements in this Annual Report about anticipated financial results, capital developments and growth, as well as about the development of our products, markets and workforce, are forward-looking statements that are based on our current plans and assumptions. Important information about the bases for these plans and assumptions and factors that may cause our actual results to differ materially from these statements is contained below and in Item 1A. “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report.
Unless otherwise indicated, all references to a year reflect our fiscal year that ends on September 30.
Operating and Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Our discussion of results includes discussion of our ARR (Annual Run Rate) operating measure, non-GAAP financial measures, and disclosure of our results on a constant currency basis. ARR and our non-GAAP financial measures, including the reasons we use those measures, are described below in Results of Operations - Operating Measure and Results of Operations - Non-GAAP Financial Measures, respectively. The methodology used to calculate constant currency disclosures is described in Results of Operations - Impact of Foreign Currency Exchange on Results of Operations. You should read those sections to understand our operating measure, non-GAAP financial measures, and constant currency disclosures.
Executive Overview
ARR increased 16% (actual and constant currency) to $1,475 million in FY’21 compared to the end of FY’20. Excluding the impact of Arena, which was acquired in the second quarter of FY’21, our organic constant currency ARR growth was 12% in FY’21 compared to FY’20. Organic churn improved approximately 130 basis points year over year, primarily driven by strong execution in CAD, PLM, FSG and modest continued improvement in IoT and AR.
FY’21 revenue of $1.81 billion increased 24% over FY’20 (20% in constant currency). Our FY’21 revenue was positively impacted by ASC 606 as longer contract durations and support to subscription conversions increased the amount of upfront subscription license revenue recognized in the year. FY’21 operating margin of 21% increased approximately 700 basis points over FY’20 due to strong revenue performance as strong product differentiation improved sales and renewals, while maintaining good discipline on our operating expense structure. FY’21 diluted EPS more than doubled year over year to $4.03, due in part to a gain of $69 million related to common stock we own in a publicly-traded company, the release of a $137 million valuation allowance related to our deferred tax assets in the U.S., and a non-cash tax benefit of $42 million related to our Arena acquisition.
FY’21 operating cash flow of $369 million grew 58% over FY’20; FY’21 free cash flow of $344 million grew 61% over FY’20. Operating cash flow and free cash flow included an $18 million outflow related to a foreign tax dispute, $15 million of acquisition-related costs, and $15 million of restructuring payments. We ended FY’21 with cash and cash equivalents of $327 million. In addition, we held a $78 million equity investment in Matterport, Inc., currently subject to trading restrictions. We ended FY’21 with gross debt of $1.45 billion, with an aggregate interest rate of 3.2%.
Results of Operations
The following table shows the financial measures that we consider the most significant indicators of our business performance. In addition to providing operating income, operating margin, diluted earnings per share and cash from operations as calculated under GAAP, we provide non-GAAP operating income, non-GAAP operating margin, non-GAAP diluted earnings per share, and free cash flow for the reported periods. We also provide a view of our actual results on a constant currency basis. These non-GAAP financial measures exclude the items described in Non-GAAP Financial Measures below. Investors should use these non-GAAP financial measures only in conjunction with our GAAP results.
For discussion of FY’20 results and comparison with FY’19 results, refer to Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Conditions and Results of Operations in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020.
(1)
See Non-GAAP Financial Measures below for a reconciliation of our GAAP results to our non-GAAP measures and Impact of Foreign Currency Exchange on Results of Operations below for a description of how we calculate our results on a constant currency basis.
(2)
In FY’21 and FY’20 our GAAP results included tax benefits of $179.7 million and $21.2 million, respectively. The FY’21 results include a $137.4 million benefit related to the release of the valuation allowance on the majority of our U.S. deferred tax assets and a $42.3 million benefit related to the release of a valuation allowance resulting from the Arena acquisition. The FY’20 results include a $21.2 million benefit related to the release of a valuation allowance resulting from the Onshape acquisition. As the non-GAAP tax provision is calculated assuming that there is no valuation allowance, these benefits have been excluded. Income tax adjustments reflect the tax effects of non-GAAP adjustments which are calculated by applying the applicable tax rate by jurisdiction to the non-GAAP adjustments listed above. Additionally, our non-GAAP results for FY'21 exclude tax expense of $34.8 million related to a non-U.S. prior period tax exposure, primarily related to foreign withholding taxes.
(3)
Cash flow from operations for FY’21 and FY’20 includes $14.5 million and $42 million of restructuring payments, respectively. Cash from operations for FY’21 and FY’20 includes $15.0 million and $9.6 million of acquisition-related payments, respectively. Cash from operations for FY’21 includes $17.9 million in un-forecasted payments related to the prior period tax exposure from a non-U.S. tax dispute.
(4)
Free cash flow is cash from operations net of capital expenditures of $24.7 million and $20.2 million in FY’21 and FY’20, respectively.
Impact of Foreign Currency Exchange on Results of Operations
Approximately 60% of our revenue and 40% of our expenses are transacted in currencies other than the U.S. dollar. Because we report our results of operations in U.S. Dollars, currency translation, particularly changes in the Euro, Yen, Shekel, and Rupee relative to the U.S. Dollar, affects our reported results. Our constant currency disclosures are calculated by multiplying the results in local currency for FY’21 and FY’20 by the exchange rates in effect on September 30, 2020, excluding the effect of any hedging. If FY'21 reported results were converted into U.S. dollars based on this methodology, FY'21 revenue would have been lower by $20 million and expenses would have been lower by $8 million. The net impact on year-over-year results would have been a decrease in operating income of $12 million in FY'21.
The results of operations in the table above and revenue by line of business, product group, and geographic region in the tables that follow present both actual percentage changes year over year and percentage changes on a constant currency basis.
Revenue
Our revenue results period to period are impacted by contract terms, including the duration and start dates of our subscription contracts, due to up-front recognition of subscription license revenue. We are expanding our SaaS offerings and are releasing additional cloud functionality into our products. As a
result, our revenue will be impacted over time as a higher portion of our sales will be from cloud services, which are recognized ratably.
Revenue by Line of Business
(1)
Includes perpetual licenses and the license portion of subscription sales.
(2)
Includes support on perpetual licenses and the support portion of subscription sales.
Software revenue increased in FY’21 compared to FY’20 due to subscription revenue growth of 42% (38% constant currency), offset by an 18% decline in perpetual support revenue (21% constant currency) due to conversions of perpetual support contracts to subscriptions. Arena; acquired in the second quarter, contributed approximately $29 million in FY’21. In FY’21, license revenue growth was primarily driven by contracts with longer durations.
Professional services engagements typically result from sales of new licenses and software upgrades; revenue is recognized over the term of the engagement. Our expectation is that professional services revenue will trend flat-to-down over time due to our strategy to expand margins by migrating more services engagements to our partners and delivering products that require less consulting and training services.
Professional services revenue grew in FY’21 by 10% (5% constant currency); where FY’20 revenue was negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, FY’21 benefited from increased delivery activity associated with PLM deployments.
Revenue and ARR by Product Group
Core product software revenue growth in FY’21 compared to FY’20 was driven by subscription revenue growth of 39% (34% constant currency), offset by expected declines in perpetual support revenue of 20% (23% constant currency) due in part to ongoing perpetual support contract conversions to subscription.
ARR increased 11% (12% constant currency) for FY’21 compared to FY’20, reflecting solid ARR growth for both PLM (13% actual,14% constant currency) and CAD (10% actual and constant currency) as customers pursue their digital transformation initiatives.
Growth product software revenue growth in FY’21 was driven by subscription revenue growth of 67% (63% constant currency) compared to the year-ago period, driven primarily by IoT and contribution from Arena.
Growth product ARR increased 50% (actual and constant currency) for FY’21 compared to FY’20, due in part to a $59 million contribution from Arena. Excluding Arena, organic ARR growth was 17% (18%
constant currency), reflecting 15% (16% constant currency) growth in IoT and 16% (actual and constant currency) growth in AR.
FSG product software revenue growth in FY’21 compared to FY’20 was primarily driven by subscription revenue growth of 34% (31% constant currency), offset by a decline in perpetual support revenue of 15% (17% constant currency) due to conversions of perpetual support contracts to subscriptions.
FSG product ARR increased 6% (actual and constant currency) for FY’21 compared to FY’20.
Software Revenue & ARR by Geographic Region
A significant portion of our software revenue is generated outside the U.S. In both FY’21 and FY’20, approximately 40% to 45% of software revenue was generated in the Americas, 35% to 40% in Europe, and 20% in Asia Pacific.
Americas software revenue growth in FY’21 was driven by growth in subscription revenue of 34% (actual and constant currency) as compared to FY’20, partially offset by a decline of 26% (actual and constant currency) in perpetual support revenue, due to conversions of perpetual support contracts to subscriptions, resulting in recurring revenue growth of 21% (actual and constant currency).
Americas ARR was up 19%, led by double-digit growth in Core products and Arena.
Europe software revenue growth in FY’21 was driven by growth in subscription revenue of 56% (46% constant currency) as compared to FY’20, partially offset by a decline of 16% (21% constant currency) in perpetual support revenue, resulting in recurring revenue growth of 35% (26% constant currency).
ARR in Europe was up 13% constant currency, led by high-single digit growth in Core products, low-40s growth in Growth products, and double-digit growth in FSG.
Asia Pacific software revenue growth in FY’21 was driven by subscription revenue growth of 36% (32% constant currency) as compared to FY’20, partially offset by a decline of 9% (12% constant currency) in perpetual support revenue, resulting in recurring revenue growth of 22% (18% constant currency).
ARR in Asia Pacific was up 17% constant currency, led by mid-teens growth in Core products and low-30s growth in Growth products.
Gross Margin
(1)
Non-GAAP financial measures are reconciled to GAAP results under Non-GAAP Financial Measures below.
License gross margin increased in FY’21 compared to FY’20 due to subscription license revenue increasing significantly as a result of longer subscription term durations, offset by increased royalty expense due to the mix of products sold and higher intangible amortization due to the Arena acquisition.
Support and cloud services gross margin percentage is flat in FY’21 compared to FY’20, while gross margin contribution increased from FY’20 to FY’21 reflecting an increase in subscription support and cloud revenue, offset by a decrease in perpetual support revenue, higher compensation costs, and an increase in costs associated with our cloud services business due to greater demand for those services.
Professional services gross margin increased in FY’21 compared to FY’20 primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on FY’20 resulting in a year-over-year increase in revenue and lower travel costs in FY’21, partially offset by higher compensation and outside services costs.
Operating Expenses
Total headcount increased by 7.5% in FY’21 to 6,709 from 6,243 at the end of FY’20. Headcount at the end of FY’21 includes approximately 180 people from Arena and other smaller acquisitions.
Operating expenses in FY'21 compared to FY'20 increased primarily due to the following:
•
a $142.3 million increase in compensation expense (including benefit costs), primarily driven by:
•
a $56.8 million (56%) increase in stock-based compensation expense,
•
a $55.4 million (14%) increase in salaries due to higher headcount and merit increases as well as $10.3 million from Arena,
•
a $15.8 million increase (17%) in benefits, of which $1.8 million is related to Arena,
•
a $12.3 million (114%) increase in cash bonus expense due to higher attainment and includes $1.2 million from Arena,
•
a $9.7 million (17%) increase in commissions due to additional amortization of capitalized commissions;
•
a $7.8 million (39%) increase in professional fees;
•
a $6.8 million (55%) increase in internal hosting costs;
•
a $6.4 million increase in acquisition-related charges, which are included in general and administrative costs; and
•
a $4.3 million (16%) increase in marketing expense;
partially offset by:
•
a $28.8 million decrease in restructuring charges.
Stock-based compensation was higher in FY’21 compared to FY’20 primarily due to higher estimated attainment under performance-based incentive compensation and more time-based awards outstanding in FY’21. Cash bonus expense was also higher in FY’21 compared to FY’20 due to higher attainment under the FY’21 bonus plan.
Interest Expense
Interest expense includes interest under our credit facility and senior notes. Interest expense was lower in FY’21 as FY’20 included $15 million of expense related to penalties for the early redemption of the 6.000% Senior Notes due 2024, with higher balances in FY’21 partially offset by lower rates. We had $1,450 million of total debt at September 30, 2021, compared to $1,018 million at September 30, 2020. For additional detail on the changes in our debt structure, see Note 9. Debt, included in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report.
The average interest rate on our total borrowings was 3.3% in FY'21 and 4.3% in FY'20.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest income represents earnings on the investment of our available cash and marketable securities.
Other expense, net includes foreign currency gains and losses and other non-operating gains and losses. In FY’21, we recorded a $69 million non-operating gain related to an equity investment in Matterport, Inc., which will continue to fluctuate. Foreign currency gains and losses include costs of hedging contracts, certain realized and unrealized foreign currency transaction gains or losses, and foreign exchange gains or losses resulting from the required period-end currency remeasurement of the assets and liabilities of our subsidiaries that use the U.S. dollar as their functional currency.
Income Taxes
In FY’21 and FY’20, our tax rate differed from the U.S. statutory federal income tax rate due to our corporate structure in which our foreign taxes are at a net effective tax rate lower than the U.S. rate. A significant amount of our foreign earnings is generated by our subsidiaries organized in Ireland and the Cayman Islands. In FY’21 and FY’20 the foreign rate differential predominantly relates to those earnings.
In FY’21, in addition to the foreign rate differential, our tax rate differed from the statutory federal income tax rate due to the release of the valuation allowance on the majority of our U.S. net deferred tax assets, the net effects of the Global Intangible Low-Taxed Income (GILTI) and Foreign Derived Intangible Income (FDII) regimes (together referred to as U.S. Tax reform), and the excess tax benefit related to stock-based compensation.
In FY’20, in addition to the foreign rate differential, our tax rate differed from the statutory federal income tax rate due to U.S. tax reform, the excess tax benefit related to stock-based compensation and the indirect effects of the adoption of ASC 606. Additionally, we recorded benefits for the reduction of the U.S. valuation allowance as a result of the Onshape acquisition. A further reduction to the valuation allowance was also recorded to reflect the impact from the scheduling of the reversal of existing temporary differences resulting in deferred tax liabilities that cannot be offset against deferred tax assets.
Our results for the twelve months ended September 30, 2021 include a charge of $37.3 million related to the effects of a tax matter in the Republic of Korea (South Korea) of $34.4 million, and the resulting impact on U.S. income taxes of $2.9 million. The charge relates to an assessment with respect to various tax issues, primarily foreign withholding taxes, that was under appeal in South Korea. We received an assessment of approximately $12 million from the tax authorities in South Korea in the fourth quarter of 2016 for the years 2011 to 2015 and paid the assessment in the first quarter of 2017. We appealed that assessment to an intermediate appellate court. In December 2020, our appeal to that court - the Seoul High Court - was rejected. We appealed this decision to the Supreme Court of the Republic of Korea. In May 2021, the Supreme Court denied our request for a review of the case. Therefore, the decision of the Seoul High Court was deemed final. We made additional payments of approximately $20 million to the tax authorities in South Korea in FY’21 for the years 2016 to 2021 in settlement of the amounts previously accrued.
Operating Measure
ARR
ARR (Annual Run Rate) represents the annualized value of our portfolio of active subscription software, cloud, SaaS, and support contracts as of the end of the reporting period. ARR includes orders placed under our Strategic Alliance Agreement with Rockwell Automation, including orders placed to satisfy contractual minimum commitments.
We believe ARR is a valuable operating metric to measure the health of a subscription business because it captures expected subscription and support cash generation from customers. Because this measure represents the annualized value of customer contracts as of a point in time, it does not represent revenue for any particular period or remaining revenue that will be recognized in future periods.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The non-GAAP financial measures presented in the discussion of our results of operations and the respective most directly comparable GAAP measures are:
•
free cash flow-cash flow from operations
•
non-GAAP gross margin-GAAP gross margin
•
non-GAAP operating income-GAAP operating income
•
non-GAAP operating margin-GAAP operating margin
•
non-GAAP net income-GAAP net income
•
non-GAAP diluted earnings or loss per share-GAAP diluted earnings or loss per share
Free cash flow is cash flow from operations net of capital expenditures, which are expenditures for property and equipment and consist primarily of facility improvements, office equipment, computer equipment, and software. We believe that free cash flow, in conjunction with cash from operations, is a useful measure of liquidity since capital expenditures are a necessary component of ongoing operations.
The non-GAAP financial measures other than free cash flow exclude, as applicable: stock-based compensation expense; amortization of acquired intangible assets; acquisition-related and other transactional charges included in general and administrative expenses; restructuring and other charges, net; non-operating charges; and income tax adjustments.
The items excluded from these non-GAAP financial measures are normally included in the comparable measures calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP. Our management excludes these items when evaluating our ongoing performance and/or predicting our earnings trends, and therefore excludes them when presenting non-GAAP financial measures. Management uses non-GAAP financial measures in conjunction with our GAAP results, as should investors.
Stock-based compensation is a non-cash expense relating to stock-based awards issued to executive officers, employees and outside directors, consisting of restricted stock units. We exclude this expense as it is a non-cash expense and we assess our internal operations excluding this expense and believe it facilitates comparisons to the performance of other companies in our industry.
Amortization of acquired intangible assets is a non-cash expense that is impacted by the timing and magnitude of our acquisitions. We believe the assessment of our operations excluding these costs is relevant to our assessment of internal operations and comparisons to the performance of other companies in our industry.
Acquisition-related and other transactional charges included in general and administrative expenses are direct costs of potential and completed acquisitions and expenses related to acquisition integration activities, including transaction fees, due diligence costs, severance and professional fees. Subsequent adjustments to our initial estimated amount of contingent consideration associated with specific acquisitions are also included within acquisition-related charges. Other transactional charges include third-party costs related to structuring unusual transactions. We do not include these costs when reviewing our operating results internally. The occurrence and amount of these costs will vary depending on the timing and size of acquisitions.
Restructuring and other charges, net includes excess facility restructuring charges (credits); impairment and accretion expense charges related to the lease assets of exited facilities; sublease income from previously impaired facilities; and severance costs resulting from reductions of personnel and third-party professional consulting fees related to modifications of our business strategy. These costs may vary in size based on our restructuring plan.
Non-operating charges (credits). In Q4’21, we recorded a $69 million gain related to our equity investment in Matterport, Inc., which will continue to fluctuate based on the market value of the investment. In FY’20, we incurred an early redemption interest penalty and wrote off debt issuance costs, both of which were related to the settlement of the 6.000% Senior Notes due 2024. These items are excluded from our non-GAAP financial measures as they are non-ordinary course in nature and not included in management’s review of our results.
Income tax adjustments include the tax impact of the items above and assumes that we are profitable on a non-GAAP basis in the U.S. and one foreign jurisdiction. It also eliminates the effect of the valuation allowance recorded against our net deferred tax assets in those jurisdictions. Additionally, we exclude other material tax items that we do not include when reviewing our operating results internally.
We use these non-GAAP financial measures, and we believe that they assist our investors, to make period-to-period comparisons of our operational performance because they provide a view of our operating results without items that are not, in our view, indicative of our core operating results. We believe that these non-GAAP financial measures help illustrate underlying trends in our business, and we use the measures to establish budgets and operational goals (communicated internally and externally) for managing our business and evaluating our performance. We believe that providing non-GAAP financial measures also affords investors a view of our operating results that may be more easily compared to the results of other companies in our industry that use similar financial measures to supplement their GAAP results.
The items excluded from the non-GAAP financial measures often have a material impact on our financial results and such items often recur. Accordingly, the non-GAAP financial measures included in this Annual Report should be considered in addition to, and not as a substitute for or superior to, the comparable measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. The following tables reconcile each of these non-GAAP financial measures to its most closely comparable GAAP measure on our financial statements.
(1)
In FY’21, we recorded a $69 million gain on common stock we own in a public company. In FY’20, we recognized $15 million of expense related to penalties for the early redemption of the 6.000% Senior Notes due in 2024 and wrote off approximately $3 million of related debt issuance costs.
(2)
In FY’21 and FY’20 our GAAP results included tax benefits of $179.7 million and $21.2 million, respectively. The FY’21 results include a $137.4 million benefit related to the release of the valuation allowance on the majority of our U.S. deferred tax assets and a $42.3 million benefit related to the release of a valuation allowance resulting from the Arena acquisition. The FY’20 results include a $21.2 million benefit related to the release of a valuation allowance resulting from the Onshape acquisition. As the non-GAAP tax provision is calculated assuming that there is no valuation allowance, these benefits have been excluded.
Income tax adjustments reflect the tax effects of non-GAAP adjustments which are calculated by applying the applicable tax rate by jurisdiction to the non-GAAP adjustments listed above. Additionally, our non-GAAP results for FY'21 exclude tax expense of $34.8 million related to a non-U.S. prior period tax exposure, primarily related to foreign withholding taxes.
Operating margin impact of non-GAAP adjustments:
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We have prepared our consolidated financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. In preparing our financial statements, we make estimates, assumptions and judgments that can have a significant impact on our reported revenues, results of operations, and net income, as well as on the value of certain assets and liabilities on our balance sheet. These estimates, assumptions and judgments are made based on our historical experience and on other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates may change as new events occur or additional information is obtained, and we may periodically be faced with uncertainties, the outcomes of which are not within our control and may not be known for a prolonged period of time.
The accounting policies, methods and estimates used to prepare our financial statements are described generally in Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report. The most important accounting judgments and estimates that we made in preparing the financial statements involved:
•
revenue recognition;
•
accounting for income taxes; and
•
valuation of assets and liabilities acquired in business combinations.
A critical accounting policy is one that is both material to the presentation of our financial statements and requires us to make subjective or complex judgments that could have a material effect on our financial condition and results of operations. Critical accounting policies require us to make assumptions about matters that are uncertain at the time of the estimate, and different estimates that we could have used, or changes in the estimates that are reasonably likely to occur, may have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations. Because the use of estimates is inherent in the financial reporting process, actual results could differ from those estimates.
Accounting policies, guidelines and interpretations related to our critical accounting policies and estimates are generally subject to numerous sources of authoritative guidance and are often reexamined by accounting standards rule makers and regulators. These rule makers and/or regulators may promulgate interpretations, guidance or regulations that may result in changes to our accounting policies, which could have a material impact on our financial position and results of operations.
Revenue Recognition
We record revenues in accordance with the guidance provided by ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. For a full description of our revenue accounting policy, refer to Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, included in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report.
Our sources of revenue include: (1) subscriptions, (2) perpetual licenses, (3) support for perpetual licenses and (4) professional services. Subscriptions include term-based on-premises licenses, Software-as-a-Service (SaaS), and hosting services.
Judgments and Estimates
Determination of performance obligations. Our subscriptions are frequently sold as a bundle of products and services, typically pairing on-premises term software licenses with support and/or cloud services over the same term. On-premises software is typically determined to be a distinct performance obligation and is thus recognized separately from the support and/or cloud components. On-premises license software revenue is generally recognized at the point in time that the software is made available to the customer, while the support and cloud software revenue components are recognized over the term of the contract. In cases where subscriptions include cloud functionality and on-premises software, an assessment has been performed to determine whether the cloud services are distinct from the on-premises software. In the substantial majority of instances, cloud services provide incremental functionality to customers and have been considered distinct and recognized separately from the on-premises software. This assessment could have a significant impact on the timing of revenue recognition and may change as our product offerings evolve.
Allocation of transaction price. We estimate the standalone selling price of each identified performance obligation and use that estimate to allocate the transaction price among said performance obligations. The estimated standalone selling price is determined using all information reasonably available to us, including market conditions and other observable inputs. Significant judgment is used in determining the standalone selling prices of the on-premises license, support, and cloud components of our subscription products. These estimates are subject to change as our product offerings change and could have a significant impact due to the difference in the timing of revenue recognition for on-premises licenses and support and/or cloud.
Right to exchange. Our multi-year, non-cancellable on-premises subscription contracts provide customers with an annual right to exchange software within the original subscription with other software. We account for this right as a refund liability. For most contracts, we use the expected value method to determine the refund liability associated with this right across a portfolio of contracts. Where contracts are outside of the standard portfolio of contracts due to contract size, longer contract duration, or other unique contractual terms, we use the most likely amount method to determine the refund liability for each individual contract. In both circumstances, the transaction price is constrained based on our estimates, which impacts the amount of revenue recognized. Changes in these estimates could significantly impact revenue for any given period.
Accounting for Income Taxes
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to calculate our income tax expense based on taxable income by jurisdiction. There are many transactions and calculations about which the ultimate tax outcome is uncertain; as a result, our calculations involve estimates by management. Some of these uncertainties arise as a consequence of revenue-sharing, cost-reimbursement and transfer pricing arrangements among related entities and the differing tax treatment of revenue and cost items across various jurisdictions. If we were compelled to revise or to account differently for our arrangements, that revision could affect our recorded tax liabilities.
The income tax accounting process also involves estimating our actual current tax liability, together with assessing temporary differences resulting from differing treatment of items for tax and accounting purposes. These differences result in deferred tax assets and liabilities, which are included within our consolidated balance sheets. We must then assess the likelihood that our deferred tax assets will be
recovered from future taxable income and, to the extent we believe that it is more likely than not that all or a portion of our deferred tax assets will not be realized, we must establish a valuation allowance as a charge to income tax expense.
As of September 30, 2021, we have a valuation allowance of $17.7 million against net deferred tax assets in the U.S. and a valuation allowance of $34.4 million against net deferred tax assets in certain foreign jurisdictions. We have concluded, based on the weight of available evidence, that a full valuation allowance is no longer required against our U.S. net deferred tax assets as they are more likely than not to be realized in the future. We will continue to reassess our valuation allowance requirements each financial reporting period.
The valuation allowance recorded against net deferred tax assets of certain foreign jurisdictions is established primarily for our capital loss carryforwards, the majority of which do not expire. However, there are limitations imposed on the utilization of such capital losses that could further restrict the recognition of any tax benefits.
Prior to the passage of the U.S. Tax Act, the Company asserted that substantially all of the undistributed earnings of its foreign subsidiaries were considered indefinitely invested and accordingly, no deferred taxes were provided. Pursuant to the provisions of the U.S. Tax Act, these earnings were subjected to a one-time transition tax and there is therefore no longer a material cumulative basis difference associated with the undistributed earnings. We maintain our assertion to permanently reinvest these earnings outside the U.S. unless repatriation can be done substantially tax-free, with the exception of a foreign holding company formed in 2018 and our Taiwan subsidiary. If we decide to repatriate any additional non-U.S. earnings in the future, we may be required to establish a deferred tax liability on such earnings. The amount of unrecognized deferred tax liability on the undistributed earnings would not be material.
In the normal course of business, PTC and its subsidiaries are examined by various taxing authorities, including the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) in the U.S. We regularly assess the likelihood of additional assessments by tax authorities and provide for these matters as appropriate. We are currently under audit by tax authorities in several jurisdictions. Audits by tax authorities typically involve examination of the deductibility of certain permanent items, transfer pricing, limitations on net operating losses and tax credits. Although we believe our tax estimates are appropriate, the final determination of tax audits and any related litigation could result in material changes in our estimates.
Valuation of Assets and Liabilities Acquired in Business Combinations
In accordance with business combination accounting, we allocate the purchase price of acquired companies to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values. Determining these fair values requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets.
Our identifiable intangible assets acquired consist of developed technology, core technology, tradenames, customer lists and contracts, and software support agreements and related relationships. Developed technology consists of products that have reached technological feasibility. Core technology represents a combination of processes, inventions and trade secrets related to the design and development of acquired products. Customer lists and contracts and software support agreements and related relationships represent the underlying relationships and agreements with customers of the acquired company’s installed base. We have generally valued intangible assets using a discounted cash flow model. Critical estimates in valuing certain of the intangible assets include but are not limited to:
•
future expected cash flows from software license sales, customer support agreements, customer contracts and related customer relationships and acquired developed technologies and trademarks and trade names and
•
discount rates used to determine the present value of estimated future cash flows.
In addition, we estimate the useful lives of our intangible assets based upon the expected period over which we anticipate generating economic benefits from the related intangible asset.
Net tangible assets consist of the fair values of tangible assets less the fair values of assumed liabilities and obligations. Except for deferred revenues, net tangible assets were generally valued by us at the respective carrying amounts recorded by the acquired company, if we believed that their carrying values approximated their fair values at the acquisition date. The values assigned to deferred revenue reflect an amount equivalent to the estimated cost plus an appropriate profit margin to perform the services related to the acquired company’s software support contracts.
In addition, uncertain tax positions and tax-related valuation allowances assumed in connection with a business combination are initially estimated as of the acquisition date and we reevaluate these items quarterly with any adjustments to our preliminary estimates being recorded to goodwill provided that we are within the measurement period (up to one year from the acquisition date) and we continue to collect information in order to determine their estimated values. Subsequent to the measurement period or our final determination of the estimated value of uncertain tax positions or tax-related valuation allowances, whichever comes first, changes to these uncertain tax positions and tax-related valuation allowances will affect our provision for income taxes in our Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Our estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable at that time, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. Assumptions may be incomplete or inaccurate, and unanticipated events and circumstances may occur, which may affect the accuracy or validity of such assumptions, estimates or actual results.
When events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of a finite-lived intangible asset may not be recoverable, we perform an assessment of the asset for potential impairment. This assessment is based on projected undiscounted future cash flows over the asset’s remaining life. If the carrying value of the asset exceeds its undiscounted cash flows, we record an impairment loss equal to the excess of the carrying value over the fair value of the asset, determined using projected discounted future cash flows of the asset.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash
We invest our cash with highly rated financial institutions and in diversified domestic and international money market mutual funds. Cash and cash equivalents include highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less. At September 30, 2021, cash and cash equivalents totaled $327 million, compared to $275 million at September 30, 2020.
A significant portion of our cash is generated and held outside the U.S. As of September 30, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $37 million in the U.S., $111 million in Europe, $145 million in Asia Pacific (including India) and $34 million in other non-U.S. countries. All our marketable securities are held in the U.S. We have substantial cash requirements in the U.S., but we believe that the combination of our existing U.S. cash and cash equivalents, marketable securities, our ability to repatriate cash to the U.S. more cost effectively, future U.S. operating cash flows and cash available under our credit facility will be sufficient to meet our ongoing U.S. operating expenses and known capital requirements.
Cash provided by operating activities
Cash provided by operating activities was $369 million in FY'21 compared to $234 million in FY'20. The year-over-year increase is primarily due to approximately $190 million of higher cash collections and $20
million in contribution from Arena, offset by $80 million more in salary and salary-related payment and an $18 million foreign tax payment.
Restructuring payments totaled $14 million in FY’21, compared to $42 million in FY’20. Cash paid for income taxes was $58 million in FY’21 compared to $53 million in FY’20.
Cash used in investing activities
Cash used in investing activities reflects $718 million used for acquisitions in FY’21, primarily related to Arena compared to $483 million in FY’20 ($469 million of which related to Onshape). For additional detail on our acquisitions, see Note 6. Acquisitions, included in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report. Our expenditures for property and equipment consist primarily of facility improvements, office equipment, computer equipment, and software.
Cash provided by financing activities
FY’21 net borrowings of $432 million were primarily used to fund the Arena acquisition. FY’20 net borrowings were primarily related to the acquisition of Onshape. FY’20 net borrowings reflect the issuance of $1 billion in new notes in February 2020 and the repayment of $500 million of earlier issued notes in May 2020, as well as net repayments of $155 million under our revolving credit facility.
Outstanding Debt
As of September 30, 2021, we had:
As of September 30, 2021, we were in compliance with all financial and operating covenants of the credit facility and the note indentures. Any failure to comply with such covenants under the credit facility would prevent us from being able to borrow additional funds under the credit facility, and, as with any
failure to comply with such covenants under the note indentures, could constitute a default that could cause all amounts outstanding to become due and payable immediately.
Our credit facility and our Senior Notes are described in Note 9. Debt to the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements in this Form 10-K.
Share Repurchase Authorization
Our Articles of Organization authorize us to issue up to 500 million shares of our common stock. Our Board of Directors has authorized us to repurchase up to $1 billion of our common stock through September 30, 2023. We may use cash from operations and borrowings under our credit facility to make any such repurchases. All shares of our common stock repurchased are automatically restored to the status of authorized and unissued.
In FY’21, we repurchased approximately 226 thousand shares in the open market for $30 million. We did not repurchase any shares in FY’20.
Expectations for Fiscal 2022
We believe that existing cash and cash equivalents, together with cash generated from operations and amounts available under the credit facility, will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure requirements (which we expect to be approximately $30 million in FY’22) through at least the next twelve months and to meet our known long-term capital requirements. In FY’22 we expect to pay approximately $50 million to $55 million in restructuring cash payments related to our recently announced restructuring charge as well as previous restructuring charges. In FY’22, we expect to return approximately 25% of our estimated free cash flow excluding restructuring payments, which is expected to be approximately $450 million, to our shareholders through stock repurchases of our common stock.
Our expected uses and sources of cash could change, our cash position could be reduced, and we could incur additional debt obligations if we decide to retire debt, engage in strategic transactions, or repurchase shares, any of which could be commenced, suspended or completed at any time. Any such repurchases or retirement of debt will depend on prevailing market conditions, our liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors. The amounts involved in any debt retirement or issuance, share repurchases, or strategic transactions may be material.
Contractual Obligations
At September 30, 2021, our future contractual obligations were related to debt, leases, pension liabilities, unrecognized tax benefits, and purchase obligations. See Note 9. Debt, Note 19. Leases, Note 14. Pension Plans, and Note 8. Income Taxes of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report for information about those obligations, which Notes are incorporated by reference into this section. Our purchase obligations were approximately $90.4 million, with $43.7 million expected to be paid in FY’22 and $46.8 million thereafter. Purchase obligations represent minimum commitments due to third parties, including royalty contracts, research and development contracts, telecommunication contracts, information technology maintenance contracts in support of internal-use software and hardware, financing leases, operating leases with original terms of less than 12 months, and other marketing and consulting contracts. Contracts for which our commitment is variable, based on volumes, with no fixed minimum quantities, and contracts that can be canceled without payment penalties are not included in the purchase obligation amounts above. The purchase obligations included above are in addition to amounts included in current liabilities and prepaid expenses recorded on our September 30, 2021 Consolidated Balance Sheet.
As of September 30, 2021, we had letters of credit and bank guarantees outstanding of approximately $16.3 million (of which $0.5 million was collateralized).
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not created, and are not party to, any special-purpose or off-balance sheet entities for the purpose of raising capital, incurring debt or operating parts of our business that are not consolidated (to
the extent of our ownership interest therein) into our financial statements. We have not entered into any transactions with unconsolidated entities whereby we have subordinated retained interests, derivative instruments or other contingent arrangements that expose us to material continuing risks, contingent liabilities, or any other obligation under a variable interest in an unconsolidated entity that provides financing, liquidity, market risk or credit risk support to us.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In accordance with recently issued accounting pronouncements, we will be required to comply with certain changes in accounting rules and regulations, none of which are expected to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. Refer to Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements in this Form 10-K for all recently issued accounting pronouncements, which is incorporated herein by reference.