Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Management Overview and Recent Developments in Market Conditions - We are a Houston, Texas-based oilfield services company that primarily owns and operates one of the largest fleets of land-based drilling rigs in the United States and a large fleet of pressure pumping equipment.
Our contract drilling business operates in the continental United States and, from time to time, we pursue contract drilling opportunities in other select markets. Our pressure pumping business operates primarily in Texas and the Appalachian region. We also provide a comprehensive suite of directional drilling services in most major producing onshore oil and gas basins in the United States, and we provide services that improve the statistical accuracy of horizontal wellbore placement. We have other operations through which we provide oilfield rental tools in select markets in the United States. We also service equipment for drilling contractors, and we provide electrical controls and automation to the energy, marine and mining industries in North America and other select markets. In addition, we own and invest, as a non-operating working interest owner, in oil and natural gas assets that are primarily located in Texas and New Mexico.
Reduced demand for crude oil and refined products related to the COVID-19 pandemic, combined with production increases from OPEC+, led to a significant reduction in crude oil prices and demand for drilling and completion services in the United States.
Oil prices remain extremely volatile, as the closing price of oil (WTI-Cushing) reached a first quarter 2020 high of $63.27 per barrel on January 6, 2020, declined to negative $36.98 per barrel on April 20, 2020, and closed at $53.55 per barrel on February 1, 2021. In response to the rapid decline in commodity prices, E&P companies acted swiftly to reduce drilling and completion activity starting late in the first quarter of 2020. While oil prices recovered from the lows experienced in the first half of 2020, our average number of rigs operating remains well below the number of our available rigs, and a significant portion of our pressure pumping horsepower remains stacked. Oil prices averaged $42.45 per barrel in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Quarterly average oil prices and our quarterly average number of rigs operating in the United States for 2018, 2019 and 2020 are as follows:
(1)
The average oil price represents the average monthly WTI spot price as reported by the United States Energy Information Administration.
(2)
A rig is considered to be operating if it is earning revenue pursuant to a contract on a given day.
Our active rig count has declined since the fourth quarter of 2018. Our average active rig count for the fourth quarter of 2020 was 62 rigs. This was an increase from our average active rig count for the third quarter of 2020 of 60 rigs. Our U.S. active rig count at December 31, 2020 of 65 rigs was less than the rig count of 121 rigs at December 31, 2019, due to the significantly reduced demand for drilling services in the United States. Term contracts help support our operating rig count. Based on contracts currently in place, we expect an average of 42 rigs operating under term contracts during the first quarter of 2021 and an average of 34 rigs operating under term contracts throughout 2021.
Due to the downturn in completions activity since March, we averaged seven active pressure pumping spreads during the fourth quarter, up from an average of five active spreads during the third quarter, but down from an average of 12 active spreads during the fourth quarter of 2019. We expect to average seven active pressure pumping spreads during the first quarter of 2021. The pressure pumping market remains oversupplied.
Recent Developments in Financial Matters - During the fourth quarter of 2020, we elected to repurchase portions of our 2028 Notes and 2029 Notes (as defined below) in the open market. The principal amounts retired through these transactions totaled $15.5 million related to our 2028 Notes and $0.8 million related to our 2029 Notes, plus accrued interest. We recorded corresponding gains on the extinguishment of these amounts totaling $3.4 million and $0.2 million, respectively, net of the proportional write-off of associated deferred financing costs and original issuance discounts. These gains are included in “Interest expense, net of amount capitalized” in the consolidated statements of operations.
On December 24, 2020, we elected to repay $50 million of the borrowings under our Term Loan Agreement (as defined below). As of December 31, 2020, we had $50 million in borrowings remaining under the Term Loan Agreement at a LIBOR-based interest rate of 1.52%. The maturity date of the Term Loan Agreement is June 10, 2022.
On March 27, 2020, we entered into Amendment No. 2 to Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (“Amendment No. 2”) to, among other things, extend the maturity date for $550 million of revolving credit commitments of certain lenders under the Credit Agreement (as defined below) from March 27, 2024 to March 27, 2025. We have the option, subject to certain conditions, to exercise an additional one-year extension of the maturity date.
Please see “- Liquidity and Capital Resources” for additional detail regarding our 2028 Notes, 2029 Notes, Term Loan Agreement and Credit Agreement.
During the second quarter of 2020, we implemented a restructuring plan to improve operating margins, achieve operational efficiencies and reduce indirect support costs. The restructuring included workforce reductions, changes to management structure and facility consolidations and closures. We recorded $38.3 million of charges associated with this plan in the second quarter of 2020. In conjunction with our restructuring, we closed our Canadian drilling operations. We recorded an impairment of $8.3 million associated with that closure. We completed the restructuring plan during the third quarter of 2020 and did not incur additional expenses related to the plan.
The following table presents restructuring expenses by reportable segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
We estimate that the restructuring plan implemented in 2020 will result in annual cost savings of approximately $94 million. Of these estimated annual cost savings, approximately $14 million, $43 million, $7 million and $8 million are attributable to operating expense savings for contract drilling, pressure pumping, directional drilling and other operations, respectively. Annual selling, general and administrative cost savings are estimated to be approximately $22 million.
Our revenues, profitability and cash flows are highly dependent upon prevailing prices for oil and natural gas and upon our customers’ ability to access capital to fund their operating and capital expenditures. During periods of improved oil and natural gas prices, the capital spending budgets of oil and natural gas operators tend to expand, which generally results in increased demand for our services. Conversely, in periods when oil and natural gas prices are relatively low or when our customers have a reduced ability to access capital, the demand for our services generally weakens, and we experience downward pressure on pricing for our services. We may also be impacted by delayed customer payments and payment defaults associated with customer liquidity issues and bankruptcies.
The North American oil and natural gas services industry is cyclical and at times experiences downturns in demand. During these periods, there has been substantially more oil and natural gas service equipment available than necessary to meet demand. As a result, oil and natural gas service contractors have had difficulty sustaining profit margins and, at times, have incurred losses during the downturn periods. Currently, there is an excess supply of drilling rigs, pressure pumping equipment and directional drilling equipment. We cannot predict either the future level of demand for our oil and natural gas services or future conditions in the oil and natural gas service businesses.
In addition to the dependence on oil and natural gas prices and demand for our services, we are highly impacted by operational risks, competition, labor issues, weather, the availability, from time to time, of products used in our pressure pumping business, supplier delays and various other factors that could materially adversely affect our business, financial condition, cash flows and results of operations, including as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. See “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of this Report.
For the three years ended December 31, 2020, our operating revenues consisted of the following (dollars in thousands):
Contract Drilling
Contract drilling revenues accounted for 59.5% of our consolidated 2020 revenues and decreased 48.9% from 2019.
We have addressed our customers’ needs for drilling horizontal wells in shale and other unconventional resource plays by improving the capabilities of our drilling fleet during the last several years. The U.S. land rig industry refers to certain high specification rigs as “super-spec” rigs. We consider a super-spec rig to be a 1,500 horsepower, AC powered rig that has at least a 750,000-pound hookload, a 7,500-psi circulating system, and is pad-capable. As of December 31, 2020, our rig fleet included 198 APEX® rigs, of which 150 were super-spec rigs.
We maintain a backlog of commitments for contract drilling services under term contracts, which we define as contracts with a duration of six months or more. Our contract drilling backlog as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 was approximately $301 million and $605 million, respectively. Approximately 21% of the total contract drilling backlog at December 31, 2020 is reasonably expected to remain after 2021. We generally calculate our backlog by multiplying the dayrate under our term drilling contracts by the number of days remaining under the contract. The calculation does not include any revenues related to fees for other services such as for mobilization, other than initial mobilization, demobilization and customer reimbursables, nor does it include potential reductions in rates for unscheduled standby or during periods in which the rig is moving or incurring maintenance and repair time in excess of what is permitted under the drilling contract. For contracts that contain variable dayrate pricing, our backlog calculation uses the dayrate in effect for periods where the dayrate is fixed, and, for periods that remain subject to variable pricing, uses the commodity price in effect at December 31, 2020. In addition, our term drilling contracts are generally subject to termination by the customer on short notice and provide for an early termination payment to us in the event that the contract is terminated by the customer. For contracts on which we have received notice for the rig to be placed on standby, our backlog calculation uses the standby rate for the period over which we expect to receive the standby rate. For contracts on which we have received an early termination notice, our backlog calculation includes the early termination rate, instead of the dayrate, for the period over which we expect to receive the lower rate. See “Item 1A. Risk Factors - Our Current Backlog of Contract Drilling Revenue May Decline and May Not Ultimately Be Realized, as Fixed-Term Contracts May in Certain Instances Be Terminated Without an Early Termination Payment.”
Pressure Pumping
Pressure pumping revenues accounted for 29.9% of our consolidated 2020 revenues and decreased 61.3% from 2019. As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately 1.4 million horsepower in our pressure pumping fleet. The pressure pumping market remains oversupplied. In response to oversupplied market conditions, we implemented changes during the second quarter of 2020 that are intended to further streamline our operations, improve our efficiencies, and reduce our overall cost structure, while maintaining our customer service levels.
Directional Drilling
Directional drilling revenues accounted for 6.5% of our consolidated 2020 revenues and decreased 61.1% from 2019. We provide a comprehensive suite of directional drilling services in most major producing onshore oil and gas basins in the United States. Our directional drilling services include directional drilling, measurement-while-drilling and supply and rental of downhole performance motors and wireline steering tools. We also provide services that improve the statistical accuracy of horizontal wellbore placement.
Other Operations
Other operations revenues accounted for 4.1% of our consolidated 2020 revenues and decreased 56.5% from 2019. Our oilfield rentals business, with a fleet of premium oilfield rental tools, provides the largest revenue contribution to our other operations and provides specialized services for land-based oil and natural gas drilling, completion and workover activities. Other operations also includes the results of our electrical controls and automation business, the results of our drilling equipment service business, and the results of our ownership, as a non-operating working interest owner, in oil and natural gas assets that are primarily located in Texas and New Mexico.
Capital Expenditures
Cash capital expenditures for 2020 totaled $145 million. This was a reduction from the $348 million of cash capital expenditures for 2019, due largely to lower activity levels. Based on our current outlook for activity, we expect our capital expenditures for 2021 to be approximately $135 million.
For the three years ended December 31, 2020, our operating losses consisted of the following (dollars in thousands):
Lower demand for our contract drilling and pressure pumping services, an impairment of goodwill and an implementation of a restructuring plan in 2020 contributed to a consolidated net loss of $804 million for 2020, compared to a consolidated net loss of $426 million for 2019 and consolidated net loss of $321 million for 2018.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following tables summarize results of operations by business segment for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
(1)
Margin is defined as revenues less direct operating costs and excludes depreciation, amortization and impairment and selling, general and administrative expenses. Average margin per operating day is defined as margin divided by operating days.
(2)
A rig is considered to be operating if it is earning revenue pursuant to a contract on a given day.
Reduced demand for crude oil and refined products related to the COVID-19 pandemic, combined with production increases from OPEC+, led to a significant reduction in crude oil prices and demand for contract drilling services.
Generally, the revenues in our contract drilling segment are most impacted by two primary factors: our average number of rigs operating and our average revenue per operating day. During 2020, our average number of rigs operating was 82, compared to 149 in 2019. Our average rig revenue per operating day was $22,380 in 2020, compared to $23,990 in 2019. Our average revenue per operating day is largely dependent on the pricing terms of our rig contracts.
Revenues and direct operating costs decreased primarily due to a decrease in operating days. Average direct operating costs per operating day decreased due to cost reduction efforts and a higher percentage of rigs on standby during 2020. Rigs on standby have very little associated cost. Average margin per operating day in 2020 included benefits from lump sum early termination revenue and a credit to operating costs for sales and use taxes.
Restructuring expenses were recognized in the second quarter of 2020 and primarily related to severance costs. See Note 20 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
The increase in other operating expenses (income), net is primarily due to an insurance reimbursement for damaged drilling equipment.
Depreciation, amortization and impairment expense decreased primarily due to a $173 million write-down in 2019 related to the retirement of 36 legacy non-APEX® drilling rigs. In addition to the charge in 2019, no depreciation expense was recorded for this equipment in 2020. Additionally, in the second quarter of 2020 we recorded a $8.3 million write-down related to the closing of our Canadian drilling operations.
All of the goodwill associated with our contract drilling reporting unit was impaired in 2020. See Note 7 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
The decrease in capital expenditures was primarily due to higher maintenance capital expenditures in 2019 when activity levels were higher and reduced capital expenditures in 2020 due to lower activity.
(1)
Margin is defined as revenues less direct operating costs and excludes depreciation, amortization and impairment and selling, general and administrative expenses. Average margin per total job is defined as margin divided by total jobs. Margin as a percentage of revenues is defined as margin divided by revenues.
Reduced demand for crude oil and refined products related to the COVID-19 pandemic, combined with production increases from OPEC+, led to a significant reduction in crude oil prices and demand for pressure pumping services.
Generally, the revenues in our pressure pumping segment are most impacted by our number of fracturing jobs and the size (including whether or not we provide proppant and other materials) of those jobs, which is reflected in our average revenue per fracturing job. Direct operating costs are also most impacted by these same factors. Our average revenue per fracturing job is largely dependent on the pricing terms of our pressure pumping contracts. We completed 265 fracturing jobs during 2020 compared to 505 fracturing jobs in 2019. Our average revenue per fracturing job was $1.188 million in 2020 compared to $1.674 million in 2019.
Revenues and direct operating costs decreased in 2020 primarily due to a decline in the number of fracturing jobs. Average revenue and direct operating costs per job were impacted by lower demand and a change in the composition of our jobs.
Restructuring expenses were recognized in the second quarter of 2020. These restructuring expenses included $7.3 million related to right-of-use asset abandonments, $3.5 million of severance costs and $20.4 million of contract termination costs. See Note 20 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased primarily as a result of cost reduction efforts.
Depreciation, amortization and impairment expense decreased due to the significant decline in capital expenditures and a $20.5 million write-down of pressure pumping equipment in 2019, which resulted in no depreciation expense being recorded for this equipment in 2020.
The decrease in capital expenditures was primarily due to higher maintenance capital expenditures in 2019 when activity levels were higher and reduced capital expenditures in 2020 due to lower activity.
(1)
Margin is defined as revenues less direct operating costs and excludes depreciation and amortization and selling, general and administrative expenses.
Reduced demand for crude oil and refined products related to the COVID-19 pandemic, combined with production increases from OPEC+, led to a significant reduction in crude oil prices and demand for directional drilling services.
Directional drilling revenue decreased by $115 million from 2019 primarily due to decreased job activity.
Directional drilling direct operating costs decreased by $110 million primarily due to lower direct costs from decreased job activity and cost reduction efforts.
Restructuring expenses were recognized in the second quarter of 2020 and were primarily attributable to severance and right-of-use asset abandonments. See Note 20 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased primarily as a result of cost reduction efforts.
The decrease in capital expenditures was primarily due to higher maintenance capital expenditures in 2019 when activity levels were higher and reduced capital expenditures in 2020 due to lower activity.
(1)
Margin is defined as revenues less direct operating costs and excludes depreciation, depletion, amortization and impairment and selling, general and administrative expenses.
Reduced demand for crude oil and refined products related to the COVID-19 pandemic, combined with production increases from OPEC+, led to a significant reduction in crude oil prices and demand for oilfield rental and other services.
Other operations revenue decreased by $59.2 million from 2019 primarily due to a decrease in the volume of services provided by our oilfield rentals business and a decline in the average price per barrel of crude oil received by our oil and natural gas assets.
Other operations direct operating costs decreased by $43.1 million from 2019 primarily due to a decrease in the volume of services provided by our oilfield rentals business. Additionally, a portion of the decrease is attributed to the decision to transition away from our engineering and manufacturing efforts in Calgary during 2019. Charges associated with this decision totaled $12.4 million for direct operating costs in 2019, which were primarily comprised of inventory write-offs.
Restructuring expenses were recognized in 2020 and related to severance costs. See Note 20 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Selling, general and administrative expense decreased primarily as a result of cost reduction efforts in addition to the transition away from our engineering and manufacturing efforts in Calgary during 2019. Charges associated with that decision totaled $2.2 million in 2019.
Depreciation, depletion, amortization and impairment remained relatively consistent with the comparable prior year period. We recognized a $11.2 million impairment related to certain of our oil and natural gas assets recorded in 2020, whereas $2.2 million of oil and natural gas property impairments were recorded in 2019. However, the increased oil and natural gas property impairments were partially offset by decreased 2020 depletion of our oil and natural gas assets primarily due to a decrease in production as well as certain equipment reaching the end of its depreciable life in our oilfield rentals business.
There were no impairments of goodwill in 2020 as all of the goodwill associated with our oilfield rentals and electrical controls and automation businesses was impaired in 2019.
The decrease in capital expenditures was primarily due to higher maintenance capital expenditures in 2019 when activity levels were higher and reduced capital expenditures in 2020 due to lower activity and commodity prices.
Selling, general and administrative expense decreased primarily as a result of cost reduction efforts.
Restructuring expenses were recognized in 2020 and were primarily attributable to severance and right-of-use asset abandonments. See Note 20 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Other operating expenses (income), net includes net gains or losses associated with the disposal of assets. Accordingly, the related gains or losses have been excluded from the results of specific segments. The majority of the net gain on asset disposals during 2019 reflect gains on disposal of drilling equipment. Legal-related expenses and settlements in 2019 includes proceeds from insurance claims.
Other expenses, net include charges of $9.2 million and $12.7 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively related to a 2017 capacity reservation agreement that required a cash deposit to increase our access to finer grades of sand for our pressure pumping business. As market prices for sand substantially decreased since 2017, we purchased lower cost sand outside of this capacity reservation contract and revalued the deposit at its expected realizable value. There is no value assigned to the capacity reservation contract subsequent to the charge recorded in the second quarter of 2020.
A provision for credit losses was recognized in the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 with respect to accounts receivable balances that are estimated to be uncollectible.
Interest expense was lower in the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. Interest expense for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019 included a loss on debt extinguishment of $24.0 million as a result of full prepayment of the Series A Notes and Series B Notes (as defined below). Additionally, interest expense for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 included a gain on debt extinguishment of $3.6 million associated with the repurchase of portions of our 2028 Notes and 2029 Notes.
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
A discussion of our results of operations for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the fiscal year ended December 31, 2018 is included in Part II, Item 7 - "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 13, 2020.
Income Taxes
The effective tax rate decreased by approximately 6% to 13.7% for 2020 compared to 19.7% for 2019. This difference was primarily due to higher goodwill impairment charges in 2020 relative to 2019, which are not deductible for tax purposes. These charges resulted in an 8.2% decrease to the effective tax rate in 2020, as compared to a 0.7% decrease to the effective tax rate in 2019.
We continue to monitor income tax developments in the United States and other countries where we have legal entities. During 2020, the United States enacted various legislation related to COVID-19 relief, which includes multiple tax provisions. We have considered these tax provisions and do not currently expect any material impact to our financial statements. We will incorporate into our future financial statements the impacts, if any, of future regulations and additional authoritative guidance when finalized.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
During the second quarter of 2020, we implemented a restructuring plan to improve operating margins, achieve operational efficiencies and reduce indirect support costs. The restructuring included workforce reductions, changes to management structure and facility consolidations and closures. We recorded $38.3 million of charges associated with this plan in second quarter of 2020. There were no restructuring charges in the comparable periods of 2019. We completed the restructuring plan during the third quarter of 2020 and did not incur additional expenses related to the plan.
While oilfield services activity and revenues declined significantly throughout 2020, we aligned our cost structure with the changing activity levels and enhanced our liquidity position. Our liquidity as of December 31, 2020 included approximately $204 million in working capital, $225 million of cash and cash equivalents, and approximately $600 million available under our revolving credit facility.
On January 19, 2018, we completed an offering of $525 million in aggregate principal amount of our 2028 Notes. We used $239 million of the net proceeds from the offering to repay amounts outstanding under our revolving credit facility. As described below, on March 27, 2018, we entered into an amended and restated credit agreement, which is a committed senior unsecured revolving credit facility that permits aggregate borrowings of up to $600 million, including a letter of credit facility that, at any time outstanding, is limited to $150 million and a swing line facility that, at any time outstanding, is limited to $20 million.
On August 22, 2019, we entered into the Term Loan Agreement, which permitted a single borrowing of up to $150 million initially, which we drew in full on September 23, 2019. Subject to customary conditions, we may request that the lenders’ aggregate commitments be increased by up to $75 million, not to exceed total commitments of $225 million. On September 25, 2019, we used $150 million of borrowings from the Term Loan Agreement and approximately $158 million of cash on hand to prepay the Series A Notes. The total amount of the prepayment, including the applicable “make-whole” premium, was approximately $308 million, plus accrued interest to the prepayment date. We repaid $50 million of the borrowings under the Term Loan Agreement on December 16, 2019, and an additional $50 million on December 24, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, we had $50 million in borrowings remaining under the Term Loan Agreement at a LIBOR-based interest rate of 1.52%. The maturity date of the Term Loan Agreement is June 10, 2022.
On November 15, 2019, we completed an offering of $350 million in aggregate principal amount of the 2029 Notes. The net proceeds before offering expenses were approximately $347 million. On December 16, 2019, we used a portion of the net proceeds from the offering to prepay the Series B Notes. The total amount of the prepayment, including the applicable “make-whole” premium, was approximately $315 million, plus accrued interest to the prepayment date. The remaining net proceeds and available cash on hand was used to repay $50 million of the borrowings under the Term Loan Agreement.
On March 27, 2020, we entered into Amendment No. 2 to Amended and Restated Credit Agreement to, among other things, extend the maturity date for $550 million of revolving credit commitments of certain lenders under the Credit Agreement from March 27,
2024 to March 27, 2025. We have the option, subject to certain conditions, to exercise an additional one-year extension of the maturity date.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, we elected to repurchase portions of our Senior Notes due 2028 and 2029 in the open market. The principal amounts retired through these transactions totaled $15.5 million related to our 2028 Notes and $0.8 million related to our 2029 Notes, plus accrued interest. We recorded corresponding gains on the extinguishment of these amounts totaling $3.4 million and $0.2 million, respectively, net of the proportional write-off of associated deferred financing costs and original issuance discounts. These gains are included in “Interest expense, net of amount capitalized” in the consolidated statements of operations.
We believe our current liquidity, together with cash expected to be generated from operations, should provide us with sufficient ability to fund our current plans to maintain and make improvements to our existing equipment, service our debt and pay cash dividends for at least the next 12 months.
If we pursue opportunities for growth that require capital, we believe we would be able to satisfy these needs through a combination of working capital, cash flows from operating activities, borrowing capacity under our revolving credit facility or additional debt or equity financing. However, there can be no assurance that such capital will be available on reasonable terms, if at all.
As of December 31, 2020, we had working capital of $204 million, including cash and cash equivalents of $225 million, compared to working capital of $231 million, including cash and cash equivalents of $174 million, at December 31, 2019.
During 2020, our sources of cash flow included:
•
$279 million from operating activities,
•
$20.9 million in proceeds from the disposal of property and equipment and insurance claims.
During 2020, we used $18.9 million to pay dividends on our common stock, $21.2 million for repurchases of our common stock, $12.0 million for repurchases of our 2028 Notes, $0.6 million for repurchases of our 2029 Notes, $50.0 million to repay a portion of the outstanding borrowings under our Term Loan Agreement due June 2022, and $145 million:
•
to make capital expenditures for the betterment and refurbishment of drilling and pressure pumping equipment and, to a much lesser extent, equipment for our other businesses,
•
to acquire and procure equipment to support our drilling, pressure pumping, directional drilling, oilfield rentals and manufacturing operations, and
•
to fund investments in oil and natural gas properties on a non-operating working interest basis.
We paid cash dividends during the year ended December 31, 2020 as follows:
On February 3, 2021, our Board of Directors approved a cash dividend on our common stock in the amount of $0.02 per share to be paid on March 18, 2021 to holders of record as of March 4, 2021. The amount and timing of all future dividend payments, if any, are subject to the discretion of the Board of Directors and will depend upon business conditions, results of operations, financial condition, terms of our debt agreements and other factors.
We may, at any time and from time to time, seek to retire or purchase our outstanding debt for cash through open-market purchases, privately negotiated transactions, redemptions or otherwise. Such repurchases, if any, will be upon such terms and at such prices as we may determine, and will depend on prevailing market conditions, our liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors. The amounts involved may be material.
On September 6, 2013, our Board of Directors approved a stock buyback program that authorized purchases of up to $200 million of our common stock in open market or privately negotiated transactions. On July 25, 2018, our Board of Directors approved an increase of the authorization under the stock buyback program to allow for $250 million of future share repurchases. On February 6, 2019, our Board of Directors approved another increase of the authorization under the stock buyback program to allow for $250 million of future share repurchases. On July 24, 2019, our Board of Directors approved another increase of the authorization under the stock buyback program to allow for $250 million of future share repurchases. All purchases executed to date have been through open market transactions. Purchases under the program are made at management’s discretion, at prevailing prices, subject to market conditions and other factors. Purchases may be made at any time without prior notice. Shares of stock purchased under the buyback program are held as treasury shares. There is no expiration date associated with the buyback program. As of December 31, 2020, we had remaining authorization to purchase approximately $130 million of our outstanding common stock under the stock buyback program.
We acquired shares of stock from employees during 2020, 2019 and 2018 that are accounted for as treasury stock. Certain of these shares were acquired to satisfy the exercise price and employees’ tax withholding obligations upon the exercise of stock options. The remainder of these shares were acquired to satisfy payroll withholding obligations upon the settlement of performance unit awards and the vesting of restricted stock and restricted stock units. These shares were acquired at fair market value. These acquisitions were made pursuant to the terms of the Patterson-UTI Energy, Inc. Amended and Restated 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan, as amended, and not pursuant to the stock buyback program.
Treasury stock acquisitions during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 were as follows (dollars in thousands):
2019 Term Loan Agreement - On August 22, 2019, we entered into a term loan agreement (“Term Loan Agreement”) among us, as borrower, Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as administrative agent and lender and the other lender party thereto.
The Term Loan Agreement is a committed senior unsecured term loan facility that permitted a single borrowing of up to $150 million initially, which we drew in full on September 23, 2019. Subject to customary conditions, we may request that the lenders’ aggregate commitments be increased by up to $75 million, not to exceed total commitments of $225 million. We repaid $50 million of the borrowings under the Term Loan Agreement on December 16, 2019, and an additional $50 million on December 24, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, we had $50 million in borrowings remaining under the Term Loan Agreement at a LIBOR-based interest rate of 1.52%. The maturity date under the Term Loan Agreement is June 10, 2022.
Loans under the Term Loan Agreement bear interest by reference, at our election, to the LIBOR rate or base rate. The applicable margin on LIBOR rate loans varies from 1.00% to 1.375%, and the applicable margin on base rate loans varies from 0.00% to 0.375%, in each case determined based upon our credit rating. As of December 31, 2020, the applicable margin on LIBOR rate loans and base rate loans was 1.375% and 0.375%, respectively.
The Term Loan Agreement contains representations, warranties, affirmative and negative covenants and events of default and associated remedies that we believe are customary for agreements of this nature, including certain restrictions on our ability and the ability of each of our subsidiaries to incur debt and grant liens. If our credit rating is below investment grade at both Moody’s and S&P, we will become subject to a restricted payment covenant, which would require us to have a Pro Forma Debt Service Coverage Ratio (as defined in the Term Loan Agreement) greater than or equal to 1.50 to 1.00 immediately before and immediately after making any restricted payment. Restricted payments include, among other things, dividend payments, repurchases of our common stock, distributions to holders of our common stock or any other payment or other distribution to third parties on account of our or our subsidiaries’ equity interests. Our credit rating is currently investment grade at one of the two ratings agencies.
The Term Loan Agreement requires mandatory prepayment in an amount equal to 100% of the net cash proceeds from the issuance of new senior indebtedness (other than certain permitted indebtedness) if our credit rating is below investment grade at both Moody’s and S&P. Our credit rating is currently investment grade at one of the two ratings agencies. The Term Loan Agreement also requires that our total debt to capitalization ratio, expressed as a percentage, not exceed 50%. The Term Loan Agreement generally defines the total debt to capitalization ratio as the ratio of (a) total borrowed money indebtedness to (b) the sum of such indebtedness plus consolidated net worth, with consolidated net worth determined as of the end of the most recently ended fiscal quarter. We were in compliance with these covenants at December 31, 2020.
Credit Agreement - On March 27, 2018, we entered into an amended and restated credit agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) among us, as borrower, Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as administrative agent, letter of credit issuer, swing line lender and lender, each of the other lenders and letter of credit issuers party thereto, The Bank of Nova Scotia and U.S. Bank National Association, as Co-Syndication Agents, Royal Bank of Canada, as Documentation Agent and Wells Fargo Securities, LLC, The Bank of Nova Scotia and U.S. Bank National Association, as Co-Lead Arrangers and Joint Book Runners.
The Credit Agreement is a committed senior unsecured revolving credit facility that permits aggregate borrowings of up to $600 million, including a letter of credit facility that, at any time outstanding, is limited to $150 million and a swing line facility that, at any time outstanding, is limited to $20 million. Subject to customary conditions, we may request that the lenders’ aggregate commitments be increased by up to $300 million, not to exceed total commitments of $900 million. The original maturity date under the Credit Agreement was March 27, 2023. On March 26, 2019, we entered into Amendment No. 1 to Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, which amended the Credit Agreement to, among other things, extend the maturity date under the Credit Agreement from March 27, 2023 to March 27, 2024. On March 27, 2020, we entered into Amendment No. 2 to Amended and Restated Credit Agreement to, among other things, extend the maturity date for $550 million of revolving credit commitments of certain lenders under the Credit Agreement from March 27, 2024 to March 27, 2025. We have the option, subject to certain conditions, to exercise an additional one-year extension of the maturity date.
Loans under the Credit Agreement bear interest by reference, at our election, to the LIBOR rate or base rate. The applicable margin on LIBOR rate loans varies from 1.00% to 2.00% and the applicable margin on base rate loans varies from 0.00% to 1.00%, in each case determined based upon our credit rating. As of December 31, 2020, the applicable margin on LIBOR rate loans was 1.75% and the applicable margin on base rate loans was 0.75%. A letter of credit fee is payable by us equal to the applicable margin for LIBOR rate loans times the daily amount available to be drawn under outstanding letters of credit. The commitment fee rate payable to the lenders varies from 0.10% to 0.30% based on our credit rating.
None of our subsidiaries are currently required to be a guarantor under the Credit Agreement. However, if any subsidiary guarantees or incurs debt in excess of the Priority Debt Basket (as defined in the Credit Agreement), such subsidiary is required to become a guarantor under the Credit Agreement.
The Credit Agreement contains representations, warranties, affirmative and negative covenants and events of default and associated remedies that we believe are customary for agreements of this nature, including certain restrictions on our ability and the ability of each of our subsidiaries to incur debt and grant liens. If our credit rating is below investment grade at both Moody’s and S&P, we will become subject to a restricted payment covenant, which would require us to have a Pro Forma Debt Service Coverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement) greater than or equal to 1.50 to 1.00 immediately before and immediately after making any restricted payment. Restricted payments include, among other things, dividend payments, repurchases of our common stock, distributions to holders of our common stock or any other payment or other distribution to third parties on account of our or our subsidiaries’ equity interests. Our credit rating is currently investment grade at one of the two ratings agencies. The Credit Agreement also requires that our total debt to capitalization ratio, expressed as a percentage, not exceed 50%. The Credit Agreement generally defines the total debt to capitalization ratio as the ratio of (a) total borrowed money indebtedness to (b) the sum of such indebtedness plus consolidated net worth, with consolidated net worth determined as of the end of the most recently ended fiscal quarter. We were in compliance with these covenants at December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, we had no borrowings outstanding under our revolving credit facility. We had $0.1 million in letters of credit outstanding under the Credit Agreement at December 31, 2020 and, as a result, had available borrowing capacity of approximately $600 million at that date.
2015 Reimbursement Agreement - On March 16, 2015, we entered into a Reimbursement Agreement (the “Reimbursement Agreement”) with The Bank of Nova Scotia (“Scotiabank”), pursuant to which we may from time to time request that Scotiabank issue an unspecified amount of letters of credit. As of December 31, 2020, we had $60.7 million in letters of credit outstanding under the Reimbursement Agreement.
Under the terms of the Reimbursement Agreement, we will reimburse Scotiabank on demand for any amounts that Scotiabank has disbursed under any letters of credit. Fees, charges and other reasonable expenses for the issuance of letters of credit are payable by us at the time of issuance at such rates and amounts as are in accordance with Scotiabank’s prevailing practice. We are obligated to pay to Scotiabank interest on all amounts not paid by us on the date of demand or when otherwise due at the LIBOR rate plus 2.25% per annum, calculated daily and payable monthly, in arrears, on the basis of a calendar year for the actual number of days elapsed, with interest on overdue interest at the same rate as on the reimbursement amounts.
We have also agreed that if obligations under the Credit Agreement are secured by liens on any of our or our subsidiaries’ property, then our reimbursement obligations and (to the extent similar obligations would be secured under the Credit Agreement) other obligations under the Reimbursement Agreement and any letters of credit will be equally and ratably secured by all property subject to such liens securing the Credit Agreement.
Pursuant to a Continuing Guaranty dated as of March 16, 2015, our payment obligations under the Reimbursement Agreement are jointly and severally guaranteed as to payment and not as to collection by our subsidiaries that from time to time guarantee payment under the Credit Agreement. None of our subsidiaries are currently required to guarantee payment under the Credit Agreement.
Series A Senior Notes and Series B Senior Notes - On October 5, 2010, we completed the issuance and sale of $300 million in aggregate principal amount of our 4.97% Series A Senior Notes due October 5, 2020 (the “Series A Notes”) in a private placement. The Series A Notes bore interest at a rate of 4.97% per annum. On September 25, 2019, we fully prepaid the Series A Notes. The total amount of the prepayment, including the applicable “make-whole” premium, was approximately $308 million, which represents 100% of the principal and the “make-whole” premium to the prepayment date.
On June 14, 2012, we completed the issuance and sale of $300 million in aggregate principal amount of our 4.27% Series B Senior Notes due June 14, 2022 (the “Series B Notes”) in a private placement. The Series B Notes bore interest at a rate of 4.27% per annum. On December 16, 2019, we fully prepaid the Series B Notes. The total amount of the prepayment, including the applicable “make-whole” premium, was approximately $315 million, which represents 100% of the principal and the “make-whole” premium to the prepayment date.
Primarily as a result of the “make-whole” premiums, we incurred an $8.2 million loss on early extinguishment of the Series A Notes in the three months ended September 30, 2019, and a $15.8 million loss on early extinguishment of the Series B Notes in the three months ended December 31, 2019, which were included in “Interest expense, net of amount capitalized” in the consolidated statements of operations.
2028 Senior Notes and 2029 Senior Notes - On January 19, 2018, we completed an offering of $525 million in aggregate principal amount of our 3.95% Senior Notes due 2028 (the “2028 Notes”). The net proceeds before offering expenses were approximately $521 million, of which we used $239 million to repay amounts outstanding under our revolving credit facility. On November 15, 2019, we completed an offering of $350 million in aggregate principal amount of our 5.15% Senior Notes due 2029 (the “2029 Notes”). The net proceeds before offering expenses were approximately $347 million. We used a portion of the net proceeds from the offering to prepay our Series B Notes. The remaining net proceeds and available cash on hand was used to repay $50 million of the borrowings under the Term Loan Agreement in 2019.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, we elected to repurchase portions of our 2028 Notes and 2029 Notes in the open market. The principal amounts retired through these transactions totaled $15.5 million related to our 2028 Notes and $0.8 million related to our 2029 Notes, plus accrued interest. We recorded corresponding gains on the extinguishment of these amounts totaling $3.4 million and $0.2 million, respectively, net of the proportional write-off of associated deferred financing costs and original issuance discounts. These gains are included in “Interest expense, net of amount capitalized” in the consolidated statements of operations.
We pay interest on the 2028 Notes on February 1 and August 1 of each year. The 2028 Notes will mature on February 1, 2028. The 2028 Notes bear interest at a rate of 3.95% per annum.
We pay interest on the 2029 Notes on May 15 and November 15 of each year. The 2029 Notes will mature on November 15, 2029. The 2029 Notes bear interest at a rate of 5.15% per annum.
The 2028 Notes and 2029 Notes (together, the “Senior Notes”) are our senior unsecured obligations, which rank equally with all of our other existing and future senior unsecured debt and will rank senior in right of payment to all of our other future subordinated debt. The Senior Notes will be effectively subordinated to any of our future secured debt to the extent of the value of the assets securing such debt. In addition, the Senior Notes will be structurally subordinated to the liabilities (including trade payables) of our subsidiaries that do not guarantee the Senior Notes. None of our subsidiaries are currently required to be a guarantor under the Senior Notes. If our subsidiaries guarantee the Senior Notes in the future, such guarantees (the “Guarantees”) will rank equally in right of payment with all of the guarantors’ future unsecured senior debt and senior in right of payment to all of the guarantors’ future subordinated debt. The Guarantees will be effectively subordinated to any of the guarantors’ future secured debt to the extent of the value of the assets securing such debt.
At our option, we may redeem the Senior Notes in whole or in part, at any time or from time to time at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of such Senior Notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, on those Senior Notes to the redemption date, plus a “make-whole” premium. Additionally, commencing on November 1, 2027, in the case of the 2028 Notes, and on August 15, 2029, in the case of the 2029 Notes, at our option, we may redeem the respective Senior Notes in whole or in part, at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the Senior Notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, on those Senior Notes to the redemption date.
The indentures pursuant to which the Senior Notes were issued include covenants that, among other things, limit our and our subsidiaries’ ability to incur certain liens, engage in sale and lease-back transactions or consolidate, merge, or transfer all or substantially all of their assets. These covenants are subject to important qualifications and limitations set forth in the indentures.
Upon the occurrence of a change of control triggering event, as defined in the indentures, each holder of the Senior Notes may require us to purchase all or a portion of such holder’s Senior Notes at a price equal to 101% of their principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but excluding, the repurchase date.
The indentures also provide for events of default which, if any of them occurs, would permit or require the principal of, premium, if any, and accrued interest, if any, on the Senior Notes to become or to be declared due and payable.
Commitments - As of December 31, 2020, we maintained letters of credit in the aggregate amount of $60.8 million primarily for the benefit of various insurance companies as collateral for retrospective premiums and retained losses which could become payable under the terms of the underlying insurance contracts. These letters of credit expire annually at various times during the year and are typically renewed. As of December 31, 2020, no amounts had been drawn under the letters of credit.
As of December 31, 2020, we had commitments to purchase major equipment totaling approximately $14.7 million for our drilling, pressure pumping, directional drilling and oilfield rentals businesses.
Our pressure pumping business has entered into agreements to purchase minimum quantities of proppants and chemicals from certain vendors. The agreements expire in years 2021 and 2022. As of December 31, 2020, the remaining obligation under these agreements was approximately $13.4 million, of which approximately $10.0 million and $3.4 million relate to 2021 and 2022, respectively. In the event the required minimum quantities are not purchased during any contract year, we could be required to make a liquidated damages payment to the respective vendor for any shortfall. In 2017, we entered into a capacity reservation agreement that required a cash deposit to increase our access to finer grades of sand for our pressure pumping business. As market prices for sand substantially decreased since 2017, we purchased lower cost sand outside of this capacity reservation contract and recorded a charge of $9.2 million and $12.7 million in the second quarters of 2020 and 2019, respectively, to revalue the deposit to its expected realizable value. There is no value assigned to the capacity reservation contract subsequent to the charge recorded in the second quarter of 2020.
Trading and Investing - We have not engaged in trading activities that include high-risk securities, such as derivatives and non-exchange traded contracts. We invest cash primarily in highly liquid, short-term investments such as overnight deposits and money market accounts.
Contractual Obligations
The following table presents information with respect to our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
(1)
Principal repayment of the 2029 Notes is required at maturity on November 15, 2029.
(2)
Interest to be paid on the 2029 Notes using 5.15% coupon rate.
(3)
Principal repayment of the Term Loan Agreement is required at maturity on June 10, 2022.
(4)
Interest to be paid on Term Loan Agreement using a LIBOR-based interest rate of 1.52% rate in effect as of December 31, 2020.
(5)
Principal repayment of the 2028 Notes is required at maturity on February 1, 2028.
(6)
Interest to be paid on the 2028 Notes using 3.95% coupon rate.
(7)
See Note 13 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
(8)
Represents commitments to purchase major equipment to be delivered in 2021 based on expected delivery dates.
(9)
Represents commitments to purchase proppants and chemicals for our pressure pumping business.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We had no off-balance sheet arrangements at December 31, 2020.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“Adjusted EBITDA”) is not defined by accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”). We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) plus net interest expense, income tax expense (benefit) and depreciation, depletion, amortization and impairment expense (including impairment of goodwill). We present Adjusted EBITDA because we believe it provides to both management and investors additional information with respect to the performance of our fundamental business activities and a comparison of the results of our operations from period to period and against our peers without regard to our financing methods or capital structure. We exclude the items listed above from net income (loss) in arriving at Adjusted EBITDA because these amounts can vary substantially from company to company within our industry depending upon accounting methods and book values of assets, capital structures and the method by which the assets were acquired. Adjusted EBITDA should not be construed as an alternative to the U.S. GAAP measure of net income (loss). Our computations of Adjusted EBITDA may not be the same as other similarly titled measures of other companies. Set forth below is a reconciliation of the non-U.S. GAAP financial measure of Adjusted EBITDA to the U.S. GAAP financial measure of net income (loss).
Critical Accounting Policies
In addition to established accounting policies, our consolidated financial statements are impacted by certain estimates and assumptions made by management. The following is a discussion of our critical accounting policies pertaining to property and equipment, goodwill, revenue recognition, leases and the use of estimates.
Property and equipment - Property and equipment, including betterments which extend the useful life of the asset, are stated at cost. Maintenance and repairs are charged to expense when incurred. We provide for the depreciation of our property and equipment using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives. Our method of depreciation does not change when equipment becomes idle; we continue to depreciate idled equipment on a straight-line basis. No provision for salvage value is considered in determining depreciation of our property and equipment.
On a periodic basis, we evaluate our fleet of drilling rigs for marketability based on the condition of inactive rigs, expenditures that would be necessary to bring inactive rigs to working condition and the expected demand for drilling services by rig type. The components comprising rigs that will no longer be marketed are evaluated, and those components with continuing utility to our other marketed rigs are transferred to other rigs or to our yards to be used as spare equipment. The remaining components of these rigs are retired. In the second quarter of 2020, we recorded an impairment of $8.3 million related to the closing of our Canadian drilling operations. In 2019, we identified 36 legacy non-APEX® rigs and related equipment that would be retired. Based on the strong customer preference across the industry for super-spec drilling rigs, we believed the 36 rigs that were retired had limited commercial opportunity. We recorded a $173 million charge related to this retirement. In 2018, we identified 42 legacy non-APEX® rigs and related equipment that would be retired. Based on the strong customer preference across the industry for super-spec drilling rigs, we believed the 42 rigs that were retired had limited commercial opportunity. We recorded a $48.4 million charge related to this retirement.
We also periodically evaluate our pressure pumping assets for marketability based on the condition of inactive equipment, expenditures that would be necessary to bring the equipment to working condition and the expected demand. The components of equipment that will no longer be marketed are evaluated, and those components with continuing utility will be used as parts to support active equipment. The remaining components of this equipment are retired. In 2019, we recorded a charge of $20.5 million for the write-down of pressure pumping equipment compared to a $17.4 million write-down of pressure pumping equipment in 2018. There was no similar charge in 2020.
We also periodically evaluate our directional drilling assets. During 2019, we recorded a charge of $8.4 million for the write-down of directional drilling equipment. There was no similar charge in 2020 or 2018.
We review our long-lived assets, including property and equipment, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amounts of certain assets may not be recovered over their estimated remaining useful lives (“triggering events”). In connection with this review, assets are grouped at the lowest level at which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of other asset groupings. We estimate future cash flows over the life of the respective assets or asset groupings in our assessment of impairment. These estimates of cash flows are based on historical cyclical trends in the industry as well as our expectations regarding the continuation of these trends in the future. Provisions for asset impairment are charged against income when estimated future cash flows, on an undiscounted basis, are less than the asset’s net book value. Any provision for impairment is measured at fair value.
2020 Triggering Event Assessment
Due to the decline in the market price of our common stock and commodity prices in the first quarter of 2020, we lowered our expectations with respect to future activity levels in certain of our operating segments. We deemed it necessary to assess the recoverability of our contract drilling, pressure pumping, directional drilling and oilfield rentals asset groups as of March 31, 2020. We performed an analysis as required by ASC 360-10-35 to assess the recoverability of the asset groups within our contract drilling, pressure pumping, directional drilling and oilfield rentals operating segments as of March 31, 2020. With respect to these asset groups, future cash flows were estimated over the expected remaining life of the assets, and we determined that, on an undiscounted basis, expected cash flows exceeded the carrying value of the asset groups, and no impairment was indicated. Expected cash flows, on an undiscounted basis, exceeded the carrying values of the asset groups within the contract drilling, pressure pumping, directional drilling and oilfield rentals operating segments by approximately 15%, 22%, 3% and 9%, respectively.
For the assessment performed in the first quarter of 2020, the expected cash flows for our asset groups included revenue and operating expense growth rates. Also, the expected cash flows for the contract drilling, pressure pumping, directional drilling and oilfield rentals asset groups were based on the assumption that activity levels in all four segments would generally be lower than levels experienced in the second half of 2019 and the first quarter of 2020 and would begin to recover in 2022 in response to improved oil prices. While we believed these assumptions with respect to future oil pricing were reasonable, actual future prices and activity levels may vary significantly from the ones that were assumed. The timeframe over which oil prices and activity levels may recover is highly uncertain. Potential events that could affect our assumptions regarding future prices and the timeframe for a recovery are affected by factors such as those described in “Risk Factors-We Are Dependent on the Oil and Natural Gas Industry and Market Prices for Oil and Natural Gas. Declines in Customers’ Operating and Capital Expenditures and in Oil and Natural Gas Prices May Adversely Affect Our Operating Results.”
All of these factors are beyond our control. If the lower oil price environment experienced in 2020 were to last into late 2022 and beyond, our actual cash flows would likely be less than the expected cash flows used in these assessments and could result in impairment charges in the future, and such impairment charges could be material.
After the assessment we performed in the first quarter of 2020, we concluded that no triggering events occurred during the periods thereafter through December 31, 2020 with respect to our asset groups based on our recent results of operations, management’s expectations of operating results in future periods and the prevailing commodity prices at the time.
2019 Triggering Event Assessment
Due to the decline in the market price of our common stock and commodity prices, our results of operations for the quarter ended September 30, 2019 and management’s expectations of operating results in future periods, we lowered our expectations with respect to future activity levels in certain of our operating segments. We deemed it necessary to assess the recoverability of our contract drilling, pressure pumping, directional drilling and oilfield rentals asset groups as of September 30, 2019. We performed an analysis as required by ASC 360-10-35 to assess the recoverability of the asset groups within our contract drilling, pressure pumping, directional drilling and oilfield rentals operating segments as of September 30, 2019. With respect to these asset groups, future cash flows were estimated over the expected remaining life of the assets, and we determined that, on an undiscounted basis, expected cash flows exceeded the carrying value of the asset groups, and no impairment was indicated. Expected cash flows, on an undiscounted basis, exceeded the carrying values of the asset groups within the contract drilling, pressure pumping, directional drilling and oilfield rentals operating segments by approximately 35%, 54%, 23% and 7%, respectively.
For the assessment performed in 2019, the expected cash flows for our asset groups included revenue and operating expense growth rates. Also, the expected cash flows for the contract drilling, pressure pumping, directional drilling and oilfield rentals asset groups were based on the assumption that activity levels in all four segments would generally be lower than levels experienced in 2019 and would begin to recover in late 2020 or 2021 in response to improved oil prices.
We concluded that no triggering events occurred during the quarter ended December 31, 2019 with respect to our asset groups based on our recent results of operations, management’s expectations of operating results in future periods and the prevailing commodity prices at the time.
2018 Triggering Event Assessment
Due to the decline in the market price of our common stock and the deterioration of crude oil prices in the fourth quarter of 2018, we lowered our expectations with respect to future activity levels in certain of our operating segments. We deemed it necessary to assess the recoverability of our contract drilling, pressure pumping, directional drilling and oilfield rentals asset groups. We performed an analysis as required by ASC 360-10-35 to assess the recoverability of the asset groups within our contract drilling, pressure pumping, directional drilling and oilfield rentals operating segments as of December 31, 2018. With respect to these asset groups, future cash flows were estimated over the expected remaining life of the assets, and we determined that, on an undiscounted basis, expected cash flows exceeded the carrying value of the asset groups, and no impairment was indicated. Expected cash flows, on an undiscounted basis, exceeded the carrying values of the asset groups within the contract drilling, pressure pumping, directional drilling and oilfield rentals operating segments by approximately 38%, 58%, 9% and 23%, respectively.
For the assessment performed in 2018, the expected cash flows for our asset groups included revenue and operating expense growth rates. Also, the expected cash flows for the contract drilling, pressure pumping, directional drilling and oilfield rentals asset groups were based on the assumption that activity levels in all four segments would generally be lower than levels experienced in the fourth quarter of 2018, and would begin to recover in late 2019 and continue into 2020 in response to improved oil prices and activity levels.
Goodwill - Goodwill is considered to have an indefinite useful economic life and is not amortized. Goodwill is evaluated at least annually as of December 31, or when circumstances require, to determine if the fair value of recorded goodwill has decreased below its carrying value. For impairment testing purposes, goodwill is evaluated at the reporting unit level. Our reporting units for impairment testing are our operating segments. We determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value after considering qualitative, market and other factors, and if this is the case, any necessary goodwill impairment is determined using a quantitative impairment test. From time to time, we may perform quantitative testing for goodwill impairment in lieu of performing the qualitative assessment. If the resulting fair value of goodwill is less than the carrying value of goodwill, an impairment loss would be recognized for the amount of the shortfall.
2020 Triggering Event Assessment
Due to the decline in the market price of our common stock and commodity prices in the first quarter of 2020, we lowered our expectations with respect to future activity levels in our contract drilling reporting unit. We performed a quantitative impairment assessment of our goodwill as of March 31, 2020. In completing the assessment, the fair value of our contract drilling operating segment was estimated using the income approach. The estimate of fair value required the use of significant unobservable inputs, representative of a Level 3 fair value measurement. The assumptions included discount rates, revenue growth rates, operating expense growth rates, and terminal growth rates.
Based on the results of the goodwill impairment test as of March 31, 2020, impairment was indicated in our contract drilling reporting unit. We recognized an impairment charge of $395 million in the quarter ended March 31, 2020 associated with the impairment of all of the goodwill in our contract drilling reporting unit. We had no remaining goodwill balance as of December 31, 2020.
2019 Triggering Event Assessment
Due to the decline in the market price of our common stock and recent commodity prices, our results of operations for the quarter ended September 30, 2019 and our expectations of operating results in future periods, we lowered our expectations with respect to future activity levels in certain of our operating segments. We performed a quantitative impairment assessment of our goodwill as of September 30, 2019. In completing the assessment, the fair value of each reporting unit was estimated using the income approach. The estimate of fair value for each reporting unit required the use of significant unobservable inputs, representative of a Level 3 fair value measurement. The assumptions included discount rates, revenue growth rates, operating expense growth rates, and terminal growth rates.
Based on the results of the goodwill impairment test as of September 30, 2019, the fair value of the contract drilling reporting unit exceeded its carrying value by approximately 13% and we concluded that no impairment was indicated in our contract drilling reporting unit; however, impairment was indicated in our oilfield rentals and electrical controls and automation reporting units included in the other operations segment. We recognized an impairment charge of $17.8 million in 2019 associated with the impairment of all of the goodwill in our oilfield rentals and electrical controls and automation reporting units.
In connection with our annual goodwill impairment assessment as of December 31, 2019, we determined based on an assessment of qualitative factors that it was more likely than not that the fair values of our reporting units were greater than the respective carrying amount. In making this determination, we considered the current and expected levels of commodity prices for oil and natural gas, which influence the overall level of business activity in our reporting units, as well as our 2019 operating results and forecasted operating results for the succeeding year. We also considered our overall market capitalization at December 31, 2019.
2018 Triggering Event Assessment
Due to the decline in the market price of our common stock and the deterioration of crude oil prices in the fourth quarter of 2018, we lowered our expectations with respect to future activity levels in certain of our operating segments. We performed a quantitative impairment assessment of our goodwill as of December 31, 2018. In completing the assessment, the fair value of each reporting unit was estimated using the income approach. The estimate of fair value for each reporting unit required the use of significant unobservable inputs, representative of a Level 3 fair value measurement. The assumptions included discount rates, revenue growth rates, operating expense growth rates, and terminal growth rates.
Based on the results of the goodwill impairment test as of December 31, 2018, the fair value of the contract drilling and oilfield rentals reporting units exceeded their carrying values by approximately 16% and 14%, respectively, and we concluded that no impairment was indicated in our contract drilling and oilfield rentals reporting units; however, impairment was indicated in our pressure pumping and directional drilling reporting units. We recognized an impairment charge of $211 million associated with the impairment of all of the goodwill in our pressure pumping and directional drilling reporting units.
Revenue recognition - On January 1, 2018, we adopted the new revenue guidance under Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, using the modified retrospective method for contracts that were not complete at December 31, 2017. The adoption of the new accounting standard did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements, and a cumulative adjustment was not recognized. Revenues for reporting periods beginning after January 1, 2018 are presented under Topic 606, while revenues prior to January 1, 2018 continue to be reported under previous revenue recognition requirements of Topic 605.
Leases - On January 1, 2019, we adopted the new lease guidance under Topic 842, Leases, using the modified retrospective approach to each lease that existed at the date of initial application as well as leases entered into after that date. We have elected to report all leases at the beginning of the period of adoption and not restate our comparative periods. This standard does not apply to leases to explore for or use minerals, oil, natural gas and similar non-regenerative resources, including the intangible right to explore for those natural resources and rights to use the land in which those natural resources are contained. See Note 13 for Notes to consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Use of estimates - The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make certain estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from such estimates.
Key estimates used by management include:
•
allowance for credit losses,
•
depreciation, depletion and amortization,
•
fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in acquisitions,
•
goodwill and long-lived asset impairments, and
•
reserves for self-insured levels of insurance coverage.
For additional information on our accounting policies, see Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included as a part of Item 8 of this Report.
Volatility of Oil and Natural Gas Prices and its Impact on Operations and Financial Condition
Our revenue, profitability and cash flows are highly dependent upon prevailing prices for oil and natural gas and expectations about future prices. For many years, oil and natural gas prices and markets have been extremely volatile. Prices are affected by many factors beyond our control. Please see “Risk Factors - We are Dependent on the Oil and Natural Gas Industry and Market Prices for Oil and Natural Gas. Declines in Customers’ Operating and Capital Expenditures and in Oil and Natural Gas Prices May Adversely Affect Our Operating Results” in Item 1A of this Report. Oil prices remain extremely volatile, as the closing price of oil (WTI-Cushing) reached a first quarter 2020 high of $63.27 per barrel on January 6, 2020, declined to negative $36.98 per barrel on April 20, 2020, and closed at $53.55 per barrel on February 1, 2021. In response to the rapid decline in commodity prices, E&P companies acted swiftly to reduce drilling and completion activity starting late in the first quarter of 2020. While oil prices have recovered from the lows experienced in the first half of 2020, our average number of rigs operating remains well below the number of our available rigs, and a significant portion of our pressure pumping horsepower remains stacked. Oil prices averaged $42.45 per barrel in the fourth quarter of 2020.
We expect oil and natural gas prices to continue to be volatile and to affect our financial condition, operations and ability to access sources of capital. Higher oil and natural gas prices do not necessarily result in increased activity because demand for our services is generally driven by our customers’ expectations of future oil and natural gas prices, as well as our customers’ ability to access sources of capital to fund their operating and capital expenditures. A decline in demand for oil and natural gas, prolonged low oil or natural gas prices, expectations of decreases in oil and natural gas prices or a reduction in the ability of our customers to access capital, would likely result in reduced capital expenditures by our customers and decreased demand for our services, which could have a material adverse effect on our operating results, financial condition and cash flows. Even during periods of historically moderate or high prices for oil and natural gas, companies exploring for oil and natural gas may cancel or curtail programs, or reduce their levels of capital expenditures for exploration and production for a variety of reasons, which could reduce demand for our services.
Impact of Inflation
Inflation has not had a significant impact on our operations during the three years ended December 31, 2020. We believe that inflation will not have a significant near-term impact on our financial position.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
For a discussion of recently issued accounting standards, see Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included as a part of Item 8 of this Report.