Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and the related notes included at the end of this report. This discussion and other parts of this report contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Risk factors” section of this report, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on Protagenic’s financial statements, which Protagenic has prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires Protagenic to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. On an ongoing basis, Protagenic evaluates such estimates and judgments, including those described in greater detail below. Protagenic bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that Protagenic believes are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and minimal positive net cash flows from operations or negative net cash flows from operations for the foreseeable future, and those expenses and losses may fluctuate significantly from quarter-to-quarter and year-to-year. We anticipate that our expenses will fluctuate substantially as we:
● continue our ongoing preclinical studies, clinical trials and our product development activities for our pipeline of product candidates;
● seek regulatory approvals for any product candidates that successfully complete clinical trials;
● continue research and preclinical development and initiate clinical trials of our other product candidates;
● seek to discover and develop additional product candidates either internally or in partnership with other pharmaceutical companies;
● adapt our regulatory compliance efforts to incorporate requirements applicable to marketed products;
● maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio; and
● incur additional legal, accounting and other expenses in operating as a public company.
Results of Operations
We are a development stage company currently performing clinical trials to obtain Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) approval and commercialization of our product.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred a loss from operations of $2,551,611 as compared to $2,086,130 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in the loss is due to a decrease in research and development expense of $108,150 from $807,947 for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $699,797 for the year ended December 31, 2020, and an increase in general and administrative expenses of $573,631 from $1,278,183 for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $1,851,814 or the year ended December 31, 2020 due to an increase in stock compensation expense.
Liquidity and Going Concern
We continually project anticipated cash requirements, predominantly from the ongoing funding requirements of our neuropeptide drug development program. The majority of these expenses relate to paying external vendors such as Contract Research Organizations (CROs) and peptide synthesizer companies. They could also include business combinations, capital expenditures, and new drug development working capital requirements. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $671,091 and working capital of $224,060. The Company currently has a derivative liability on the books in the amount of $83,670 and we don’t expect to settle this liability in cash. Removing the derivative liability from the working capital calculation would increase our working capital to $307,730. We anticipate further losses in the development of our business. Based on its current forecast and budget, Management believes that its cash resources will be sufficient to fund its operations at least until the end of the third quarter of 2021. Absent generation of sufficient revenue from the execution of the Company’s business plan, it will need to obtain debt or equity financing by the third quarter of 2021.
Operating activities used $1,348,779 and $487,990 in cash for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The use of cash in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily comprised of $2,548,735 net loss, $1,654,754 in stock compensation expense, ($248,552) of change in the fair value of the derivative liability since December 31, 2019, a decrease in prepaid expenses of $164,802, amortization of debt discount of $154,899, and a ($196,629) decrease of accounts payable and accrued expenses, which included payments to tax penalties, legal and accounting professionals, payments to consultants, and other administrative expenses.
Investing activities provided $0 and $250,000 in cash for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of $250,000 from the sale of marketable securities.
Financing activities provided $1,223,410 and $670,000 in cash for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The cash provided by financing consisted of $1,177,500 in proceeds from convertible notes, $150,000 in proceeds from convertible notes from related parties, and ($104,090) in payment of debt issuance costs of convertible notes for the year ended December 31, 2020. The cash provided by financing consisted of $420,000 in proceeds from convertible notes and $250,000 in proceeds from convertible notes from related parties for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Contractual Obligations
The following table sets forth certain information concerning the future contractual obligations under our convertible notes at December 31, 2020.
Plan of Operations
Business Overview
The Company is in its developmental stage, with encouraging but not conclusive evidence that its lead drug candidate, PT00014, may be effective as an anti-anxiety and/or anti-depression drug. It is focused on confirming the efficacy of this drug candidate, along with performing the other preclinical steps needed to progress along the pathway to bring this drug candidate into human clinical trials and eventually, to the global market to provide a new pharmaceutical for patients suffering from anxiety or treatment-resistant depression.
We anticipate $4,225,000 in capital expenditures in FY 2021 to implement our current plan of operations in connection with the development of PT00114.
If we are able to successfully develop our drug, PT00114, and obtain FDA approval, we could then begin marketing and selling it in the United States and generate revenue. FDA approval to begin commercial sales is the singular gating item that will allow us to begin generating sales revenue in the U.S., so it will have an enormous impact on our business plan and our financial condition. It is anticipated that the sale of our drug will allow the Company to generate enough sales revenue to support all of our operations and to generate a profit. However, given the stage of development, even if FDA Approval is obtained, we do not anticipate generating any revenue from sales prior to 2024.
Development Milestones (upcoming developmental milestones)
Upcoming development milestones include confirming efficacy of our lead drug candidate in an animal model in a CRO, conducting toxicology testing in two animal species, and filing an IND application to begin human clinical trials.
Human Resources (current state of employees)
The Company has two part-time employees: Garo H. Armen, PhD, the Executive Chairman, and Alexander K. Arrow, MD, the Chief Financial Officer. The Company also has six paid consultants: Andrew Slee, PhD, Chief Operating Officer, Robert S. Stein, MD, PhD, Chief Medical Officer, Dalia Barsyte, PhD, Scientific Advisor, David Lovejoy, PhD, Scientific Advisor, and Zack Armen, Strategic Advisor.
Financing - Capital Needs
In addition to the working capital being generated via the Convertible Note Offering, the Company anticipates that it will need to raise additional capital in the next year or so to support its research and development activities as it prepares to commence and commences human clinical trials. The Company does not have any commitments for such additional capital.
Over the next three years, we currently anticipate capital expenditures of $4,225,00 in 2021, $6,278,000 in 2022, and $12,215,000 in 2023. These expenditures are anticipated to be focused on conducting research and development activities in connection with our lead drug candidate as well as other potential drug candidates.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no material off-balance sheet arrangements that are likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital resources, or capital expenditures.
Critical accounting policies and estimates
Our discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). The notes to the consolidated financial statements contained in this Annual Report describe our significant accounting policies used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. Actual results could differ from those estimates. We continually evaluate our critical accounting policies and estimates.
We believe the critical accounting policies listed below reflect significant judgments, estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Foreign Currency Translation and Transactions. The assets and liabilities of our foreign subsidiary PTI Canada are translated into U.S. dollars from the functional currency using the exchange rate in effect at the balance sheets date. Additionally, the accounts on the statements of operations are translated using exchange rates approximating average rates prevailing during the years. Equity accounts are translated at historical exchange rates. Translation adjustments that arise from translating its financial statements from the local currency to the U.S. dollar are accumulated and reflected as a separate component of stockholders’ equity (deficit). The current year effects of the transaction adjustments are included on the statement of operations as a realized gain (loss) on foreign transaction exchange.
Use of Estimates. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses as well as the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Management continually evaluates its estimates and judgments including those related to accruals, contingencies, valuation allowance for deferred tax assets, and valuation of stock options and warrants. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience and other factors that are believed to be reasonable in the circumstances. Actual results may differ from those estimates. Macroeconomic conditions may directly, or indirectly through our business partners and vendors, impact our financial performance and available resources. Such conditions may, in turn, impact the aforementioned estimates and assumptions.
Fair Value Measurements. Accounting Standards Codification ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurements and Disclosure,” defines fair value as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date, not adjusted for transaction costs. ASC 820 also establishes a fair value hierarchy that prioritizes the inputs to valuation techniques used to measure fair value into three broad levels giving the highest priority to quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (Level 1) and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs (Level 3).
The three levels are described below:
Level 1 Inputs - Unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities that is accessible by the Company;
Level 2 Inputs - Quoted prices in markets that are not active or financial instruments for which all significant inputs are observable, either directly or indirectly;
Level 3 Inputs - Unobservable inputs for the asset or liability including significant assumptions of the Company and other market participants.
Derivative Liability. The Company evaluates its options, warrants or other contracts, if any, to determine if those contracts or embedded components of those contracts qualify as derivatives to be separately accounted for in accordance with ASC 815-10-05-4 and 815-40-25. The result of this accounting treatment is that the fair value of the embedded derivative is marked-to-market each balance sheet date and recorded as either an asset or a liability. In the event that the fair value is recorded as a liability, the change in fair value is recorded in the consolidated statement of operations as other income or expense. Upon conversion, exercise or cancellation of a derivative instrument, the instrument is marked to fair value at the date of conversion, exercise or cancellation and then the related fair value is reclassified to equity.
The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period. Equity instruments that are initially classified as equity that become subject to reclassification are reclassified to liability at the fair value of the instrument on the reclassification date. Derivative instrument liabilities will be classified in the balance sheet as current or non-current based on whether or not net-cash settlement of the derivative instrument is expected within 12 months of the balance sheet date.
Basic and Diluted Net (Loss) per Common Share. Basic (loss) per common share is computed by dividing the net (loss) by the weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstanding for each period. Diluted (loss) per share is computed by dividing the net (loss) by the weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstanding plus the dilutive effect of shares issuable through the common stock equivalents. Potentially dilutive securities consisting of options, warrants, and convertible notes aggregating 11,085,039 as of December 31, 2020, including common shares issuable under the conversion feature of the preferred shares, options, $1,997,500 worth of convertible Notes, which could convert into 1,598,000 shares of common stock, and warrants issued in the Private Offering and Convertible Note Offering closings and merger transactions were not included in the calculation of weighted-average shares of common stock outstanding as they were determined to be anti-dilutive.
COVID-19
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization (“WHO”) declared the Covid-19 outbreak to be a global pandemic. In addition to the devastating effects on human life, the pandemic is having a negative ripple effect on the global economy, leading to disruptions and volatility in the global financial markets. Most U.S. states and many countries have issued policies intended to stop or slow the further spread of the disease. Covid-19 and the U.S. response to the pandemic are significantly affecting the economy. There are no comparable events that provide guidance as to the effect the Covid-19 pandemic may have, and, as a result, the ultimate effect of the pandemic is highly uncertain and subject to change. We do not yet know the full extent of the effects on the economy, the markets we serve, our business, or our operations.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
None