Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. As discussed in the section titled "Special Note Regarding Forward Looking Statements," the following discussion and analysis contains forward looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, as well as assumptions that, if they never materialize or prove incorrect, could cause our results to differ materially from those expressed or implied by such forward looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in the section titled "Risk Factors" in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Peloton is the largest interactive fitness platform in the world with a loyal community of over 5.9 million Members as of June 30, 2021. We pioneered connected, technology-enabled fitness, and the streaming of immersive, instructor-led boutique classes to our Members anytime, anywhere. We make fitness entertaining, approachable, effective, and convenient, while fostering social connections that encourage our Members to be the best versions of themselves. We define a Member as any individual who has a Peloton account through a paid Connected Fitness Subscription, or a paid Peloton Digital subscription.
Our Connected Fitness Product portfolio includes the Peloton Bike, Bike+, and the Peloton Tread and Tread+. Our revenue is generated primarily from the sale of our Connected Fitness Products and associated recurring subscription revenue. We have historically experienced significant growth in sales of our Connected Fitness Products, which, when combined with our low Average Net Monthly Connected Fitness Churn has led to significant growth in Connected Fitness Subscriptions. From fiscal year 2020 to fiscal year 2021, total revenue grew 120%, and our Connected Fitness Subscription base grew 114%.
Our compelling financial profile is characterized by high growth, strong retention, recurring revenue, and efficient customer acquisition. Our low Average Net Monthly Connected Fitness Churn, together with our high Subscription Contribution Margin, allows us to generate attractive value from our Connected Fitness Subscriptions. When we acquire new Connected Fitness Subscriptions, we are often able to offset our subscription acquisition costs with the gross profit earned on our Connected Fitness Products. This allows for rapid payback of our sales and marketing investments and results in a robust unit economic model.
For fiscal years 2021, 2020 and 2019:
•We generated total revenue of $4,021.8 million, $1,825.9 million and $915.0 million respectively, representing 120% and 100% year-over-year growth;
•As of June 30, 2021, 2020 and 2019, we had 2,330,700, 1,091,100 and 511,200 Connected Fitness Subscriptions, respectively, representing 114% and 113% year-over-year growth;
•Our Average Net Monthly Connected Fitness Churn was 0.61%, 0.62% and 0.65%, respectively;
•We recognized net losses of $189.0 million, $71.6 million and $195.6 million, respectively;
•Our Adjusted EBITDA was $253.7 million, $117.7 million and $(71.3) million, respectively; and
•Our Subscription Contribution Margin was 67.2%, 63.8%, and 50.8%, respectively.
For a definition of Connected Fitness Subscriptions and Average Net Monthly Connected Fitness Churn, see the section titled “-Key Operational and Business Metrics”.
See the section titled “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for definitions of and information regarding our use of Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA Margin, Subscription Contribution and Subscription Contribution Margin, and a reconciliation of each of net loss to Adjusted EBITDA and Subscription Gross Profit to Subscription Contribution.
Fourth quarter fiscal 2021 update and recent developments
The past fiscal year represented an inflection point for the connected fitness industry, with significant increases in awareness and demand following the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. As we have discussed in the past, this necessitated significant investments in manufacturing capacity, logistics and expedited shipping to reduce order-to-delivery windows, which we were pleased to restore to pre-pandemic levels during the fourth quarter.
To support our large long-term growth opportunity, on May 24, 2021, we announced plans to build our first U.S. factory. Peloton Output Park will sit on over 200 acres of land in Troy Township, Ohio and will feature more than a million square feet of manufacturing, office, and amenities space, making it one of the largest connected fitness plants in the world. This state-of-the-art factory will diversify our manufacturing footprint, provide additional capacity to support our growth, drive production efficiencies through automation and scale, and accelerate our speed-to-market. Peloton Output Park will complement our existing manufacturing assets and contract partnerships in Taiwan and the recently acquired Precor assets in North Carolina and Washington state. We expect to begin producing Bike, Bike+, and Tread products at POP starting in calendar 2023.
Since our founding, Peloton's mission has been to help people be the best version of themselves by making it easier to access world-class fitness and wellness content. Today, we announced our latest step in making Peloton more attainable by lowering the price of our original, award-winning Peloton Bike across all of our markets to $1,495 USD, or $39 per month with our 39-month financing plan. We know price remains a barrier to purchase and are pleased to offer our most popular product at an attractive everyday price point. We are also introducing a longer 43-month 0% financing term option for Bike+ and Tread across all regions, which equates to $59 per month.
During the fourth fiscal quarter, we also celebrated the first anniversary of the Peloton Pledge, our four-year, $100 million investment to support the fight against racial injustice and inequality and promote health and well-being for all. In fiscal 2021, we expanded our Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion team, increased starting wages for our hourly team members, launched new learning and development programs for our team, and updated our recruiting, hiring, and onboarding practices to make them even more inclusive. We intend to continue to raise awareness of and reaffirm our commitment to becoming an anti-racist organization and hold ourselves accountable to ongoing progress.
Content
On April 30, 2021, during our virtual Peloton Homecoming 2021, we were pleased to announce the expansion of Peloton Programs, curated collections of exclusive classes designed to make it easier for Members to meet their fitness goals. Spanning nearly 190 classes across nine disciplines, Programs are sortable based on instructor, duration, modality and number of classes, while featuring sequential classes, a progress bar, and achievement badges. Since re-launch, Members have taken over 3 million classes as part of a Program.
Strength remains our fastest-growing modality, demonstrating the effectiveness of our content investments and cementing our position as a full-body fitness solution. During fiscal 2021, total connected fitness Strength workouts grew 256% year-on-year and now represent 18% of the total mix, up from 13% in fiscal 2020. We continue to invest in content to support this demand and during Q4 added our inaugural Strength First instructors, Callie Gullickson and Rad Lopez, both of whom have been extremely well-received by our community.
We also relaunched our Yoga content, adding three new instructors, introducing content in additional languages, and debuting a Beginner Yoga program to help newcomers learn the discipline. These changes have made our content more accessible and approachable to a wider audience; for example, Mariana Fernández, our first Spanish language instructor, had her classes taken over 200,000 times by well over 100,000 Members in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021.
Our teams also reimagined our Scenic rides from the ground up and during Homecoming launched refreshed content to provide distance-based, time-based, and guided workouts featuring responsive video, curated and ever-changing playlists, and new locations. We are pleased with the initial reception during the quarter, with roughly 20% of our active Bike / Bike+ Members taking at least one scenic ride after the re-launch.
Software
We continue to invest heavily in software development and this quarter we were excited to introduce Strive Score, a personal, non-competitive metric that utilizes a compatible heart rate monitor to track effort. Many of our most popular workout modalities -- such as strength, HIIT, and bootcamp classes -- don’t have easily comparable power-based outputs from a connected device, but can be measured via Strive Score, which awards points based on the length of time spent in different Heart Rate zones. Since its launch, over 850 thousand Members have utilized Strive Score to enhance their workouts.
Corporate Wellness
We have long believed that Peloton provides a perfect solution for corporations and organizations looking to provide wellness benefits for their employees, and on June 22nd, we officially launched the Peloton Corporate Wellness program. This initiative will provide employers, insurers, and other partners the ability to offer their employees and Members subsidized access to Peloton Digital subscriptions, All Access Memberships, and/or Connected Fitness Products.
The corporate wellness market is large and growing, and we are uniquely positioned to add value through our proven ability to drive high engagement and Member satisfaction, while also offering back-end enterprise features that reduce administrative load, including tools to measure program impact via a secure, easy-to-use portal. Our initial launch partners include Wayfair, Samsung, SAP, Accenture Interactive, and Sky (in the U.K.) and on July 20th we announced our first partnership with a health insurer, United Healthcare, the largest provider in the U.S.
Product recall update
In April 2021, the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (“CPSC”) unilaterally issued a warning to consumers about the safety hazards associated with the Tread+. Thereafter, on May 5, 2021, we announced separate, voluntary recalls of each of our Tread+ and Tread products in collaboration with the CPSC and halted sales of these products to work on product enhancements. Members were notified that they could return their Tread or Tread + for a full refund, have the unit moved to another location or wait until a solution is available. During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, we accrued for a reduction to connected fitness products revenue for actual and estimated future returns of approximately $81 million. We also expect to continue to incur additional costs which could include costs for which we have not accrued or established adequate reserves, including increases to the return reserves, inventory write-downs, logistics costs associated with Member requests to return or move their hardware, subscription waiver variable costs of service, anticipated recall-related hardware development and repair costs, and related legal and advisory fees. Recall charges are based upon estimates associated with our expected and historical consumer response rates. Our plans for the recalls are still being finalized and actual costs related to this matter may vary from the estimate, and may result in further impacts to our future results of operations and business.
Key Operational and Business Metrics
In addition to the measures presented in our consolidated financial statements, we use the following key operational and business metrics to evaluate our business, measure our performance, develop financial forecasts, and make strategic decisions.
______________________________
(1) Please see the section titled “Non-GAAP Financial Measures-Subscription Contribution and Subscription Contribution Margin” for a reconciliation of Subscription Gross Profit to Subscription Contribution and an explanation of why we consider Subscription Contribution and Subscription Contribution Margin to be helpful metrics for investors.
(2) Please see the section titled “Non-GAAP Financial Measures-Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin” for a reconciliation of net loss to Adjusted EBITDA and an explanation of why we consider Adjusted EBITDA to be a helpful metric for investors.
Connected Fitness Subscriptions
Our ability to expand the number of Connected Fitness Subscriptions is an indicator of our market penetration and growth. We define a Connected Fitness Subscription as a person, household, or commercial property, such as a hotel or residential building, who has either paid for a subscription to a Connected Fitness Product (a Connected Fitness Subscription with a successful credit card billing or with prepaid subscription credits or waivers) or requested a "pause" to their subscription for up to 3 months. We do not include canceled or unpaid Connected Fitness Subscriptions in the Connected Fitness Subscription count.
Average Net Monthly Connected Fitness Churn
We use Average Net Monthly Connected Fitness Churn to measure the retention of our Connected Fitness Subscriptions. We define Average Net Monthly Connected Fitness Churn as Connected Fitness Subscription cancellations, net of reactivations, in the quarter, divided by the average number of beginning Connected Fitness Subscriptions in each month, divided by three months. This metric does not include data related to our Peloton Digital subscriptions for Members who pay a monthly fee for access to our content library on their own devices.
Total Workouts and Average Monthly Workouts per Connected Fitness Subscription
We review Total Workouts and Average Monthly Workouts per Connected Fitness Subscription to measure engagement, which is the leading indicator of retention for our Connected Fitness Subscriptions. We define Total Workouts as all workouts completed during a given period. We define a Workout as a Connected Fitness Subscription for Members either completing at least 50% of an instructor-led or scenic ride or run, or ten or more minutes of “Just Ride” or “Just Run” mode. We define Average Monthly Workouts per Connected Fitness Subscription as the Total Workouts completed in the quarter divided by the average number of Connected Fitness Subscriptions in each month, divided by three months.
Components of our Results of Operations
Revenue
Connected Fitness Products
Connected Fitness Product revenue consists of sales of our portfolio of Connected Fitness Products and related accessories, delivery and installation services, branded apparel, extended warranty agreements, and the sale, service, installation, and delivery contracts of our commercial business. Connected Fitness Product revenue is recognized at the time of delivery, except for extended warranty revenue which is recognized over the warranty period and service revenue which is recognized over the term, and is recorded net of returns and discounts and third-party financing program fees, when applicable.
Subscription
Subscription revenue consists of revenue generated from our monthly $39.00 Connected Fitness Subscription and $12.99 Peloton Digital subscription.
As of June 30, 2021, 98% and 100% of our Connected Fitness Subscription and Peloton Digital subscription bases were paying month-to-month, respectively.
If a Connected Fitness Subscription owns both a Bike and Tread product in the same household, the price of the Subscription remains $39.00 monthly. As of June 30, 2021, approximately 3% of our Connected Fitness Subscriptions owned both a Bike and Tread product.
Cost of revenue
Connected Fitness Products
Connected Fitness Product cost of revenue consists of our portfolio of Connected Fitness Products and branded apparel product costs, including manufacturing costs, duties and other applicable importing costs, shipping and handling costs, packaging, warranty replacement and service costs, fulfillment costs, warehousing costs, depreciation of property and equipment, and certain costs related to management, facilities, and personnel-related expenses associated with supply chain logistics. As we launch new Connected Fitness Products and continue to grow our presence in new regions where we have not yet achieved economies of scale, we expect to incur higher cost of revenue (as a percentage of sales) for our Connected Fitness Products.
Subscription
Subscription cost of revenue includes costs associated with content creation and costs to stream content to our Members. These costs consist of both fixed costs, including studio rent and occupancy, other studio overhead, instructor and production personnel-related expenses, depreciation of property and equipment as well as variable costs, including music royalty fees, content costs for past use, third-party platform streaming costs, and payment processing fees for our monthly subscription billings. While our fixed costs currently represent the majority of these costs, music royalty fees are our largest subscription variable cost. As we have grown the number of licensing agreements with music rights holders, music royalty fees as a percent of our subscription revenue has increased. However, unlike music streaming services where having an exhaustive music catalog is vital to be able to compete for customers, we have control over what music we select for our classes. As a result, we expect to be able to manage music expense such that, over time, these fees as a percentage of subscription revenue will flatten, or even decrease.
Operating expenses
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing expense consists of performance marketing media spend, asset creation, and other brand creative, all showroom expenses and related lease payments, payment processing fees incurred in connection with the sale of our Connected Fitness Products, sales and marketing personnel-related expenses, expenses related to Peloton Digital, and depreciation of property and equipment. We intend to continue to invest in our sales and marketing capabilities in the future and expect this expense to increase in absolute dollars in future periods as we release new products and expand internationally. Sales and marketing expense as a percentage of total revenue may fluctuate from period to period based on total revenue and the timing of our investments in our sales and marketing functions as these investments may vary in scope and scale over future periods.
General and administrative
General and administrative expense includes personnel-related expenses and facilities-related costs primarily for our executive, finance, accounting, legal, human resources, and IT functions. General and administrative expense also includes fees for professional services principally comprised of legal, audit, tax and accounting services, depreciation of property and equipment, and insurance, as well as litigation settlement costs.
We expect to continue to incur additional general and administrative expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including expenses related to compliance and reporting obligations of public companies, and increased costs for insurance, investor relations expenses, and professional services. As a result, we expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase in absolute dollars in future periods and vary from period to period as a percentage of revenue, but we expect to leverage these expenses over time as we grow our revenue and Connected Fitness Subscription base.
Research and development
Research and development expense primarily consists of personnel and facilities-related expenses, consulting and contractor expenses, tooling and prototype materials, software platform expenses, and depreciation of property and equipment. We capitalize certain qualified costs incurred in connection with the development of internal-use software which may also cause research and development expenses to vary from period to period. We expect our research and development expenses to increase in absolute dollars in future periods and vary from period to period as a percentage of total revenue as we continue to hire personnel to develop new and enhance existing Connected Fitness Products and interactive software.
Non-operating income and expenses
Other (expense) income, net
Other (expense) income, net consists of interest (expense) income, realized gains (losses) on investments, amortization of debt issuance costs, and impacts from foreign exchange transactions.
Income tax provision
The provision for income taxes consists primarily of income taxes related to state and international taxes for jurisdictions in which we conduct business. We maintain a valuation allowance on the majority of our deferred tax assets as we have concluded that it is more likely than not that the deferred assets will not be utilized.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our consolidated results of operations in dollars and as a percentage of total revenue for the periods presented. The period-to-period comparisons of our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected in the future.
____________________
(1) Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
____________________
(2) Includes depreciation and amortization expense as follows:
Comparison of the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Connected Fitness Products revenue increased $1,687.4 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020. This increase was primarily attributable to the significant growth in the number of Connected Fitness Products delivered during the period, which was the result of investments made in brand and product awareness, compounded by a strong increase in demand driven by the stay-at-home orders issued by governments around the world in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as incremental deliveries as a result of significant investments in expedited freight to alleviate backlog demand, all partially offset by the halt of sales and increased returns of Tread and Tread+ due to the voluntary recall.
Subscription revenue increased $508.5 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020. This increase was primarily attributable to the year-over-year growth in our Connected Fitness Subscriptions. The growth of our Connected Fitness Subscriptions was primarily driven by the increased number of Connected Fitness Products delivered during the period and our low Average Net Monthly Connected Fitness Churn of 0.61% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021. We believe engagement is a leading indicator of retention. Our Member engagement continued to grow with 22.0 Average Monthly Workouts per Connected Fitness Subscription during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, compared to 17.9 Average Monthly Workouts per Connected Fitness Subscription for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020. Members with Connected Fitness Subscriptions worked out with us 459.7 million times in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, up from 164.5 million workouts during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, representing year-over-year growth of 180%.
Cost of Revenue, Gross Profit, and Gross Margin
Connected Fitness Products cost of revenue for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 increased $1,405.9 million, or 168.7%, compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020. This increase was primarily driven by costs associated with the growth in the number of Connected Fitness Products delivered during the period, our investments in expedited shipping to alleviate our backlog of demand, and increased shipping and component part costs that we expect to carry into the next fiscal year.
Our Connected Fitness Product Gross Margin decreased by 1,410 basis points for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020 primarily driven by the price reduction on our Bike from $2,245 to $1,895 in September 2020, charges associated with the voluntary recalls of Tread+ and Tread, and expedited shipping investments.
Subscription cost of revenue for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 increased $174.8 million, or 112.3%, compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020. This increase was primarily driven by an increase of $117.1 million in music royalty and streaming delivery fees driven by increased usage of our platform as our Subscription base and engagement continued to increase, an increase of $18.6 million in personnel-related expenses excluding stock-based compensation expense, due to increased headcount, an increase of $18.4 million in stock-based compensation expense driven by increased headcount and bonuses, and an increase of $12.9 million in payment processing fees for our monthly subscription billing.
Subscription Gross Margin increased by 492 basis points for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, primarily driven by fixed cost leverage with more Connected Fitness Subscriptions, and relative current period decreases in certain travel and studio expenditures due to COVID-19 restrictions.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense increased $252.6 million, or 53.0% when comparing the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 with the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020. These increases were primarily due to an increase in spending on advertising and marketing programs of $121.8 million. We resumed marketing in the second half of the year given our improved order-to-delivery position. The year-over-year increase in sales and marketing expense was further driven by an increase in personnel-related expenses of $49.9 million, excluding stock-based compensation expense, due to increased headcount, a volume-based increase in payment processing fees of $38.6 million, and an increase in expenses related to our showrooms of $16.9 million.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense increased $310.8 million, or 88.4% when comparing the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 with the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020. This increase was primarily due to an increase in professional services fees and system implementation costs of $117.9 million related primarily to the upgrading of our back-office systems and infrastructure as well as various acquisitions and related integration costs, an increase in personnel-related expenses of $97.2 million, excluding stock-based compensation expense, due to increased headcount as a result of being a public company, an increase in stock-based compensation expense of $49.7 million driven by increased headcount and bonuses, and an increase in business operations costs of $14.4 million primarily driven by higher recruitment agency fees and relocation expense.
Research and Development
Research and development expense increased $158.8 million, or 178.5% when comparing the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 with the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020. This increase was primarily due to an increase in personnel-related expenses, which, excluding stock-based compensation expense, increased $67.1 million, due to increased headcount, an increase of $49.4 million in product development and research costs associated with development of new software features and products, an increase in stock-based compensation expense of $16.8 million driven by increased headcount and bonuses, and an increase of $12.5 million in software expense.
Other (Expense) Income, Net and Income Tax (Benefit) Expense
___________________________
*NM - not meaningful
Other (expense) income, net, was comprised of the following for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021:
•Interest expense primarily related to the amortization of the convertible notes discount and deferred financing costs of $(14.8) million
•Interest income from cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments of $7.9 million; and
•Foreign exchange losses of $(3.5) million.
Other (expense) income, net, was comprised of the following for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020:
•Interest expense primarily related to the secured revolving credit facility of $(2.0) million
•Interest income from cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments of $18.2 million; and
•Foreign exchange losses of $(3.8) million.
Income tax benefit for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 of $(9.2) million was primarily due to adjustments to the valuation allowance resulting from acquisitions during the period, partially offset by state and international taxes.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our results determined in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or GAAP, we believe the following non-GAAP financial measures are useful in evaluating our operating performance.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin
We calculate Adjusted EBITDA as net (loss) income adjusted to exclude: other expense (income), net; income tax (benefit) expense; depreciation and amortization expense; stock-based compensation expense; transaction and integration costs; certain litigation expenses, consisting of legal settlements and related fees for specific proceedings that arise outside of the ordinary course of our business; product recall costs; specific non-recurring costs associated with COVID-19; short-term purchase accounting adjustments; impairment charges for fixed assets; and restructuring costs. Adjusted EBITDA Margin is calculated by dividing Adjusted EBITDA by total revenue.
We use Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin as measures of operating performance and the operating leverage in our business. We believe that these non-GAAP financial measures are useful to investors for period-to-period comparisons of our business and in understanding and evaluating our operating results for the following reasons:
•Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin are widely used by investors and securities analysts to measure a company’s operating performance without regard to items such as stock-based compensation expense, depreciation and amortization expense, other (income) expense, net, and provision for income taxes that can vary substantially from company to company depending upon their financing, capital structures, and the method by which assets were acquired;
•Our management uses Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin in conjunction with financial measures prepared in accordance with GAAP for planning purposes, including the preparation of our annual operating budget, as a measure of our core operating results and the effectiveness of our business strategy, and in evaluating our financial performance; and
•Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin provide consistency and comparability with our past financial performance, facilitate period-to-period comparisons of our core operating results, and also facilitate comparisons with other peer companies, many of which use similar non-GAAP financial measures to supplement their GAAP results.
Our use of Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin have limitations as analytical tools, and you should not consider these measures in isolation or as substitutes for analysis of our financial results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are, or may in the future be, as follows:
•Although depreciation and amortization expense are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin do not reflect cash capital expenditure requirements for such replacements or for new capital expenditure requirements;
•Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin exclude stock-based compensation expense, which has recently been, and will continue to be for the foreseeable future, a significant recurring expense for our business and an important part of our compensation strategy;
•Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin do not reflect: (1) changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs; (2) interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments on our debt, which reduces cash available to us; or (3) tax payments that may represent a reduction in cash available to us;
•Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin do not reflect certain litigation expenses, consisting of legal settlements and related fees for specific proceedings that we have determined arise outside of the ordinary course of business based on the following considerations which we assess regularly: (i) the frequency of similar cases that have been brought to date, or are expected to be brought within two years, (ii) the complexity of the case, (iii) the nature of the remedy(ies) sought, including the size of any monetary damages sought, (iv) offensive versus defensive posture of us, (v) the counterparty involved, and (vi) our overall litigation strategy;
•Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin do not reflect transaction and integration costs related to acquisitions;
•Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin do not reflect incremental costs associated with COVID-19, which consist of hazard pay for field operations employees;
•Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin do not reflect impairment charges, and gains (losses) on disposals for fixed assets;
•Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin do not reflect the impact of purchase accounting adjustments to inventory related to the Precor acquisition;
•Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin do not reflect the impact of restructuring costs;
•Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin do not reflect costs associated with Tread and Tread+ product recalls including increases to the return reserves, Tread+ inventory write-downs, logistics costs associated with Member requests on Tread and Tread+, the cost to move the Tread+ for those that elect the option, subscription waiver costs of service, and recall-related hardware development and repair costs; and
•The expenses and other items that we exclude in our calculation of Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin may differ from the expenses and other items, if any, that other companies may exclude from Adjusted EBITDA when they report their operating results and we may, in the future, exclude other significant, unusual or non-recurring expenses or other items from these financial measures.
Because of these limitations, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin should be considered along with other operating and financial performance measures presented in accordance with GAAP.
The following table presents a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net loss, the most directly comparable financial measure prepared in accordance with GAAP, for each of the periods indicated:
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin
______________________
(1) Represents adjustments and charges associated with the Tread and Tread+ product recall, as well as accrual adjustments. These include a reduction to connected fitness products revenue for actual and estimated future returns of $81.1 million and recorded costs in connected fitness products cost of revenue associated with inventory write-downs, logistic costs, and repair costs of $15.7 million and operating expenses of $3.2 million associated with subscription wavers and recall-related hardware development.
(2) Includes litigation fees for certain ongoing patent infringement litigation, consumer arbitration, and product recalls for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, and confidential settlements and associated legal fees relating to two previously disclosed legal matters-“Downtown Music Publishing LLC et. al v. Peloton Interactive” and “Flywheel Sports, Inc.” for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020.
(3) Includes transaction and integration costs primarily associated with the acquisition and integration of Precor Fitness for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021.
(4) Includes incremental costs associated with COVID-19 of $5.9 million, short-term purchase accounting adjustments of $4.6 million, asset impairment charges of $4.5 million, and restructuring costs of $4.0 million for fiscal year ended June 30, 2021. Includes $8.5 million of incremental costs associated with COVID-19 for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, and $7.2 million of ground lease expense related to build-to-suit lease obligations under ASC 840 for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2019.
Subscription Contribution and Subscription Contribution Margin
We define Subscription Contribution as subscription revenue less cost of subscription revenue, adjusted to exclude from cost of subscription revenue, depreciation and amortization expense, and stock-based compensation expense. Subscription Contribution Margin is calculated by dividing Subscription Contribution by subscription revenue.
We use Subscription Contribution and Subscription Contribution Margin to measure our ability to scale and leverage the costs of our Connected Fitness Subscriptions. We believe that these non-GAAP financial measures are useful to investors for period-to-period comparisons of our business and in understanding and evaluating our operating results because our management uses Subscription Contribution and Subscription Contribution Margin in conjunction with financial measures prepared in accordance with GAAP for planning purposes, including the preparation of our annual operating budget, as a measure of our core operating results and the effectiveness of our business strategy, and in evaluating our financial performance.
The use of Subscription Contribution and Subscription Contribution Margin as analytical tools has limitations, and you should not consider these in isolation or as substitutes for analysis of our financial results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are as follows:
•Although depreciation and amortization expense are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future, and Subscription Contribution and Subscription Contribution Margin do not reflect cash capital expenditure requirements for such replacements or for new capital expenditure requirements; and
•Subscription Contribution and Subscription Contribution Margin exclude stock-based compensation expense, which has recently been, and will continue to be for the foreseeable future, a significant recurring expense for our business and an important part of our compensation strategy.
Because of these limitations, Subscription Contribution and Subscription Contribution Margin should be considered along with other operating and financial performance measures presented in accordance with GAAP.
The following table presents a reconciliation of Subscription Contribution to Subscription Gross Profit, the most directly comparable financial measure prepared in accordance with GAAP, for each of the periods indicated:
The continued growth of our Connected Fitness Subscription base will allow us to improve our Subscription Contribution Margin. While there are variable costs, including music royalties, associated with our Connected Fitness Subscriptions, a significant portion of our content creation costs are fixed given that we operate with a limited number of production studios and instructors. The fixed nature of those expenses should scale over time as we grow our Connected Fitness Subscription base.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our operations have been funded primarily through net proceeds from the sales of our equity and convertible debt securities, as well as cash flows from operating activities. As of June 30, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $1.1 billion and marketable securities of $472.0 million.
As of June 30, 2021, our marketable securities portfolio primarily consists of U.S. government notes and investment grade corporate debt securities.
We believe our existing cash and cash equivalent balances, cash flow from operations, marketable securities portfolio, and amounts available for borrowing under our Amended Credit Agreement (described below) will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure needs for at least the next 12 months. Our future capital requirements may vary materially from those currently planned and will depend on many factors, including our rate of revenue growth, timing and amount of spending related to acquisitions, the timing and amount of spending on research and development and manufacturing initiatives, the timing and financial impact of recently announced product recalls, growth in sales and marketing activities, the timing of new Connected Fitness Product introductions, market acceptance of our Connected Fitness Products, timing and investments needed for international expansion, and overall economic conditions. Further, we may use cash to satisfy exercise payments and/or tax withholdings in connection with the settlement of equity awards, or other stock buyback programs. To the extent that current and anticipated future sources of liquidity are insufficient to fund our future business activities and requirements, we may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. The sale of additional equity would result in additional dilution to our stockholders. The incurrence of debt financing would result in debt service obligations and the instruments governing such debt could provide for operating and financing covenants that would restrict our operations. There can be no assurances that we will be able to raise additional capital. The inability to raise capital would adversely affect our ability to achieve our business objectives.
Convertible Notes
In February 2021, we issued $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of 0% Convertible Senior Notes due 2026 (the "Notes") in a private offering, including the exercise in full of the over-allotment option granted to the initial purchasers of $125.0 million. The Notes were issued pursuant to an Indenture (the "Indenture") between us and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee. The Notes are our senior unsecured obligations and do not bear regular interest, and the principal amount of the Notes does not accrete. The net proceeds from this offering were approximately $977.2 million, after deducting the initial purchasers' discounts and commissions and our offering expenses. For additional details, refer to Note 12 - Debt - 'Convertible Senior Notes' included in the “Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements” in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Amended Credit Agreement
In June 2019, we entered into an amended and restated loan and security agreement, or the Amended Credit Agreement, with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent, lead arranger and bookrunner and Bank of America, N.A., Barclays Bank PLC, Goldman Sachs Lending Partners LLC and Silicon Valley Bank, as joint syndication agents, which amended and restated our prior secured revolving credit facility.
On February 8, 2021, we entered into a First Amendment (the “First Amendment”) to the Amended Credit Agreement to revise certain covenants that restricted the incurrence of indebtedness to permit the Capped Call Transactions and issuance of the Notes.
On March 18, 2021, we entered into a Joinder Agreement (the "Joinder") to the Amended Credit Agreement, as amended by the First Amendment, to add Citibank, N.A. as a lender under the Amended Credit Agreement and to provide for an increase of the commitments available under the revolving credit facility by $35.0 million from $250.0 million to $285.0 million.
The Amended Credit Agreement provides for a $285.0 million secured revolving credit facility, including up to the lesser of $150.0 million and the aggregate unused amount of the facility for the issuance of letters of credit. Interest on the Amended Credit Agreement is paid based on LIBOR plus 2.75% or an Alternative Base Rate plus 1.75%. We are required to pay an annual commitment fee of 0.375% on a quarterly basis based on the unused portion of the revolving credit facility. The principal amount, if any, is payable in full in June 2024. As of June 30, 2021, we had not drawn on the credit facility and did not have outstanding borrowings under the Amended Credit Agreement. As of June 30, 2021, we had outstanding letters of credit totaling $4.8 million issued primarily to cover security deposits for an operating lease obligation.
We have the option to repay our borrowings under the Amended Credit Agreement without premium or penalty prior to maturity. The Amended Credit Agreement contains customary affirmative covenants, such as financial statement reporting requirements and delivery of borrowing base certificates, as well as customary covenants that include limitations on our ability to, among other things, incur additional indebtedness, sell certain assets, guarantee obligations of third parties, declare dividends or make certain distributions, and undergo a merger or consolidation or certain other transactions. The Amended Credit Agreement also contains certain financial condition covenants, including maintaining a total level of liquidity of not less than $125.0 million and maintaining certain minimum total revenue ranging from $725.0 million to $1,985.0 million depending on the applicable date of determination.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities of $239.7 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 was primarily due to a net loss of $189.0 million and a decrease in net change in operating assets and liabilities of $400.6 million, partially offset by non-cash adjustments of $349.9 million. The decrease in net operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $587.2 million increase in inventory levels as we ramped up supply to meet increased demand and prepare for the relaunch of Tread in the U.S., Canada, U.K. and Germany and a $212.7 million decrease in customer deposits and deferred revenue driven by reduced order-to-delivery timeframes, partially offset by a $439.8 million increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses related to increased inventory and other expenditures to support general business growth. Non-cash adjustments primarily consisted of stock-based compensation expense, depreciation and amortization, and non-cash operating lease expense.
Investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 of $585.1 million was primarily related to $556.3 million relating to acquisitions, purchases of marketable securities of $449.1 million, and $241.0 million used for capital expenditures primarily related to the continued build out of our New York City headquarters, our new Peloton studios in London, our new manufacturing facilities in Taiwan, and new showrooms, partially offset by maturities of marketable securities of $665.9 million.
Financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of $916.8 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 was primarily related to proceeds from the issuance of convertible debt of $977.2 million, partially offset by $81.3 million of capped call transactions entered into concurrently with the convertible debt issuance.
Commitments
As of June 30, 2021, our contractual obligations were as follows:
(1) Lease obligations relate to our office space, warehouses, production studios, equipment, and retail showrooms and microstores. As of June 30, 2021, the Company has additional operating leases for real estate that have not yet commenced of $263.9 million which has been included above. The Company also has finance lease obligations of $3.3 million, also included above. The lease terms are between one and twenty-one years, and the majority of the lease agreements are renewable at the end of the lease period.
(2) We are subject to minimum royalty payments associated with our license agreements for the use of licensed content. See "Risk Factors --Our Most Material Financial, Operational, and Execution Risks- We are a party to many music license agreements that are complex and impose numerous obligations upon us that may make it difficult to operate our business, and a breach of such agreements could adversely affect our business, operating results, and financial condition."
(3) The Company is required to pay a commitment fee of 0.375% based on the unused portion of the revolving credit facility. As of June 30, 2021, we were contingently liable for approximately $4.8 million in standby letters of credit for our operating lease obligations.
(4) Other purchase obligations include all other non-cancelable contractual obligations. These contracts are primarily related to cloud computing costs.
(5) Refer to Note 12 in the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details regarding our convertible senior notes obligations.
The commitment amounts in the table above are associated with contracts that are enforceable and legally binding and that specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum services to be used, fixed, minimum or variable price provisions, and the approximate timing of the actions under the contracts.
Purchase orders or contracts for the purchase of certain goods and services are not included in the table. We cannot determine the aggregate amount of such purchase orders that represent contractual obligations because purchase orders may represent authorizations to purchase rather than binding agreements. Our purchase orders are based on our current needs and are fulfilled by our suppliers and manufacturers within short periods of time. We subcontract with other companies to manufacture our products. During the normal course of business, we and our manufacturers procure components based upon a forecasted production plan. If we cancel all or part of the orders, we may be liable to our suppliers and manufacturers for the cost of the non-utilized component orders or components purchased by our manufacturers.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any undisclosed off-balance sheet arrangements as of June 30, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. In preparing the consolidated financial statements, we make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, stockholders’ equity/deficit, revenue, expenses, and related disclosures. We re-evaluate our estimates on an on-going basis. Our estimates are based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Because of the uncertainty inherent in these matters, actual results may differ from these estimates and could differ based upon other assumptions or conditions. The critical accounting policies that reflect our more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements include those noted below.
Revenue Recognition
Our primary source of revenue is from sales of its Connected Fitness Products and related accessories and associated recurring Subscription revenue, as well as Precor branded fitness products, delivery and installation services.
We determine revenue recognition through the following steps in accordance with ASC 606:
•identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer;
•identification of the performance obligations in the contract;
•determination of the transaction price;
•allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
•recognition of revenue when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation.
Revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. Our revenue is reported net of sales returns and discounts, as a reduction of the transaction price. We estimate our liability for product returns based on historical return trends by product category, impact of seasonality, and an evaluation of current economic and market conditions and records the expected customer refund liability as a reduction to revenue, and the expected inventory right of recovery as a reduction of cost of revenue. If actual return costs differ from previous estimates, the amount of the liability and corresponding revenue are adjusted in the period in which such costs occur.
Some of our contracts with customers contain multiple performance obligations. For customer contracts that include multiple performance obligations, we account for individual performance obligations if they are distinct. The transaction price is then allocated to each performance obligation based on its standalone selling price. We generally determine the standalone selling price based on the prices charged to customers.
Deferred revenue is recorded for nonrefundable cash payments received for our performance obligation to transfer, or stand ready to transfer, goods or services in the future. Deferred revenue consists of subscription fees billed that have not been recognized. Customer deposits represent payments received in advance before we transfer a good or service to the customer and are refundable.
As described in Note 13 of the consolidated financial statements, the Company announced voluntary recalls of the Company's Tread+ and Tread products, permitting customers to return the products for a refund. We estimate a returns reserve primarily based on historical and expected product returns.
Product Warranty
We offer a standard product warranty that its Connected Fitness Products and Precor branded fitness products will operate under normal, non-commercial use for a period of one year from the date of original delivery. We have the obligation, at our option, to either repair or replace the defective product. At the time revenue is recognized, an estimate of future warranty costs, including costs associated with service of Connected Fitness Products outside of the warranty period, is recorded as a component of cost of revenue. Factors that affect the warranty obligation include historical as well as current product failure rates, service delivery costs incurred in correcting product failures, and warranty policies and business practices. Our products are manufactured both in-house and by contract manufacturers, and in certain cases, we may have recourse to such contract manufacturers.
We also offer the option for customers in some markets to purchase a third-party extended warranty and service contract that extends or enhances the technical support, parts, and labor coverage offered as part of the base warranty included with the Connected Fitness Product for an additional period of 12 to 27 months.
Revenue and related fees paid to the third-party provider are recognized on a gross basis as we have a continuing obligation to perform over the service period. Extended warranty revenue is recognized ratably over the extended warranty coverage period and is included in Connected Fitness Product revenue in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the excess of the aggregate of the consideration transferred and the amount recognized for non-controlling interest, if any, over the fair value of identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination.
Intangible assets other than goodwill are comprised of acquired developed technology, brand name, customer relationships, distributor relationships, and other definite-lived intangible assets. At initial recognition, intangible assets acquired in a business combination or asset acquisition are recognized at their fair value as of the date of acquisition. Following initial recognition, intangible assets are carried at acquisition date fair value less accumulated amortization and impairment losses, if any, and are amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of the asset.
We review goodwill for impairment annually on April 1 of each fiscal year or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that an impairment may exist. In conducting our annual impairment test, we first review qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If factors indicate that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, we perform a quantitative assessment and the fair value of the reporting unit is determined by analyzing the expected present value of future cash flows. If the carrying value of the reporting unit continues to exceed its fair value, the fair value of the reporting unit’s goodwill is calculated and an impairment loss equal to the excess is recorded. We assess the impairment of intangible assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
Business Combination
To determine whether transactions should be accounted for as acquisitions of assets or business combinations, we make certain judgments, which include assessment of the inputs, processes, and outputs associated with the acquired set of activities. If we determine that substantially all of the fair value of gross assets included in a transaction is concentrated in a single asset (or a group of similar assets), the assets would not represent a business. To be considered a business, the assets in a transaction need to include an input and a substantive process that together significantly contribute to the ability to create outputs.
We allocate the fair value of the purchase consideration to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values at the acquisition date. The fair values of intangible assets are determined utilizing information available near the acquisition date based on expectations and assumptions that are deemed reasonable by management. Given the considerable judgment involved in determining fair values, we typically obtain assistance from third-party valuation specialists for significant items. Any excess of the purchase price (consideration transferred) over the estimated fair values of net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill. Transaction costs are expensed as incurred. Amounts recorded in a business combination may change during the measurement period, which is a period not to exceed one year from the date of acquisition, as additional information about conditions that existed at the acquisition date becomes available.
Loss Contingencies
We are involved in legal proceedings, claims, and regulatory, tax, and government inquiries and investigations that arise in the ordinary course of business. Certain of these matters include claims for substantial or indeterminate amounts of damages. We record a liability when we believe that it is both probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated. If we determine that a loss is reasonably possible and the loss or range of loss can be reasonably estimated, we disclose the possible loss in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements. If we determine that a loss is reasonably possible but the loss or range of loss cannot be reasonably estimated, we state that such an estimate cannot be made.
We review the developments in our contingencies that could affect the amount of the provisions that have been previously recorded, and the matters and related reasonably possible losses disclosed. We make adjustments to our provisions and changes to our disclosures accordingly to reflect the impact of negotiations, settlements, rulings, advice of legal counsel, and updated information. Significant judgment is required to determine both the probability and the estimated amount of loss. These estimates have been based on our assessment of the facts and circumstances at each balance sheet date and are subject to change based on new information and future events.
The outcome of litigation is inherently uncertain. Therefore, if one or more of these matters were resolved against us for amounts in excess of management’s expectations, our results of operations and financial condition, including in a particular reporting period in which any such outcome becomes probable and estimable, could be materially adversely affected.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements in the section titled “-Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements” in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion about new accounting pronouncements adopted and not yet adopted as of the date of this report.