ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
References to the “company,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to ArcLight Clean Transition Corp.. The following discussion and analysis of the company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other SEC filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on July 28, 2020 as a Cayman Islands exempted company for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities (the “Business Combination”), that we have not yet identified. Our sponsor is ArcLight CTC Holdings, L.P., a Delaware limited partnership (our “Sponsor”).
Our registration statement for our initial public offering (the “Initial Public Offering”) was declared effective on September 22, 2020. On September 25, 2020, we consummated its Initial Public Offering of 25,000,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the Class A ordinary shares included in the Units being offered, the “Public Shares”), at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $250.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $14.4 million, inclusive of approximately $8.8 million in deferred underwriting commissions. On September 29, 2020, we issued an additional 2,750,000 units (the “Over-Allotment Units”) pursuant to the partial exercise by the underwriters of their over-allotment option in connection with the Initial Public Offering (the “Over-Allotment”). The Over-Allotment Units were priced at $10.00 per Unit, generating total gross proceeds of $27.5 million and incurring additional offering costs of approximately $1.5 million, inclusive of approximately $1.0 million in deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering on September 25, 2020, we consummated the private placement (“Private Placement”) of 7,000,000 private placement warrants (each, a “Private Placement Warrant” and collectively, the “Private Placement Warrants”), at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant with the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $7.0 million. Concurrently with the consummation of the Over-Allotment on September 29, 2020, our Sponsor also purchased an additional 550,000 Private Placement Warrants, generating gross proceeds of approximately $0.6 million.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement on September 25, 2020, $250.0 million ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the sale of the Units in the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement were placed in a trust account (“Trust Account”) with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee and invested in United States “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below. In connection with the consummation of the Over-Allotment on September 29, 2020, an additional amount of $27.5 million ($10.00 per Unit), for a total of approximately $277.5 million, was placed in the Trust Account.
If we are unable to complete a Business Combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or September 25, 2022, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up; (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us to pay its income taxes, if any (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses) divided by the number of the then-outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish Public Shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any); and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining shareholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii), to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Proposed Merger
On January 11, 2021, we entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (as it may be amended, supplemented or otherwise modified from time to time, the “Merger Agreement”), by and among Phoenix Merger Sub, Inc., a Delaware corporation and a wholly-owned direct subsidiary of ArcLight (“Phoenix Merger Sub”), and Proterra Inc, a Delaware corporation (“Proterra”).
The Merger Agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby were approved by our boards of directors and the board of directors of Proterra.
The Business Combination
The Merger Agreement provides for, among other things, the following transactions at the closing: (i) we will become a Delaware corporation (the “Domestication”), (ii) following the Domestication, Phoenix Merger Sub will merge with and into Proterra, with Proterra as the surviving company in the merger and, after giving effect to such merger, continuing as a wholly-owned subsidiary of us (the “Merger”) and, in connection with the Merger, (iii) our name will be changed to Proterra Inc. The Domestication, the Merger and the other transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement are hereinafter referred to as the “Business Combination”.
The Business Combination is expected to close in the second quarter of 2021, following the receipt of the required approval by our stockholders and the fulfillment of other customary closing conditions.
Business Combination Consideration
In accordance with the terms and subject to the conditions of the Merger Agreement, each share of common stock of Proterra, par value $0.0001 per share (“Proterra Common Stock”), other than any Cancelled Shares (as defined in the Merger Agreement) and Dissenting Shares (as defined in the Merger Agreement) shall be converted into the right to receive a fraction of a share of duly authorized, validly issued, fully paid and nonassessable ordinary shares, par value $0.0001 per share, of ArcLight (“ArcLight Common Stock”) equal to 0.8925 ArcLight Common Stock. In addition to the issuance of ArcLight Common Stock at the 0.8925 exchange ratio as of closing of the Business Combination, in the event that the closing sale price of ArcLight Common Stock exceeds certain price thresholds for 20 out of any 30 consecutive trading days during the first five years following the closing of the Business Combination, up to an additional 22,809,500 shares of ArcLight Common Stock may be issued to the parties that were holders of Proterra Common Stock immediately prior to the closing of the Business Combination.
Governance
We have agreed to take all action within its power as may be necessary or appropriate such that, effective immediately after the closing of the Business Combination, our board of directors shall consist of nine directors, which shall be divided into three classes, which directors shall include the current board of directors of Proterra and Jake F. Erhard as our designee. Additionally, the current Proterra management team will move to us in their current roles and titles.
Representations and Warranties; Covenants
The Merger Agreement contains representations, warranties and covenants of each of the parties thereto that are customary for transactions of this type, including with respect to the operations of us and Proterra and that each of the parties have undertaken to procure approval under the under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act of 1976, as amended (the “HSR Act”). In addition, we have agreed to adopt an equity incentive plan and employee stock purchase plan, as described in the Merger Agreement.
Conditions to Each Party’s Obligations
The obligation of us and Proterra to consummate the Business Combination is subject to certain closing conditions, including, but not limited to, (i) the expiration or termination of the applicable waiting period under the HSR Act, (ii) the approval of our shareholders, (iii) the approval of Proterra’s shareholders and (iv) the Registration Statement (as defined below) becoming effective.
In addition, the obligation of us to consummate the Business Combination is subject to the fulfillment of other closing conditions, including, but not limited to, (i) the representations and warranties of Proterra being true and correct to the standards applicable to such representations and warranties and each of the covenants of Proterra having been performed or complied with in all material respect, (ii) the aggregate cash proceeds from our trust account, together with the proceeds from the PIPE Financing (as defined below), equaling no less than $300,000,000 (after deducting any amounts paid to our shareholders that exercise their redemption rights in connection with the Business Combination and net of unpaid transaction expenses incurred or subject to reimbursement by us) and (iii) no Material Adverse Effect (as defined in the Merger Agreement) shall have occurred.
The obligation of Proterra to consummate the Business Combination is also subject to the fulfillment of other closing conditions, including, but not limited to, (i) the representations and warranties of us and Phoenix Merger Sub being true and correct to the standards applicable to such representations and warranties and each of the covenants of us having been performed or complied with in all material respects, (ii) the aggregate cash proceeds from our trust account, together with the proceeds from the PIPE Financing (as defined below), equaling no less than $350,000,000 (after deducting any amounts paid to our shareholders that exercise their redemption rights in connection with the Business Combination and net of unpaid transaction expenses incurred or subject to reimbursement by us) and (iii) the approval by Nasdaq of our listing application in connection with the Business Combination.
Termination
The Merger Agreement may be terminated under certain customary and limited circumstances prior to the closing of the Business Combination, including, but not limited to, (i) by mutual written consent of us and Proterra, (ii) by Us if the representations and warranties of Proterra are not true and correct or if Proterra fails to perform any covenant or agreement set forth in the Merger Agreement such that certain conditions to closing cannot be satisfied and the breach or breaches of such representations or warranties or the failure to perform such covenant or agreement, as applicable, are not cured or cannot be cured within certain specified time periods, (iii) termination by Proterra if the representations and warranties of us are not true and correct or if we fail to perform any covenant or agreement set forth in the Merger Agreement such that certain conditions to closing cannot be satisfied and the breach or breaches of such representations or warranties or the failure to perform such covenant or agreement, as applicable, are not cured or cannot be cured within certain specified time periods, (iv) subject to certain limited exceptions, by either us or Proterra if the Business Combination is not consummated by July 11, 2021, (v) by either us or Proterra if certain required approvals are not obtained by our shareholders after the conclusion of a meeting of our stockholders held for such purpose at which such shareholders voted on such approvals, and (vi) termination by us if Proterra’s shareholders do not deliver to us a written consent approving the Business Combination within ten business days of the Consent Solicitation Statement (as defined in the Merger Agreement) being disseminated.
If the Merger Agreement is validly terminated, none of the parties to the Merger Agreement will have any liability or any further obligation under the Merger Agreement other than customary confidentiality obligations, except in the case of Willful Breach or Fraud (each, as defined in the Merger Agreement).
The Merger Agreement contains representations, warranties and covenants that the respective parties made to each other as of the date of the Merger Agreement or other specific dates. The assertions embodied in those representations, warranties and covenants were made for purposes of the contract among the respective parties and are subject to important qualifications and limitations agreed to by the parties in connection with negotiating such agreement. The representations, warranties and covenants in the Merger Agreement are also modified in important part by the underlying disclosure schedules which are not filed publicly and which are subject to a contractual standard of materiality different from that generally applicable to stockholders and were used for the purpose of allocating risk among the parties rather than establishing matters as facts. We do not believe that these schedules contain information that is material to an investment decision.
PIPE Financing (Private Placement)
Concurrently with the execution of the Merger Agreement, we entered into subscription agreements (the “Subscription Agreements”) with certain investors (the “PIPE Investors”). Pursuant to the Subscription Agreements, the PIPE Investors agreed to subscribe for and purchase, and we agreed to issue and sell to such investors, immediately following the Closing (as defined in the Merger Agreement), an aggregate of 41,500,000 shares of our Common Stock for a purchase price of $10.00 per share, for aggregate gross proceeds of $415,000,000 (the “PIPE Financing”).
The closing of the PIPE Financing is contingent upon, among other things, the substantially concurrent consummation of the Business Combination. The Subscription Agreements provide that we will grant the investors in the PIPE Financing certain customary registration rights.
The foregoing description of the Subscription Agreements and the PIPE Financing is subject to and qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of the form of Subscription Agreement.
Sponsor Support Agreement
Concurrently with the execution of the Merger Agreement, the Sponsor, and other holders of Class B ordinary shares, par value $0.0001 per share, of ArcLight entered into a Sponsor Support Agreement (the “Sponsor Support Agreement”) with us and Proterra, pursuant to which the Sponsor and such holders agreed to, among other things, (i) vote at any meeting of the shareholders of our Company all of their ordinary shares held of record or thereafter acquired in favor of the Proposals (as defined in the Merger Agreement), (ii) be bound by certain other covenants and agreements related to the Business Combination and (iii) be bound by certain transfer restrictions with respect to such securities, prior to the closing of the Business Combination, in each case, on the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in the Sponsor Support Agreement.
The foregoing description of the Sponsor Support Agreement is subject to and qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of the Sponsor Support Agreement.
Sponsor Letter Agreement
Concurrently with the execution of the Merger Agreement, the Sponsor entered into the Sponsor Letter Agreement (the “Sponsor Letter Agreement”) with us and Proterra, pursuant to which the parties thereto agreed to, among other things, (i) certain vesting and forfeiture terms with respect to 10% of our Common Stock beneficially owned by the Sponsor immediately following the closing, (ii) the lock-up described below and (iii) cause our designee to the ArcLight board of directors to resign in the event the Sponsor sells, disposes of, transfers or assigns (other than to an affiliate) 50% or more of the ArcLight Common Stock held beneficially by the Sponsor as of the closing of the Business Combination, in each case, on the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in the Sponsor Support Agreement.
The foregoing description of the Sponsor Letter Agreement is subject to and qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of the Sponsor Letter Agreement.
On February 2, 2021, ArcLight, Proterra and the Sponsor entered into Amendment No. 1 to the Sponsor Letter Agreement (the “Amendment”) to conditionally shorten the Lock-up Period with respect to a portion of the Lock-up Shares based on the trading price of the ArcLight Common Stock following the Closing Date. Under the terms of the Amendment, the Lock-up Period shall be the period beginning on the Closing Date and ending 180 days after the Closing Date; provided, that the Lock-up Period will terminate early with respect to:
A. 33% of the Lock-up Shares on the business day after the Release Condition (as defined below) is satisfied during the period starting on the day after the Closing Date and ending on the 119th day after the Closing Date; provided, that such early termination will occur no earlier than the later of 60 days after the Closing Date and 30 days after the registration statement registering shares of ArcLight Common Stock issued on the Closing Date to investors in connection with the PIPE financing contemplated by the Merger Agreement is declared effective under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), and
B. 33% of the Lock-up Shares on the business day after the Release Condition is satisfied during the period starting 120 days after the Closing Date (which, for the avoidance of doubt, shall represent an additional 33% of the Lock-up Shares if the Release Condition shall have been satisfied in clause (A) above).
For purposes of the Amendment, the term “Release Condition” means if, over any 20 trading days within any 30 trading day period, the volume-weighted average price of ArcLight Common Stock is greater than or equal to $20.00 per share, or there occurs any transaction resulting in a change in control with a valuation for the ArcLight Common Stock that is greater than or equal to $20.00 per share; provided that the reference to $20.00 per share will be equitably adjusted on account of any changes occurring after the Closing Date in the equity securities of ArcLight by way of stock split, stock dividend, combination or reclassification, or through merger, consolidation, reorganization, recapitalization or business combination, or by any other means.
Under Proterra’s Ninth Amended and Restated Investors’ Rights Agreement (the “IRA”), parties to the IRA agreed to be subject to a lock-up with respect to their outstanding shares of Proterra capital stock, including shares issuable upon exercise of outstanding warrants or conversion of outstanding secured convertible promissory notes, and the ArcLight Common Stock that will be issued in exchange for such shares of Proterra capital stock, for 180 days following the Closing Date, subject to customary terms and exceptions, which include a pro rata release provision. All of the parties to the IRA will be entitled to the benefit of the early lock-up release provisions of the Amendment with respect to such shares, which represent more than 95% of the currently outstanding shares of Proterra’s capital stock.
Proterra Stockholder Support Agreements
Concurrently with the execution of the Merger Agreement, certain stockholders of Proterra representing the requisite votes necessary to approve the Business Combination entered into support agreements (the “Proterra Support Agreements”) with us and Proterra, pursuant to which each such holder agreed to (i) vote at any meeting of the shareholders of Proterra all of its Proterra Common Stock held of record or thereafter acquired in favor of the Proposals (as defined in the Merger Agreement) and appoint us as such holder’s proxy, (ii) be bound by certain other covenants and agreements related to the Business Combination and (iii) be bound by certain transfer restrictions with respect to such securities, in each case, on the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in Proterra Support Agreement.
The foregoing description of Proterra Support Agreements is subject to and qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of the form of Company Support Agreement.
Lock-Ups
The Sponsor and certain holders of Proterra Common Stock, including its institutional holders and certain of its officers and directors, immediately prior to the closing of the Business Combination will be subject to post-closing lock-ups with respect to their shares of ArcLight Common Stock for a period to be agreed between Proterra and the Company, but not to exceed 180 days, subject, in each case, to customary terms.
Amended and Restated Registration Rights Agreement
At the closing of the Business Combination, Proterra, the Sponsor and certain stockholders of Proterra will enter into an amended and restated registration rights agreement (the “Registration Rights Agreement”) pursuant to which, among other things, the parties thereto will be granted certain customary registrant rights with respect to shares of Proterra Common Stock.
The foregoing description of the Registration Rights Agreement is subject to and qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of the form of Registration Rights Agreement.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception through December 31, 2020 related to our formation, the preparation for the Initial Public Offering, and since the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the search for a prospective initial Business Combination. We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. We will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial Business Combination. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from July 28, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had net loss of approximately $1.3 million, which consisted of approximately $1.3 million in general and administrative costs, partially offset by interest income on the investments in Trust Account.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $0.9 million in our operating bank account.
Our liquidity needs up to September 25, 2020 had been satisfied through a payment of $25,000 from the Sponsor to cover certain expenses on our behalf in exchange for the issuance of the Founder Shares (as defined below), a loan under a note agreement from our Sponsor of approximately $154,000 (the “Note”), and the net proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust Account. The Note was repaid in full on October 1, 2020. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our officers, directors and Initial Shareholders may, but are not obligated to, provide us working capital loans. To date, there are no amounts outstanding under any working capital loans.
In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 205-40, “Basis of Presentation - Going Concern,” we have determined that the cash requirements for the next twelve months raise substantial about our ability to continue as a going concern until the earlier of the consummation of the Business Combination or the date the Company is required to liquidate, September 25, 2022. The financial statements do not include any adjustment that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern.
We continue to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and have concluded that the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the balance sheet. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an administrative services agreement to pay our Sponsor $10,000 per month for office space, secretarial and administrative services provided to us.
Registration and Shareholder Rights
The holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants, and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any Class A ordinary shares issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans) are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration and shareholder rights agreement. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we will register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of the initial Business Combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the date of this prospectus to purchase up to 3,750,000 additional Units at the Initial Public Offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. The underwriters partially exercised their over-allotment option on September 29, 2020 to purchase an additional 2,750,000 Over-Allotment Units. The remaining unexercised over-allotment option expired unexercised on November 6, 2020.
In connection with the consummation of the Initial Public Offering on September 25, 2020, the underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or $5.0 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. In addition, $0.35 per unit, or approximately $8.8 million in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. On September 29, 2020, the underwriters were entitled to an additional underwriting discount of approximately $0.6 million paid upon the closing of the Over-Allotment, and an additional deferred underwriting commissions of approximately $1.0 million. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We have identified the following as its critical accounting policies:
Investments Held in Trust Account
The Company’s portfolio of investments is comprised solely of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities, or a combination thereof. The Company’s investments held in the Trust Account are classified as trading securities. Trading securities are presented on the balance sheet at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these securities is included in net gain on investments held in Trust Account in the accompanying statement of operations.
Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that features redemption right that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2020, 26,290,616 shares of Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the Company’s balance sheet.
Net Loss Per Ordinary Share
Net income (loss) per share is computed by dividing net income by the weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. We have not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the Public Offering and Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 21,425,000 shares in the calculation of diluted loss per share, since the exercise of the warrants are contingent upon the occurrence of future events and the inclusion of such warrants would be anti-dilutive.
Our statement of operations includes a presentation of income (loss) per share for Redeemable Class A Common Stock in a manner similar to the two-class method of income (loss) per share. Net income per common share, basic and diluted, for Redeemable Class A Common Stock is calculated by dividing the proportionate share of income or loss on marketable securities held by the Trust Account, net of applicable franchise and income taxes, by the weighted average number of Common stock subject to possible redemption outstanding since original issuance.
Net loss per share, basic and diluted, for Non-Redeemable Class A and Class B Common Stock is calculated by dividing the net loss, adjusted for income or loss on marketable securities attributable to Redeemable Class A Common Stock, by the weighted average number of non-redeemable common stock outstanding for the period.
Non-Redeemable Class A and Class B Common Stock includes Founder Shares and non-redeemable shares of common stock as these shares do not have any redemption features. Non-Redeemable Class A and Class B Common Stock participates in the income or loss on marketable securities based on non-redeemable common stock shares’ proportionate interest..
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Our management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards if currently adopted would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the JOBS Act and are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We elected to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
As an “emerging growth company”, we are not required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our initial public offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.