ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion compares the Company’s financial condition at December 31, 2020 to its financial condition at December 31, 2019 and the results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes thereto appearing in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Forward-Looking Statements
Certain statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K may constitute “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Forward-looking statements are statements that include, without limitation, projections, predictions, expectations, or beliefs about future events or results that are not statements of historical fact. Such forward-looking statements are based on various assumptions as of the time they are made, and are inherently subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties, and other factors, some of which cannot be predicted or quantified, that may cause actual results, performance or achievements to be materially different from those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements are often accompanied by words that convey projected future events or outcomes such as “expect,” “believe,” “estimate,” “plan,” “project,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “will,” “may,” “view,” “opportunity,” “potential,” or words of similar meaning or other statements concerning opinions or judgment of the Company and its management about future events. Although the Company believes that its expectations with respect to forward-looking statements are based upon reasonable assumptions within the bounds of its existing knowledge of its business and operations, there can be no assurance that actual results, performance, or achievements of, or trends affecting, the Company will not differ materially from any projected future results, performance, achievements or trends expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Actual future results, performance, achievements or trends may differ materially from historical results or those anticipated depending on a variety of factors, including, but not limited to:
● changes in interest rates;
● general economic and financial market conditions, in the United States generally and particularly in the markets in which the Company operates and in which its loans are concentrated, including the effects of declines in real estate values, increases in or sustained high levels of unemployment and bankruptcies and slowdowns in economic growth, including as a result of the pandemic caused by a novel strain of coronavirus (“COVID-19”);
● the quality or composition of the loan or investment portfolios and changes therein;
● demand for loan products and financial services in the Company’s market area;
● the Company’s ability to manage its growth or implement its growth strategy;
● the introduction of new lines of business or new products and services;
● the Company’s ability to recruit and retain key employees;
● real estate values in the Company’s lending area;
● an insufficient allowance for credit losses;
● the Company’s liquidity and capital positions;
● concentrations of loans secured by real estate, particularly commercial real estate;
● the effectiveness of the Company’s credit processes and management of the Company’s credit risk;
● the Company’s ability to compete in the market for financial services;
● technological risks and developments, and cyber threats, attacks, or events;
● the potential adverse effects of unusual and infrequently occurring events, such as weather-related disasters, terrorist acts or public health events (including the COVID-19 pandemic), and of governmental and societal responses thereto; these potential adverse effects may include, without limitation, adverse effects on the ability of the Company’s borrowers to satisfy their obligations to the Company, on the value of collateral securing loans, on the demand for the Company’s loans or its other products and services, on incidents of cyberattack and fraud, on the Company’s liquidity or capital positions, on risks posed by reliance on third-party service providers, on other aspects of the Company’s business operations and on financial markets and economic growth;
● the potential effect of the COVID-19 pandemic, the steps the Company takes in response to the pandemic, the severity and duration of the pandemic, and the distribution and efficacy of vaccines, including the pace of recovery when the pandemic subsides and the heightened impact it has on many of the risks described herein;
● performance by the Company’s counterparties or vendors;
● deposit flows;
● the availability of financing and the terms thereof;
● the level of prepayments on loans and mortgage-backed securities;
● legislative or regulatory changes and requirements, including the impact of the CARES Act and other legislative and regulatory reactions to the COVID-19 pandemic;
● the effects of changes in federal, state or local tax laws and regulations;
● monetary and fiscal policies of the U.S. government including policies of the U.S. Department of the Treasury and the Federal Reserve;
● changes to applicable accounting principles and guidelines; and
● other factors, many of which are beyond the control of the Company.
These factors should not be considered exhaustive and should be read together with other cautionary statements that are included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K including those discussed in Item 1A. “Risk Factors.” All of the forward-looking statements made in this Annual Report are expressly qualified by the cautionary statements contained or referred to in this Annual Report. The actual results or developments anticipated may not be realized or, even if substantially realized, they may not have the expected consequences to or effects on the Company or its businesses or operations. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on the forward-looking statements contained in this Annual Report. Forward-looking statements speak only as of the date they are made and the Company does not undertake any obligation to update, revise, or clarify these forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Overview
Partners Bancorp, a bank holding corporation, through its wholly owned subsidiaries, The Bank of Delmarva (“Delmarva”) and Virginia Partners Bank (“Partners”), each of which are commercial banking corporations, engages in general commercial banking operations, with eighteen branches throughout Wicomico, Charles, Anne Arundel, and Worcester Counties in Maryland, Sussex County in Delaware, Camden and Burlington Counties in New Jersey, the city of Fredericksburg, Virginia, and Spotsylvania County, Virginia.
The Company derives the majority of its income from interest received on our loans and investment securities. The primary source of funding for making these loans and investment securities are deposits and secondarily, borrowings. Consequently, one of the key measures of the Company’s success is the amount of net interest income, or the difference between the income on interest earning assets, such as loans and investment securities, and the expense on interest bearing liabilities, such as deposits and borrowings. The resulting ratio of that difference as a percentage of average interest earning assets represents the net interest margin. Another key measure is the spread between the yield earned on interest earning assets and the rate paid on interest bearing liabilities, which is called the net interest spread. In addition to earning interest on loans and investment securities, the Company earns income through fees and other charges to customers. Also included is a discussion of the various components of this noninterest income, as well as of noninterest expense.
There are risks inherent in all loans, so the Company maintains an allowance for credit losses to absorb probable losses on existing loans that may become uncollectible. The Company maintains this allowance for credit losses by charging a provision for credit losses as needed against our operating earnings for each period. The Company has included a detailed discussion of this process, as well as several tables describing its allowance for credit losses.
The Company plans to continue to grow both organically and possibly through future acquisitions, including potential expansion into new market areas, such as its proposed expansion into the Greater Washington and Northern Virginia Markets. The Company believes its current financial condition, coupled with its scalable operational capabilities, will allow it to act upon growth opportunities in the current banking environment. The Company’s financial performance generally, and in particular the ability of its borrowers to repay their loans, the value of collateral securing those loans, as well as demand for loans and other products and services the Company offers, is highly dependent on the business environment in the Company’s primary markets where the Company operates and in the United States as a whole.
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has severely disrupted supply chains and adversely affected production, demand, sales and employee productivity across a range of industries, dramatically increased unemployment in the Company’s areas of operation and nationally, and resulted in orders directing the closing or limited operation of certain businesses and restrictions on public gatherings, many of which remain in place. These events affected the Company’s operations during 2020 and are expected to impact the Company’s financial results continuing on into 2021. The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s operational and financial performance will depend on certain developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak, the impact on the Company’s customers, employees and vendors and the nature and effect of past and future federal and state governmental and private sector responses to the pandemic, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted.
In connection with the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, both Delmarva and Partners continue to follow their pandemic response plans, which were enacted in February 2020. To date, management believes that the plans have been implemented successfully. The operation of these plans continues to require daily oversight in order to properly navigate this complex and ever-changing environment. The roll out of these plans previously resulted in adjustments to both Delmarva and Partners branch operations, including, but not limited to, lobby and drive-thru hours as well as physical access, the provision of personal protective equipment to employees and customers, and having employees work remotely whenever possible. As of December 31, 2020, both Delmarva and Partners branch operations were operating under normal lobby and drive-thru hours with facemasks being required to enter one of their branch facilities and signage and floor markings in their branch lobbies to help facilitate compliance with social distancing guidelines. In addition, the majority of Delmarva’s and Partners’ employees, with a few exceptions, have shifted from remote work to returning to the office on either a full-time or hybrid basis. Delmarva and Partners continue to proactively work with their local, state and federal government agencies to ensure their response to the COVID-19 pandemic is both safe and sound with little disruption to their customers. Additionally, Delmarva and Partners continue to take necessary precautions in order to protect their staffs, customers and their families as well as their communities, and to limit the ongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Future developments with respect to the COVID-19 pandemic are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted and new information may emerge concerning the severity of the outbreak and the actions to contain the outbreak or treat its impact, among others. Other national health concerns, including the outbreak of other contagious diseases or pandemics may adversely affect the Company in the future. Please refer to the “Provision and Allowance for Credit Losses” section of this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” for more information related to payment deferrals, concentrations in higher risk industries, and the impact on the allowance for credit losses.
The following discussion and analysis also identifies significant factors that have affected the Company's financial position and operating results during the periods included in the consolidated financial statements accompanying this report. You are encouraged to read this management's discussion and analysis in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto included in Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and the other statistical information included in this Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Policies
Certain critical accounting policies affect significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of the Company's consolidated financial statements. These significant accounting policies are described in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The accounting principles the Company follows and the methods of applying these principles conform to U.S. GAAP and general banking industry practices. The Company's most critical accounting policy relates to the determination of the allowance for credit losses,
which reflects the estimated losses resulting from the inability of borrowers to make loan payments. The determination of the adequacy of the allowance for credit losses involves significant judgment and complexity and is based on many factors. If the financial condition of our borrowers were to deteriorate, resulting in an impairment of their ability to make payments, the estimates would be updated and additional provisions for credit losses may be required. See “Provision and Allowance for Credit Losses” and Note 1 and Note 3 of the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Another of the Company’s critical accounting policies, with the acquisitions of Liberty in 2018 and Partners in 2019, relates to the valuation of goodwill and intangible assets. The Company accounted for the Liberty Merger and the Share Exchange in accordance with ASC Topic No. 805, which requires the use of the acquisition method of accounting. Under this method, assets acquired, including intangible assets, and liabilities assumed, are recorded at their fair value. Determination of fair value involves estimates based on internal valuations of discounted cash flow analyses performed, third party valuations, or other valuation techniques that involve subjective assumptions. Additionally, the term of the useful lives and appropriate amortization periods of intangible assets is subjective. Resulting goodwill from the Liberty Merger and the Share Exchange, which totaled approximately $5.2 million and $4.4 million, respectively, under the acquisition method of accounting represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net assets acquired. Goodwill is not amortized, but is evaluated for impairment annually or more frequently if deemed necessary. If the fair value of an asset exceeds the carrying amount of the asset, no charge to goodwill is made. If the carrying amount exceeds the fair value of the asset, goodwill will be adjusted through a charge to earnings, which is limited to the amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. In evaluating the goodwill on its consolidated balance sheet for impairment after the consummation date of the Liberty Merger and the Share Exchange, the Company will first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of our acquired assets is less than the carrying amount of the acquired assets, as allowed under ASU 2017-04. After making the assessment based on several factors, which will include, but is not limited to, the current economic environment, the economic outlook in our markets, our financial performance and common stock value as compared to our peers, we will determine if it is more likely than not that the fair value of our assets is greater than their carrying amount and, accordingly, will determine whether impairment of goodwill should be recorded as a charge to earnings in years subsequent to the Liberty Merger and the Share Exchange. This assessment was performed during the fourth quarter of 2020, and resulted in no impairment of goodwill. Depending on the severity of the economic consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic and their impact on the Company, management may determine that goodwill is required to be evaluated for impairment due to the presence of a triggering event, which may have a negative impact on the Company’s results of operations. See Note 20 - Virginia Partners Bank Transaction in the audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 for more information related to the fair value of net assets acquired in the acquisition of Partners, including goodwill and intangible assets.
In addition to the Company’s policies related to the valuation of goodwill, intangible assets and other acquisition accounting adjustments, ongoing accounting for acquired loans is considered a critical accounting policy. Acquired loans are classified as either purchase credit impaired (“PCI “) loans or purchased performing loans and are recorded at fair value on the date of acquisition. PCI loans are those for which there is evidence of credit deterioration since origination and for which it is probable at the date of acquisition that the Company will not collect all contractually required principal and interest payments. The difference between contractually required payments at acquisition and the cash flows expected to be collected at acquisition is referred to as the “nonaccretable difference.” Any excess of cash flows expected at acquisition over the estimated fair value is referred to as the “accretable yield” and is recognized as interest income over the remaining life of the loan when there is a reasonable expectation about the amount and timing of such cash flows. Periodically, we evaluate our estimate of cash flows expected to be collected on PCI loans. Estimates of cash flows for PCI loans require significant judgment. Subsequent decreases to the expected cash flows will generally result in a provision for credit losses resulting in an increase to the allowance for credit losses. Subsequent significant increases in cash flows may result in a reversal of post-acquisition provision for credit losses or a transfer from nonaccretable difference to accretable yield that increases interest income over the remaining life of the loan, or pool(s) of loans. The Company accounts for purchased performing loans using the contractual cash flows method of recognizing discount accretion based on the acquired loans’ contractual cash flows. Purchased performing loans are recorded at fair value, including a credit discount. The fair value discount is accreted as an adjustment to yield over the estimated lives of the loans. There is no allowance for credit losses established at the acquisition date for purchased performing loans, but a provision for credit losses may be required for any deterioration in these loans in future periods. The Company evaluates purchased performing loans quarterly for deterioration and records any required additional provision for credit losses.
Another critical accounting policy relates to deferred tax assets and liabilities. The Company records deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities for future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Future tax benefits, such as net operating loss carry forwards available from the Liberty acquisition, are recognized to the extent that realization of such benefits is more likely than not. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which the assets and liabilities are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income tax expense in the period that includes the enactment date. In the event the future tax consequences of differences between the financial reporting bases and the tax bases of our assets and liabilities results in deferred tax assets, an evaluation of the probability of being able to realize the future benefits indicated by such assets is required. A valuation allowance is provided when it is more likely than not that a portion or the full amount of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. In assessing the ability to realize the deferred tax assets, management considers the scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, and tax planning strategies. Such a deferred tax liability will only be recognized when it becomes apparent that those temporary differences will reverse in the foreseeable future. A tax position is recognized as a benefit only if it is “more likely than not” that the tax position would be sustained in a tax examination, with a tax examination being presumed to occur. The amount recognized is the largest amount of tax benefit that is greater than 50 percent more likely of being realized on examination. For tax positions not meeting the “more likely than not” test, no tax benefit is recorded.
Results of Operations
Net income attributable to the Company for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $5.7 million, or $0.32 per basic and diluted share, as compared to $5.9 million, or $0.54 per basic and diluted share, for the year ended December 31, 2019, a $215 thousand or 3.7% decrease. The Company’s results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 were directly impacted by the acquisition of Partners, whose results of operations were not fully present for the same period of 2019, and significantly higher provision for credit losses due to the current economic environment stemming from the COVID-19 pandemic.
As previously disclosed, effective after the close of business on November 15, 2019, the Company and Partners completed their share exchange (the “Share Exchange”), pursuant to which Partners became a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company. As a result of the Share Exchange, the Company acquired from Partners total assets of $454.2 million, including investment securities available for sale of $65.4 million and loans held for investment of $355.2 million, and total liabilities of $405.0 million, including total deposits of $348.6 million and total borrowings of $49.0 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company’s return on average assets, return on average equity and efficiency ratio were 0.40%, 4.24% and 71.96%, respectively, as compared to 0.70%, 7.22% and 71.40%, respectively, for the same period in 2019.
The decrease in net income attributable to the Company for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019, was driven by higher provision for credit losses and noninterest expenses, and was partially offset by increases in net interest income and noninterest income, and lower income taxes.
Financial Condition
Total assets as of December 31, 2020 were $1.51 billion, an increase of $261.7 million, or 20.9%, from December 31, 2019. Key drivers of this change were increases in cash and cash equivalents, investment securities available for sale, at fair value and total loans held for investment. Changes in key balance sheet components as of December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019 were as follows:
● Cash and due from banks as of December 31, 2020 were $13.6 million, a decrease of $20.8 million, or 60.4%, from December 31, 2019. Key drivers of this change were increases in interest bearing deposits in other financial institutions and federal funds sold as the Company repositioned its excess liquidity in order to earn higher amounts of interest income;
● Interest bearing deposits in other financial institutions as of December 31, 2020 were $218.7 million, an increase of $189.3 million, or 643.9%, from December 31, 2019. Key drivers of this change were the aforementioned item noted in the cash and due from banks analysis, total deposit growth outpacing total loan growth and increases in subordinated debt, net of issuance costs and other borrowings, which were partially offset by an increase in investment securities available for sale, at fair value, a decrease in Federal Home Loan Bank borrowings, and the maturity of certificate of deposit investments in other financial institutions that were not replaced;
● Federal funds sold as of December 31, 2020 were $50.3 million, an increase of $19.1 million, or 61.1%, from December 31, 2019. Key drivers of this change were the aforementioned items noted in the analysis of cash and due from banks and interest bearing deposits in other financial institutions;
● Investment securities available for sale, at fair value as of December 31, 2020 were $124.9 million, an increase of $20.6 million, or 19.7%, from December 31, 2019. Key drivers of this change were management of the investment securities available for sale portfolio in light of the Company's liquidity needs and an increase in unrealized gains on the investment securities available for sale portfolio. The significant inflow of deposits presented the Company with the opportunity to deploy excess cash and cash equivalents primarily into liquid, cash-flowing products while expanding net interest margin and increasing earnings per share;
● Loans, net of unamortized discounts on acquired loans of $4.0 million as of December 31, 2020 were $1.04 billion, an increase of $41.5 million, or 4.2%, from December 31, 2019. Key drivers of this change were the origination and funding of approximately $64.2 million in loans under the PPP, of which approximately $42.3 million were still outstanding as of December 31, 2020, which was partially offset by a decrease in organic growth due to higher pay-offs and tempered loan demand due to the uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic;
● Total deposits as of December 31, 2020 were $1.27 billion, an increase of $261.8 million, or 26.0%, from December 31, 2019. Key drivers of this change were organic growth as a result of the Company’s continued focus on total relationship banking, customers seeking the liquidity and safety of deposit accounts in light of continuing economic uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic, and the funding of loans under the PPP, the proceeds of which are deposited directly into the operating account of these customers at the Company;
● Total borrowings as of December 31, 2020 were $99.5 million, a decrease of $5.1 million, or 4.8%, from December 31, 2019. Key drivers of this change were a decrease in Federal Home Loan Bank borrowings due to maturities that were not replaced, which was partially offset by an increase in borrowings at the Federal Reserve Bank Discount Window under the PPP Liquidity Facility in which the loans under the PPP originated by the Company have been pledged as collateral, and the issuance of $18.1 million in subordinated debt in June 2020; and
● Total stockholders’ equity as of December 31, 2020 was $136.7 million, an increase of $5.8 million, or 4.4%, from December 31, 2019. Key drivers of this change were the net income attributable to the Company for the year ended December 31, 2020 and an increase in accumulated other comprehensive income, net of deferred tax, which were partially offset by cash dividends paid to shareholders and the repurchase of shares of the Company’s common stock under the Company’s Board of Directors approved stock purchase plan.
Delmarva's Tier 1 leverage capital ratio was 8.1% at December 31, 2020 as compared to 9.1% at December 31, 2019. At December 31, 2020, Delmarva's Tier 1 risk weighted capital and total risk-weighted capital ratios were 11.6% and 12.9%, respectively, as compared to Tier 1 risk weighted capital and total risk weighted capital ratios of 11.6% and 12.7%, respectively, at December 31, 2019.
Partners’ Tier 1 leverage capital ratio was 9.5% at December 31, 2020 as compared to 10.4% at December 31, 2019. At December 31, 2020, Partners’ Tier 1 risk-weighted capital and total risk-weighted capital ratios were 13.2% and 13.6%, respectively, as compared to Tier 1 risk-weighted capital and total risk-weighted capital ratios of 12.4% and 12.5%, respectively, at December 31, 2019.
As of December 31, 2020, all of the capital ratios of Delmarva and Partners continue to exceed regulatory requirements, with total risk-based capital substantially above well-capitalized regulatory requirements.
See “Capital” below for additional information about Delmarva’s and Partners’ capital ratios and requirements.
At December 31, 2020, nonperforming assets totaled $7.6 million, an increase from December 31, 2019 balances of $7.0 million. Most of this increase was due to an increase in nonaccrual loans, which totaled $4.9 million at December 31, 2020 compared with a balance of $4.5 million at December 31, 2019. There was one loan past due 90 days or more and still accruing interest at the end of 2020 with a balance of $2 thousand, compared to one loan past due 90 days or more and still accruing interest at December 31, 2019 with a balance of $5 thousand. The remaining increase was due to an increase in other real estate owned. Other real estate owned as of December 31, 2020 was $2.7 million, as compared to $2.4 million at December 31, 2019. Nonperforming loans as a percentage of total assets was 0.3% at December 31, 2020 and 0.4% at December 31, 2019. Nonperforming assets to total assets as of December 31, 2020 was 0.5% compared to 0.6% at December 31, 2019. Loans classified as TDRs totaled $8.1 million at December 31, 2020 and $10.3 million at December 31, 2019, a decrease of $2.2 million during the year. This decrease was mainly due to two relationships that paid off during the year with aggregrate balances of $1.6 million.
Net charge-offs were 0.1% of average total loans for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 0.2% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The allowance for credit losses to total loans ratio was 1.3% at December 31, 2020, compared to 0.7% at December 31, 2019. In addition to the allowance for credit losses, as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the Company had $4.0 million and $6.1 million, respectively, in unamortized discounts on acquired loans related to the acquisitions of Liberty and Partners. This discount is amortized over the life of the remaining loans.
Summary of Return on Equity and Assets
(See Note 15 - Regulatory Capital Requirements of the Company’s consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020.)
Earnings Analysis
The Company's primary source of revenue is interest income and fees, which it earns by lending and investing the funds which are held on deposit. Because loans generally earn higher rates of interest than investment securities, the Company seeks to deploy as much of its deposit funds as possible in the form of loans to individuals, businesses, and other organizations. To ensure sufficient liquidity, the Company also maintains a portion of its deposits in cash and cash equivalents, government securities, interest bearing deposits in other financial institutions, and overnight loans of excess reserves (known as “Federal Funds Sold”) to correspondent banks. The revenue which the Company earns (prior to deducting its overhead expenses) is essentially a function of the amount of the Company's loans and deposits, as well as the profit margin (“interest spread”) and fee income which can be generated on these amounts.
Net income attributable to the Company was $5.7 million and $5.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, as reported in its audited consolidated financial statements. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Company's consolidated financial statements and the notes to the consolidated financial statements included at Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The following is a summary of the results of operations by the Company for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Interest Income and Expense - Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Net Interest Income and Net Interest Margin
The largest component of net income for the Company is net interest income, which is the difference between the income earned on assets, such as loans and investment securities, and interest paid on liabilities, such as deposits and borrowings, used to support such assets. Net interest income is determined by the rates earned on the Company's interest-earning assets and the rates paid on its interest-bearing liabilities, the relative amounts of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, and the degree of mismatch and the maturity and repricing characteristics of its interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities.
Net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $12.8 million, or 41.1%, when compared to the same period of 2019. The Company's net interest margin (tax equivalent basis) decreased to 3.2%, representing a decrease of 72 basis points for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. The decrease in the net interest margin (tax equivalent basis) was primarily due to a decrease in the yields earned on average loans and investment securities, and higher average balances of interest-bearing liabilities. The Company’s net interest spread, the difference between the yield earned on average interest-earning assets and the rates paid on average interest-bearing liabilities, decreased to 2.8%, representing a decrease of 65 basis points for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. These margin pressures were offset by increases in average loan and investment securities balances, and lower rates paid on average interest-bearing liabilities. The Company’s net interest margin (tax equivalent basis) was also negatively impacted by higher average balances of cash and due from banks, interest bearing deposits from banks and federal funds sold, which are lower yielding interest-earning assets. Total interest income increased by $16.7 million, or 42.4%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 while total interest expense increased by $3.9 million, or 47.5%, both as compared to the same period in 2019. The most significant factors impacting net interest income during the year ended December 31, 2020 were as follows:
Positive Impacts:
● Increases in average loan balances, primarily due to the acquisition of Partners, partially offset by lower loan yields;
● Increases in average investment securities balances, primarily due to the acquisition of Partners, partially offset by lower investment securities yields; and
● Decrease in the rate paid on average interest-bearing deposit balances, primarily due to lower rates paid on average time deposits, partially offset by increases in average interest-bearing deposit balances, primarily due to the acquisition of Partners and organic deposit growth.
Negative Impacts:
● Increases in average cash and due from banks, interest bearing deposits from banks and federal funds sold, primarily due to the acquisition of Partners and deposit growth outpacing loan growth, and lower yields on each; and
● Increases in average borrowings balances, partially offset by lower rates paid on average borrowings, in each case primarily due to the acquisition of Partners and the Company’s issuance of subordinated debt late in the second quarter of 2020.
Loans
Average loan balances increased by $357.7 million, or 52.1%, and average yields earned decreased by 0.3% to 5.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019. The increase in average loan balances was primarily due to the inclusion of a full year, or $402.1 million, in Partners average loan balances and the origination and funding of loans under the PPP, which were partially offset by a decrease in organic growth due to higher pay-offs and tempered loan demand due to the uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic. The decrease in average yields earned was primarily due to pay-offs of higher yielding fixed rate loans, repricing of variable rate loans, and lower average yields on new loan originations, including loans originated under the PPP. Total average loans were 75.4% of total average interest-earning assets for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 85.9% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Investment securities
Average total investment securities balances increased by $67.1 million, or 110.1%, and average yields earned decreased by 0.7% to 2.5% for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to the inclusion of a full year, or $62.4 million, in Partners total average investment securities balances and management of the investment securities portfolio in light of the Company's liquidity needs. Total average investment securities were 9.3% of total average interest-earning assets for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 7.6% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Interest-bearing deposits
Average total interest-bearing deposit balances increased by $326.6 million, or 67.7%, and average rates paid decreased by 0.2% to 1.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to the inclusion of a full year, or $312.8 million, in Partners total average interest-bearing deposit balances and organic deposit growth, and a decrease in the rate paid on average time deposits due to the decline in interest rates beginning late in the first quarter of 2020.
Borrowings
Average total borrowings increased by $72.6 million, or 116.0%, and average rates paid decreased by 0.9% to 2.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to the inclusion of a full year, or $81.2 million, in Partners average total borrowings and the Company’s issuance of $18.1 million in subordinated debt late in the second quarter of 2020, and a decrease in the average balance of and rates paid on Federal Home Loan Bank advances due to maturities that were not replaced and the decline in interest rates beginning late in the first quarter of 2020.
Interest earned on assets and interest paid on liabilities is significantly influenced by market factors, specifically interest rate targets established by the Federal Reserve.
The Federal Open Markets Committee (“FOMC”) lowered Federal Funds target rates for the first time in 11 years on July 31, 2019 and then again in September 2019 and October 2019, for a combined decrease of 75 basis points during 2019. In response to market volatility related to the COVID-19 pandemic, the FOMC again lowered Federal Funds target rates twice in March 2020, for a combined decrease of 150 basis points. The FOMC’s current Federal Funds target rate range is currently 0% to 0.25%. As a consequence, long-term interest rates have decreased. The Company anticipates that these actions by the FOMC will continue to put downward pressure on its net interest margin. In general, the Company believes interest rate increases lead to improved net interest margins whereas interest rate decreases result in correspondingly lower net interest margins.
The following tables depict, for the periods indicated, certain information related to the average balance sheet and average yields earned on assets and average costs paid on liabilities for the Company. Such yields and costs are derived by dividing income or expense by the average balance of the corresponding assets or liabilities. Average balances have been derived from daily averages
(1) Yields on securities available-for-sale have been calculated on the basis of historical cost and do not give effect to changes in the fair value of those securities, which is reflected as a component of shareholder's equity.
(2) Presented on a taxable-equivalent basis using the statutory income tax rate of 21.0% for 2020 and 2019. Taxable equivalent adjustments of $322 thousand and $10 thousand are included in the calculation of tax exempt income for investment interest income and loan interest income, respectively for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $226 thousand and $11 thousand respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2019.
(3) Loans placed on nonaccrual are included in average balances.
(4) Yields do not include the average balance of the fair value adjustment for pools of non-credit impaired loans acquired or discounts on credit impaired loans acquired.
(5) Net interest income on the financial statements includes fees and charges on loans of $364 and $370 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The level of net interest income is affected primarily by variations in the volume and mix of these interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, as well as changes in interest rates. The following table shows the effect that these factors had on the interest earned from the Company's interest earning assets and interest paid on its interest bearing liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2020 versus 2019.
Rate and Volume Analysis
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Versus December 31, 2019
(Dollars in Thousands)
(1) Nonaccrual loans are included in average balances and do not have a material effect on the average yield.
Interest Sensitivity. The Company monitors and manages the pricing and maturity of its assets and liabilities in order to diminish the potential adverse impact that changes in interest rates could have on its net interest income. The Company also performs asset/liability modeling to assess the impact varying interest rates and balance sheet mix assumptions will have on net interest income. Interest rate sensitivity can be managed by repricing assets or liabilities, selling investment securities available-for-sale, replacing an asset or liability at maturity, or adjusting the interest rate during the life of an asset or liability. Managing the amount of assets and liabilities repricing in the same time interval helps to hedge the risk and minimize the impact on net interest income of rising or falling interest rates. The Company evaluates interest sensitivity risk and then formulates guidelines regarding asset generation and repricing, funding sources and pricing, and off-balance sheet commitments in order to decrease interest rate sensitivity risk.
At December 31, 2020, the Company was asset sensitive within the one-year time frame when looking at a repricing gap analysis. The cumulative gap, in an unchanged interest rate environment, as a percentage of total assets up to one year is 23.0%. A positive gap indicates more assets than liabilities are repricing within the indicated time frame. Management believes there is more upside potential than downside risk and, based on the current and projected interest rate environment, management expects to see net interest income rise in the future.
Provision and Allowance for Credit Losses
The Company has developed policies and procedures for evaluating the overall quality of its credit portfolio and for timely identifying potential problem loans. Management's judgment as to the adequacy of the allowance for credit losses is based upon a number of assumptions about future events which it believes to be reasonable, but which may not prove to be accurate. Thus, there can be no assurance that loan charge-offs in future periods will not exceed the allowance for credit losses or that additional increases in the allowance for credit losses will not be required.
The Company's allowance for credit losses consists of two parts. The first part is determined in accordance with authoritative guidance issued by the FASB regarding the allowance for credit losses. The Company's determination of this part of the allowance for credit losses is based upon quantitative and qualitative factors. A loan loss history based upon the prior three years is utilized in determining the appropriate allowance for credit losses. Historical loss factors are determined by criticized and uncriticized loans by loan type. These historical loss factors are applied to the loans by loan type to determine an indicated allowance for credit losses. The historical loss factors may also be modified based upon other qualitative factors including, but not limited to, local and national economic conditions, trends of delinquent loans, changes in lending policies and underwriting standards, concentrations, and management's knowledge of the loan portfolio.
The second part of the allowance for credit losses is determined in accordance with guidance issued by the FASB regarding impaired loans. A loan is considered impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that the Company will be unable to collect the scheduled payments of principal or interest when due according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement. Factors considered by management in determining impairment include payment status, collateral value, and the probability of collecting scheduled principal and interest payments when due. Loans that experience insignificant payment delays and payment shortfalls generally are not classified as impaired. Management determines the significance of payment delays and payment shortfalls on a case-by-case basis, taking into consideration all of the circumstances surrounding the loan and the borrower, including the length of the delay, the reasons for the delay, the borrower's prior payment record, and the amount of the shortfall in relation to the principal and interest owed. Impairment is measured on a loan by loan basis. Impaired loans not deemed collateral dependent are analyzed according to the ultimate repayment source, whether that is cash flow from the borrower, guarantor or some other source of repayment. Impaired loans are deemed collateral dependent if in the Company's opinion the ultimate source of repayment will be generated from the liquidation of collateral.
The sum of the two parts constitutes management's best estimate of an appropriate allowance for credit losses. When the estimated allowance for credit losses is determined, it is presented to the Company's Board of Directors for review and approval on a quarterly basis.
At December 31, 2020, the Company's allowance for credit losses was $13.2 million, or 1.3% of total outstanding loans. At December 31, 2019, the allowance for credit losses was $7.3 million, or 0.7% of total outstanding loans. The Company's provision for credit losses was $6.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in the provision for credit losses for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period of 2019 was primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic and qualitative adjustment factors made to the allowance for credit losses related to elevated unemployment and economic uncertainty in the Company’s markets, and loans originated by Partners subsequent to the Share Exchange. The provision for credit losses during the year ended December 31, 2020, as well as the allowance for credit losses as of December 31, 2020, represents management’s best estimate of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the ability of the Company’s borrowers to repay their loans. Management continues to carefully assess the exposure of the Company’s loan portfolio to the COVID-19 pandemic related factors, including economic trends and their potential effect on asset quality.
The Company discontinues accrual of interest on loans when management believes, after considering economic and business conditions and collection efforts that a borrower's financial condition is such that the collection of interest is doubtful. Generally, the Company will place a delinquent loan in nonaccrual status when the loan becomes 90 days or more past due. At the time a loan is placed in nonaccrual status, all interest which has been accrued on the loan but remains unpaid is reversed and deducted from earnings as a reduction of reported interest income. No additional interest is accrued on the loan balance until the collection of both principal and interest becomes reasonably certain.
The following tables illustrate the Company's past due and nonaccrual loans at December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Past Due and Nonaccrual Loans
(Dollars in Thousands)
At December 31, 2020 and 2019
Total nonaccrual loans at December 31, 2020 were $4.9 million, which reflects an increase of $525 thousand from $4.5 million at December 31, 2019. Management believes the relationships on nonaccrual were adequately reserved at December 31, 2020. TDR’s not past due or on nonaccrual at December 31, 2020 amounted to $6.2 million, as compared to $8.4 million at December 31, 2019. The decrease was due to two relationships with balances of approximately $1.6 million at December 31, 2019 that paid off during 2020. Total TDR’s decreased $2.2 million to $8.1 million at December 31, 2020, compared to $10.3 million at December 31, 2019. This decrease was mainly due to the items noted above and pay-downs of principal loan balances.
Nonperforming assets, defined as nonaccrual loans, loans past due 90 days or more and accruing, and other real estate owned, net (“OREO”), at December 31, 2020 was $7.6 million compared to $7.0 million at December 31, 2019. The Company's ratio of nonperforming assets to total assets was 0.5% at December 31, 2020 compared to 0.6% at December 31, 2019. As noted above, there was an increase in nonaccrual loans during the year ended December 31, 2020. OREO, net increased during the year ended December 31, 2020 by $260 thousand. There was one additional property that was classified as OREO during 2020.
It is likely that the COVID-19 pandemic and the economic disruption related to it will continue to negatively impact the Company’s financial position and results of operations during the year ending December 31, 2021. Although it is too early to determine what the ultimate impact will be on the Company, we believe we may experience deterioration in asset quality, increased levels of charge-offs, and an increased level of provision for credit losses.
The following tables provide additional information on the Company's nonperforming assets at December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Nonperforming Assets
(Dollars in thousands)
Nonperforming Loans by Type
(Dollars in thousands)
The following table provides data related to loan balances and the allowance for loan losses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Allowance for Loan Losses Data
(Dollars in Thousands)
At December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table represents the activity of the allowance for loan losses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 by loan type:
Allowance for Credit Losses and Recorded Investments in Financing Receivables
(Dollars in Thousands)
At December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table provides information related to the allocation of the allowance for loan losses by loan category, the related loan balance for each category, and the percentage of loan balance to total loans by category:
Allocation of the Allowance for Loan Losses
At December 31, 2020 and 2019
(Dollars in thousands)
In March 2020, the five federal bank regulatory agencies and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors issued joint guidance with respect to loan modifications for borrowers affected by COVID-19 (the “Joint Guidance”). The Joint Guidance encouraged banks, savings associations, and credit unions to make loan modifications for borrowers affected by COVID-19 and assured those financial institutions that they will not (i) receive supervisory criticism for such prudent loan modifications and (ii) be required by examiners to automatically categorize COVID-19-related loan modifications as TDRs. The federal banking regulators confirmed with FASB that short-term loan modifications made on a good faith basis in response to COVID-19 to borrowers who were current (i.e., less than 30 days past due on contractual payments) prior to any loan modification are not TDRs.
In addition, Section 4013 of the CARES Act provides banks, savings associations, and credit unions with the ability to make loan modifications related to COVID-19 without categorizing the loans as a TDR or conducting the analysis to make the determination, which is intended to streamline the loan modification process. Any such suspension is effective for the term of the loan modification; however, the suspension is only permitted for loan modifications made during the effective period and only for those loans that were not more than thirty (30) days past due as of December 31, 2019.
In an effort to support the Company’s borrowers in their times of need, the Company has granted loan payment deferrals to certain borrowers, who were current on their payments prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, on a short-term basis of three to six months. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company, on a consolidated basis, approved loan payment deferrals or payments of interest only for 548 loans totaling $286.6 million, which represented approximately 28.8% of total loan balances outstanding. As of December 31, 2020, approximately 90.9% of the loan balances that were approved by the Company, on a consolidated basis, for loan payment deferrals or payments of interest only have either resumed regular payments or have paid off. As of December 31, 2020, on a consolidated basis, the Company had loan payment deferrals or payments of interest only whose modification periods had not ended or had been extended for 26 loans totaling $26.0 million, all of which are still accruing interest, which represents approximately 2.6% of total loans outstanding.
The following table presents a summary of the remaining loan payment deferrals, full payment and interest only payment deferrals, as a of percentage of the number of loans outstanding and loan balances outstanding, granted by the Company as of December 31, 2020 related to the COVID-19 pandemic:
* Excludes loans originated under the PPP of the Small Business Administration.
The following table presents a summary of the loan payment deferrals by loan portfolio segmentation, full payment and interest only payment deferral, as of percentage of total loan balances outstanding and total loan portfolio segmentation balances outstanding, granted by the Company as of December 31, 2020 related to the COVID-19 pandemic:
*Excludes loans originated under the PPP of the Small Business Administration.
The Company continues to closely monitor credit risk and its exposure to increased loan losses resulting from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on its borrowers. The Company has identified nine specific higher risk industries to monitor the credit exposure of during this crisis.
The tables below identifies these higher risk industries, the Company’s exposure to them and the remaining balance of the loans within these higher risk industries with respect to which the Company has granted loan payment deferrals for as of December 31, 2020:
*Excludes loans originated under the PPP of the Small Business Administration.
The tables below identify these higher risk industries, the Company’s exposure to them and the balance of the loans within these higher risk industries which have requested and for which the Company has granted loan payment deferrals.
*Excludes loans originated under the PPP of the Small Business Administration.
Noninterest Income
Noninterest Income. The Company's primary source of noninterest income is service charges on deposit accounts, mortgage banking income and other income. Sources of other noninterest income include ATM and credit card fees, debit card income, safe deposit box income, earnings on bank owned life insurance policies and investment fees and commissions.
Noninterest income during the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $4.6 million, or 117.3%, when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Key changes in the components of noninterest income for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019, are as follows:
● Service charges on deposit accounts decreased by $325 thousand, or 27.7%, due primarily to decreases in overdraft and nonsufficient fund, or NSF, fees as a result of the significant increase in customer deposit balances, which was partially offset by the inclusion of a full year of Partners service charges on deposit accounts;
● Gains on investment securities increased by $494 thousand, or 459.8%, due primarily to Partners recording higher gains on the sale of mortgage-backed investment securities as compared to the same period in 2019, and Partners recording a gain on a higher yielding investment security that was called during the year ended December 31, 2020 that was not present during the year ended December 31, 2019. In addition, gains on investment securities increased due to Delmarva recording a higher amount of gains on higher yielding investment securities that were called during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019, and equity investment gains recorded in income during the year ended December 31, 2020 due to market factors that were not present during the year ended December 31, 2019;
● Mortgage banking income increased by $3.8 million, or 1,608.5%, due primarily to the inclusion of a full year of Partners’ majority owned subsidiary Johnson Mortgage Company, LLC and increased volume during the year ended December 31, 2020;
● Other income increased by $611 thousand, or 25.6%, due primarily to the inclusion of a full year of Partners other income, which included ATM and credit card fees and earnings on bank owned life insurance policies. In addition, other income increased due to higher mortgage division fees at Delmarva, increases in debit and merchant card income, and Delmarva recording earnings on bank owned life insurance policies that were not present during the same period of 2019, which were partially offset by lower ATM fees and recoveries on acquired loan balances from the Liberty acquisition.
Noninterest Expense
Noninterest Expense. Noninterest expense includes all expenses with the exception of those paid for interest on deposits and borrowings. Significant expense items included in this component are salaries and employee benefits, occupancy expense and other operating expenses.
Noninterest expense during the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $12.4 million, or 49.5%, when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Key changes in the components of noninterest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019, are as follows:
● Salaries and employee benefits increased by $7.0 million, or 53.1%, primarily due to the inclusion of a full year of Partners salaries and employee benefits, including expenses associated with Partners new key hires and expansion into the Greater Washington market, and increases due to staffing related changes, merit increases and benefit costs;
● Occupancy expense increased by $891 thousand, or 24.0%, primarily due to the inclusion of a full year of Partners occupancy expense, which was partially offset by decreases related to repairs and maintenance, utilities and leases;
● Amortization of core deposit intangible increased by $367 thousand, or 106.2%, primarily due to a full year of amortization related to the $2.7 million core deposit intangible recognized in the Partners acquisition, which was partially offset by lower amortization related to the $1.5 million core deposit intangible recognized in the Liberty acquisition;
● Losses on other real estate owned decreased by $146 thousand, or 59.1%, primarily due to lower valuation adjustments on properties and higher gains on the sales of properties during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, and lower expenses related to other real estate owned;
● Merger related expenses decreased by $913 thousand, or 99.1%, primarily due to the merger being completed with Partners in 2019;
● Other operating expenses increased by $5.1 million, or 78.5%, primarily due to the inclusion of a full year of Partners other expenses, including expenses associated with Partners’ recently completed core conversion. In addition, other operating expenses increased due to higher expenses related to FDIC insurance assessments and accounting fees, which were partially offset by lower expenses related to merger, sponsorships, training, employee events, postage and delivery, and meals and entertainment.
The following table sets forth the primary components of other noninterest expense for the periods indicated:
Other Operating Expenses
(Dollars in Thousands)
Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes was $1.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the provision for income taxes of $2.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $908 thousand or 34.5%. This decrease was due primarily to lower consolidated income before taxes on income, lower merger expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019, which are typically non-deductible, and higher earnings on tax-exempt income, primarily investment securities and bank owned life insurance policies. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company’s effective tax rate was approximately 23.3% as compared to 30.9% for the same period in 2019.
In addition, Partners is not subject to Virginia state income tax, but instead pays Virginia franchise tax. The Virginia franchise tax paid by Partners is recorded in the “Other operating expenses” line item on the Consolidated Statements of Income for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, and contributed to the Company’s lower effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019.
The fair value of the deferred tax asset acquired in the Share Exchange was $1.2 million. The fair value of the deferred tax asset acquired in the Liberty transaction was $4.3 million, of which $3.4 million related to federal net operating loss carryforwards the Company could use against future federal tax liabilities. As of December 31, 2019, the total net operating loss carryforwards obtained in the Liberty transaction had been utilized.
Financial Condition
Interest Earning Assets
Loans. Loans typically provide higher yields than the other types of interest earning assets, and thus one of the Company's goals is to increase loan balances. Management attempts to control and counterbalance the inherent credit and liquidity risks associated with the higher loan yields without sacrificing asset quality to achieve its asset mix goals. Total gross loans, excluding unamortized discounts on acquired loans, averaged $1.04 billion and $686.0 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The following table shows the composition of the loan portfolio by category:
Composition of Loan Portfolio by Category
(Dollars in Thousands)
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table sets forth the repricing characteristics and sensitivity to interest rate changes of the Company's loan portfolio, excluding unamortized discounts on acquired loans, at December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Loan Maturities and Interest Rate Sensitivity
At December 31, 2020 and 2019
(Dollars in thousands)
At December 31, 2020, real estate mortgage loans included $253.7 million of owner-occupied non-farm, non-residential loans, and $263.3 million of other non-farm, non-residential loans, which is 28.9% and 30.0% of real estate mortgage loans, respectively. By comparison, at December 31, 2019, real estate mortgage loans included $238.2 million of owner-occupied non-farm, non-residential loans, and $251.3 million of other non-farm, non-residential loans, which is 27.2% and 28.7% of real estate mortgage loans, respectively. This represents an increase at December 31, 2020 of $15.5 million and $12.0 million, or 6.5% and 4.8%, in owner-occupied non-farm, non-residential loans and other non-farm, non-residential loans, respectively.
At December 31, 2020, real estate mortgage loans included $74.7 million of construction and land development loans, and $29.5 million of multi-family residential loans, which is 8.5% and 3.4% of real estate mortgage loans, respectively. By comparison, at December 31, 2019, real estate mortgage loans included $84.8 million of construction and land development loans, and $27.1 million of multi-family residential loans, which is 9.7% and 3.1% of real estate mortgage loans, respectively. This represents a decrease at December 31, 2020 of $10.1 million, or 11.9%, in construction and land development loans, and an increase of $2.4 million, or 9.0%, in multi-family residential loans, respectively.
Commercial real estate loans, excluding owner-occupied non-farm, non-residential loans, were 229.8% of total risk-based capital at December 31, 2020, as compared to 276.8% at December 31, 2019. Construction and land development loans were 46.7% of total risk-based capital at December 31, 2020, as compared to 64.6% at December 31, 2019.
At December 31, 2020, real estate mortgage loans included home equity loans of $34.2 million and residential real estate loans of $199.3 million, compared to $37.7 million and $209.3 million at December 31, 2019, respectively. Home equity loans decreased $3.5 million, or 9.3%, during the year ended December 31, 2020, while residential real estate loans decreased $9.9 million, or 4.7%, during the year ended December 31, 2020. At December 31, 2020, commercial loans were $152.8 million, compared to $112.0 million at December 31, 2019, an increase of $40.8 million, or 36.4%, during the year ended December 31, 2020.
The overall increase in loans from the year ended December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020 was due primarily to the origination and funding of approximately $64.2 million in loans under the PPP, of which approximately $42.3 million were still outstanding as of December 31, 2020, which was partially offset by a decrease in organic growth due to higher pay-offs and tempered loan demand due to the uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic.
Beginning late in the first quarter of 2020, both Delmarva and Partners began assisting their customers in obtaining loans under the PPP in order to further assist their communities. Delmarva has provided access for customers and noncustomers to the program, allowing individuals or businesses visiting their website to access the SBA loan application and complete the process through a third party vendor. Loans processed through Delmarva’s website are funded by other banks or outside funding sources. During round one of this program, Partners, an SBA approved lender, directly originated and funded almost 700 loans totaling approximately $64.2 million, all of which were pledged as collateral to the Federal Reserve Bank Discount Window under the PPP Liquidity Facility. During the fourth quarter of 2020, Partners began receiving forgiveness payments from the SBA related to these loans. As of December 31, 2020, Partners had approximately $42.3 million in loans still outstanding under this program, all of which were pledged as collateral to the Federal Reserve Bank Discount Window under the PPP Liquidity Facility. Remaining aggregate fees, net of costs to originate, from the SBA of approximately $1.3 million will continue to be recognized in interest income over the life of these loans. Upon forgiveness of these loans, the remaining aggregate fees, net of costs to originate, will be recognized in interest income on an accelerated basis, which Partners expects to continue through 2021. Beginning early in the first quarter of 2021, both Delmarva and Partners began assisting their customers in obtaining loans under round two of this program in an identical manner as was done by each under round one of the program. As of March 14, 2021, Partners has directly originated and funded 219 loans totaling approximately $23.3 million, none of which have been pledged as collateral to the Federal Reserve Bank Discount Window under the PPP Liquidity Facility. Aggregate fees, net of costs to originate, from the SBA of approximately $1.2 million will be recognized in interest income over the life of these loans.
Investment Securities. The investment securities portfolio is a significant component of the Company's total interest-earning assets. Total investment securities averaged $128.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $61.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This represented 9.3% and 7.6% of total average interest-earning assets for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. This increase was primarily due to the inclusion of a full year, or $62.4 million, in Partners total average investment securities balances and management of the investment securities portfolio in light of the Company’s liquidity needs.
The Company classifies all of its investment securities as available for sale. This classification requires that investment securities be recorded at their fair value with any difference between the fair value and amortized cost (the purchase price adjusted by any discount accretion or premium amortization) reported as a component of stockholders’ equity (accumulated other comprehensive income), net of deferred taxes. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, investment securities available for sale, at fair value totaled $124.9 million and $104.3 million, respectively. Investment securities available for sale, at fair value increased by $20.6 million, or 19.7%, during the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to the management of the investment securities available for sale portfolio in light of the Company's liquidity needs and an increase in unrealized gains on the investment securities available for sale portfolio. The significant inflow of deposits presented the Company with the opportunity to deploy excess cash and cash equivalents primarily into liquid, cash-flowing products while expanding net interest margin and increasing earnings per share. The Company attempts to maintain an investment securities portfolio of high quality, highly liquid investments with returns competitive with short-term U.S. Treasury or agency obligations. This objective is particularly important as the Company focuses on growing its loan portfolio. The Company primarily invests in securities of U.S. Government agencies, municipals, and corporate obligations. At December 31, 2020 and 2019 there were no issuers, other than the U.S. Government and its agencies, whose securities owned by the Company had a book or fair value exceeding 10% of the Company's stockholders' equity.
The following table summarizes the amortized cost and fair value of investment securities available for sale for the dates indicated:
Amortized Cost and Fair Value of Investment Securities
(Dollars in Thousands)
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table shows, at carrying value and amortized cost, the scheduled maturities of investment securities available for sale held at December 31, 2020.
Maturities of Investments
(Dollars in Thousands)
As of December 31, 2020
In addition, the Company holds stock in various correspondent banks as well as the Federal Reserve Bank. The balance of these securities was $5.4 million and $6.6 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, a decrease of $1.1 million, or 17.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Due to the rapid decline and ongoing volatility in the securities markets, as well as the rapid interest rate cuts, during the year ended December 31, 2020, the net unrealized gains in the Company’s investment securities available for sale portfolio increased by approximately $2.1 million, or 212.1%, to $3.1 million at December 31, 2020.
Subsequent interest rate fluctuations could have an adverse effect on our investment securities available for sale portfolio by increasing reinvestment risk and reducing our ability to achieve our targeted investment returns.
Interest Bearing Liabilities
Deposits. Average total deposits increased from $684.6 million to $1.15 billion, an increase of $469.4 million, or 68.6%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 over the average total deposits for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily due to the inclusion of a full year, or $405.2 million, in Partners total average deposit balances and organic deposit growth. At December 31, 2020, total deposits were $1.27 billion as compared to $1.01 billion at December 31, 2019, an increase of $261.8 million, or 26.0%. This increase was primarily driven by organic growth as a result of the Company’s continued focus on total relationship banking, customers seeking the liquidity and safety of deposit accounts in light of continuing economic uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic, and the funding of loans under the PPP, the proceeds of which are deposited directly into the operating account of these customers at the Company. Non-interest bearing demand deposits increased to $390.5 million at December 31, 2020, a $129.3 million, or 49.5%, increase from $261.2 million in non-interest bearing demand deposits at December 31, 2019, due primarily to the aforementioned items above.
The following table sets forth the deposits of the Company by category for the period indicated:
Deposits by Category
(Dollars in Thousands)
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019
The Company's loan-to-deposit ratio was 81.7% at December 31, 2020 as compared to 98.8% at December 31, 2019. Core deposits, which exclude certificates of deposit of $250 thousand or more, provide a relatively stable funding source for the Company's loan portfolio and other interest earning assets. The Company's core deposits were $1.13 billion at December 31, 2020, an increase of $243.9 million, or 27.4%, from $890.7 million at December 31, 2019, and excluded $133.5 million and $115.6 million in certificates of deposit of $250 thousand or more as of those dates, respectively. Management anticipates that a stable base of deposits will be the Company's primary source of funding to meet both its short-term and long-term liquidity needs in the future, and, therefore, feels that presenting core deposits provides valuable information to investors.
The following table provides a summary of the Company's maturity distribution for certificates of deposit at the dates indicated:
Maturities of Certificates of Deposit
(Dollars in Thousands)
As of December 31, 2020
The following table provides a summary of the Company's maturity distribution for certificates of deposit of greater than $100,000 or more at the dates indicated:
Maturities of Certificates of Deposit Greater than $100,000
(Dollars in Thousands)
As of December 31, 2020
Borrowings. Borrowings at December 31, 2020 and 2019 consist primarily of short-term and long-term borrowings with the FHLB, subordinated debt, net of issuance costs, and other borrowings.
At December 31, 2020, short-term borrowings with the FHLB were $0 as compared to $43.5 million at December 31, 2019, a decrease of $43.5 million, or 100.0%. This decrease was due to maturities that were not replaced. At December 31, 2020, long-term borrowings with the FHLB were $33.0 million as compared to $53.3 million at December 31, 2019, a decrease of $20.4 million, or 38.2%. This decrease was primarily due to maturities that were not replaced, partially offset by two long-term borrowings received in March 2020. These borrowings are collateralized by a blanket lien on the first mortgage loans in the amount of the outstanding borrowings, FHLB capital stock, and amounts on deposit with the FHLB.
The Company prepaid one of its outstanding FHLB advances totaling $10.0 million during year ended December 31, 2020, which resulted in the recognition of $116,000 in in prepayment fees.
At December 31, 2020, subordinated debt, net of issuance costs, were $24.1 million as compared to $6.4 million at December 31, 2019, an increase of $17.7 million, or 274.5%. This increase was primarily due to the Company’s issuance of $18.1 million in subordinated debt in June 2020.
At December 31, 2020, other borrowings were $42.4 million as compared to $1.2 million at December 31, 2019, an increase of $41.1 million, or 3,292.9%. This increase was primarily due to borrowings at the Federal Reserve Bank Discount Window under the PPP Liquidity Facility in which loans under the PPP originated by the Company have been pledged as collateral. In addition, Partners majority owned subsidiary, JMC, has a warehouse line of credit with another financial institution in the amount of $3.0 million, of which $142 thousand and $576 thousand were outstanding as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
See Note 8 - Credit Facilities of the audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 for additional information on the Company’s subordinated debt, net of issuance costs, and JMC’s warehouse line of credit.
The following table provides a summary of average outstanding short term borrowings and weighted average rate for each period:
Average Short Term Borrowings
At December 31, 2020 and 2019
(Dollars in Thousands)
Average short-term borrowings and average total borrowings increased by $15.5 million, or 166.4%, and $72.6 million, or 116.0%, respectively, and rates paid decreased by 0.3% and 0.9%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. These increases were primarily due to the inclusion of a full year, or $81.2 million, in Partners average total borrowings, including borrowings at the Federal Reserve Bank Discount Window under the PPP Liquidity Facility, and the Company’s issuance of $18.1 million in subordinated debt late in the second quarter of 2020, and a decrease in the average balance of and rates paid on FHLB borrowings due to maturities that were not replaced and the decline in interest rates beginning late in the first quarter of 2020.
Capital
Total stockholders’ equity as of December 31, 2020 was $136.7 million, an increase of $5.8 million, or 4.4%, from December 31, 2019. Key drivers of this change were the net income attributable to the Company for the year ended December 31, 2020 and an increase in accumulated other comprehensive income, net of deferred tax, which were partially offset by cash dividends paid to shareholders and the repurchase of shares of the Company’s common stock under the Company’s Board of Directors approved stock purchase plan.
The Federal Reserve and other bank regulatory agencies require bank holding companies and financial institutions to maintain capital at adequate levels based on a percentage of assets and off-balance sheet exposures, adjusted for risk weights ranging from 0% to 100%. The following table presents actual and required capital ratios as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 for Delmarva and Partners under Basel III Capital Rules. The minimum required capital amounts presented include the minimum required capital levels as of December 31, 2020 based on the phase-in provisions of the Basel III Capital Rules and the minimum required capital levels as of January 1, 2019 when the Basel III Capital Rules were fully phased-in. Capital levels required for an institution to be considered well capitalized are based upon prompt corrective action regulations, as amended to reflect the changes under the Basel III Capital Rules. A more in depth discussion of regulatory capital requirements is included in Note 15 of the consolidated financial statements included at Item 8 to this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Capital Components
At December 31, 2020 and 2019
(Dollars in Thousands)
Liquidity Management
Liquidity management involves monitoring the Company's sources and uses of funds in order to meet its day-to-day cash flow requirements while maximizing profits. Liquidity represents the ability of a company to convert assets into cash or cash equivalents without significant loss and to raise additional funds by increasing liabilities. Liquidity management is made more complicated because different balance sheet components are subject to varying degrees of management control. For example, the timing of maturities of the available for sale investment securities portfolio is very predictable and subject to a high degree of control at the time investment decisions are made; however, net deposit inflows and outflows are far less predictable and are not subject to the same degree of control. Asset liquidity is provided by cash and assets which are readily marketable, which can be pledged, or which will mature in the near future. Liability liquidity is provided by access to core funding sources, principally the ability to generate customer deposits in the Company's market area. The Company's Federal Funds Sold position, which includes funds in due from banks and interest-bearing deposits with banks, averaged $40.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 and totaled $50.3 million at December 31, 2020, as compared to an average of $9.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 and a year-end position of $31.2 million at December 31, 2019. Also, the Company has available advances from the FHLB. Advances available are generally based upon the amount of qualified first mortgage loans which can be used for collateral. At December 31, 2020, advances available totaled approximately $385.8 million of which $33.0 million had been drawn, or used for letters of credit. Management regularly reviews the liquidity position of the Company and has implemented internal policies which establish guidelines for sources of asset-based liquidity and limit the total amount of purchased funds used to support the balance sheet and funding from non-core sources. Subject to certain aggregation rules, FDIC deposit insurance covers the funds in deposit accounts up to at least $250 thousand.
Impact of Inflation
Unlike most industrial companies, the assets and liabilities of financial institutions such as the Company are primarily monetary in nature. Therefore, interest rates have a more significant effect on the Company's performance than do the effects of changes in the general rate of inflation and change in prices. In addition, interest rates do not necessarily move in the same direction or in the same magnitude as the prices of goods and services. As discussed previously, management seeks to manage the relationships between interest sensitive assets and liabilities in order to protect against wide interest rate fluctuations, including those resulting from inflation.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
With the exception of the Company's obligations in connection with its irrevocable letters of credit and loan commitments, the Company has no other off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on its financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources, that is material to investors.