ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis contains forward-looking statements relating to future events or our future financial performance. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may”, “should”, “intends”, “expects”, “plans”, “anticipates”, “believes”, “estimates”, “predicts”, “potential”, or “continue” or the negative of these terms or other comparable terminology. These statements are only predictions and involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors which may cause our or our industry’s actual results, levels of activity or performance to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity or performance expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements.
Although we believe that the expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, we cannot guarantee future results, levels of activity or performance. You should not place undue reliance on these statements, which speak only as of the date of this Annual Report. These cautionary statements should be considered with any written or oral forward-looking statements that we may issue in the future. You should read this Annual Report on Form 10-K with the understanding that our actual future results may be materially different from what we expect. All forward-looking statements speak only as of the date on which they are made. We undertake no obligation to update such statements to reflect events that occur or circumstances that exist after the date on which they are made, except as required by applicable law.
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). The following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations of the Company is based upon, and should be read in conjunction with, the audited consolidated financial statements and related notes elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
The Company is a diversified, industrial mineral and natural resource company working to provide solutions to the agriculture and construction materials markets. In addition, the Company intends to focus on identifying and developing other advanced stage natural resource projects in support of its agricultural business. The Company’s business is currently divided into two divisions: PureBase Ag to develop agricultural specialized fertilizers, minerals and biostimulants for organic and sustainable agriculture and USAM which will be focused on developing construction sector related products, primarily supplementary cementitious materials (“SCM’s”) based on kaolin clay.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Year Ended November 30, 2020 to the Year Ended November 30, 2019
Revenues
Revenues decreased by $192,520, or 53%, for the year ended November 30, 2020, as compared to the year ended November 30, 2019. The decrease is primarily attributable to the Company not selling any sulfate products from its Esmeralda mine during the year ended November 30, 2020.
Operating Expenses
Total operating expenses decreased remained relatively consistent as compared to the year ended November 30, 2019, decreasing by $7,157, or 0%. Selling, general and administrative remained relatively consistent as compared to the year ended November 30, 2019, decreasing by $71,673, or 5%.
Product fulfillment, exploration and mining expenses decreased by $135,484, or 64%, for the year ended November 30, 2020, as compared to the year ended November 30, 2019. The decrease is primarily attributable to a decrease in product purchases related to the Company not selling any sulfate products from its Esmeralda mine during the year ended November 30, 2020.
Loss on impairment of mineral rights increased by $200,000, or 100%, for the year ended November 30, 2020, as compared to the year ended November 30, 2019. The increase is attributable to the Company deeming the mineral rights asset to be fully impaired at November 30, 2020.
Other Income (Expenses)
Other income (expense) increased by $1,613,629, or 90%, for the year ended November 30, 2020, as compared to the year ended November 30, 2019, primarily due to the loss on conversion of related party debt of $1,230,964 during the year ended November 30, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of November 30, 2020, we had cash on hand of $7,450 and a working capital deficiency of $1,792,674, as compared to cash on hand of $8,400 and a working capital deficiency of $946,405 as of November 30, 2019. The increase in working capital deficiency is primarily a result of the increase in the due to affiliated entities of $1,091,158. This increase was offset by a decrease in settlement liability of $75,000.
The Company’s operating activities consume the majority of its cash resources. The Company anticipates that it will continue to incur operating losses as it executes its development plans for 2021, as well as other potential strategic and business development initiatives. In addition, the Company has had and expects to have negative cash flows from operations, at least into the near future. The Company has previously funded, and plans to continue funding, these losses with cash advances from an affiliate, the sale of equity, and convertible notes. The accompanying consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Although no assurances can be given as to the Company’s ability to deliver on its revenue plans or that unforeseen expenses may arise, management believes that the revenue to be generated from operations together with potential equity and debt financing or other potential financing will provide the necessary funding for the Company to continue as a going concern. Management cannot guarantee any potential debt or equity financing will be available, or if available, on favorable terms. Any additional equity financing may dilute the share ownership of current stockholders and debt financing may contain negative covenants regarding certain corporate actions. The Company currently does not have any agreements or arrangements for additional financing. As such, these matters raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for a period of twelve months from the issue date of this report. If adequate funds are not available on acceptable terms, or at all, the Company will need to curtail operations, or cease operations completely.
Going Concern
The consolidated financial statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern. The Company has accumulated losses from inception through November 30, 2020, of approximately $12,729,000, as well as negative cash flows from operating activities and a working capital deficiency. Presently, the Company does not have sufficient cash resources to meet its debt obligations for the next 12 months. These factors raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. Management is in the process of evaluating various financing alternatives in order to finance the capital requirements of the Company, as well as the needs of its existing subsidiaries and general and administrative expenses. There can be no assurance that the Company will be successful with its fund-raising initiatives. If the Company raises additional funds through the issuance of equity, the percentage ownership of current shareholders could be reduced, and such securities might have rights, preferences or privileges senior to the rights, preferences and privileges of the Company’s common stock. Additional financing may not be available upon acceptable terms, or at all. If adequate funds are not available or are not available on acceptable terms, the Company may not be able to take advantage of prospective business endeavors or opportunities, which could significantly and materially restrict its future plans for developing its business and achieving commercial revenues. If the Company is unable to obtain the necessary capital, the Company may have to cease operations.
The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that may be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Working Capital Deficiency
The decrease in current assets is primarily due to the decrease in accounts receivable of $14,563. The increase in current liabilities is primarily due to the increase in the due to affiliated entities of $1,091,158 and the recording of new settlement liability of $400,000. This increase was offset by a decrease in old settlement liability of $475,000.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $1,265,328 for the year ended November 30, 2020 and was primarily due to the net loss of $1,505,157 which was partially offset by non-cash expenses of approximately $263,000.
Net cash used in operating activities was $550,894 for the year ended November 30, 2019 and was primarily due to the net loss of $3,133,423, partially offset by accounts payable and accrued expenses of approximately $718,000, non-cash expenses of approximately $162,000 related to the issuance of common and stock based compensation, $1,230,964 in losses on conversion of related party debt and payables, and the payment of a settlement liability of $475,000.
Financing Activities
For the year ended November 30, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $1,264,378, of which $1,091,158 was advances from related parties and $178,000 was raised in connection with the sale of convertible debt.
For the year ended November 30, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities was $551,013, of which approximately $596,000 was advances from related parties which was offset by $44,500 in payments to officers in connection with outstanding notes payable.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Effects of Inflation
We do not believe that inflation has had a material impact on our business, revenues or operating results during the periods presented.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2020. We believe that the accounting policies below are critical for one to fully understand and evaluate our financial condition and results of operations.
Fair Value Measurement
As defined in ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures,” fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date (exit price). The Company utilizes market data or assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability, including assumptions about risk and the risks inherent in the inputs to the valuation technique. These inputs can be readily observable, market corroborated, or generally unobservable. ASC 820 establishes a fair value hierarchy that prioritizes the inputs used to measure fair value. The hierarchy gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (level 1 measurement) and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs (level 3 measurement). This fair value measurement framework applies at both initial and subsequent measurement.
Level 1 - Quoted prices are available in active markets for identical assets or liabilities as of the reporting date. Active markets are those in which transactions for the asset or liability occur in sufficient frequency and volume to provide pricing information on an ongoing basis. Level 1 primarily consists of financial instruments such as exchange-traded derivatives, marketable securities and listed equities;
Level 2 - Pricing inputs are other than quoted prices in active markets included in Level 1, which are either directly or indirectly observable as of the reported date. Level 2 includes those financial instruments that are valued using models or other valuation methodologies. These models are primarily industry-standard models that consider various assumptions, including quoted forward prices for commodities, time value, volatility factors and current market and contractual prices for the underlying instruments, as well as other relevant economic measures. Substantially all of these assumptions are observable in the marketplace throughout the full term of the instrument, can be derived from observable data or are supported by observable levels at which transactions are executed in the marketplace. Instruments in this category generally include non-exchange-traded derivatives such as commodity swaps, interest rate swaps, options and collars.; or
Level 3 - Pricing inputs include significant inputs that are generally less observable from objective sources. These inputs may be used with internally developed methodologies that result in management’s best estimate of fair value.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets
The Company reviews long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. Recoverability of these assets is determined by comparing the forecasted undiscounted net cash flows of the operation to which the assets relate to the carrying amount. If the operation is determined to be unable to recover the carrying amount of its assets, then these assets are written down first, followed by other long-lived assets of the operation to fair value. Fair value is determined based on discounted cash flows or appraised values, depending on the nature of the assets.
Income Taxes
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the consolidated financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets, including tax loss and credit carry forwards, and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
The Company utilizes ASC 740, “Income Taxes,” which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the unaudited condensed consolidated financial statements or tax returns. The Company accounts for income taxes using the asset and liability method to compute the differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and the related financial amounts, using currently enacted tax rates. A valuation allowance is recorded when it is “more likely-than-not” that a deferred tax asset will not be realized.
For uncertain tax positions that meet a “more likely than not” threshold, the Company recognizes the benefit of uncertain tax positions in the unaudited condensed consolidated financial statements. The Company’s practice is to recognize interest and penalties, if any, related to uncertain tax positions in income tax expense in the unaudited condensed consolidated statements of operations.
Revenue Recognition
The Company accounts for revenue in accordance with ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, which the Company adopted beginning on December 1, 2018, utilizing the modified retrospective method. The approach was applied to contracts that were in process as of December 1, 2018. The reported results for the fiscal year 2019 reflect the application of ASC topic 606.
The Company derives revenues from the sale of its agricultural products. The Company’s contracted transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance obligation and recognized as revenue when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied. The Company’s contracts have a single performance obligation which are not separately identifiable from other promises in the contracts and is, therefore, not distinct. The Company’s performance obligation is satisfied upon the transfer of risk of loss to the customer.
Exploration Stage
In accordance with GAAP, expenditures relating to the acquisition of mineral rights are initially capitalized as incurred while exploration and pre-extraction expenditures are expensed as incurred until such time as the Company exits the Exploration Stage by establishing proven or probable reserves. Expenditures relating to exploration activities such as drill programs to establish mineralized materials are expensed as incurred. Expenditures relating to pre-extraction activities are expensed as incurred until such time proven or probable reserves are established for that project, after which expenditures relating to mine development activities for that particular project are capitalized as incurred.
Mineral Rights
Acquisition costs of mineral rights are capitalized as incurred while exploration and pre-extraction expenditures are expensed as incurred until such time as the Company exits the exploration stage by establishing proven or probable reserves, as defined by the SEC under Industry Guide 7, through the completion of a “final” or “bankable” feasibility study. Expenditures relating to exploration activities are expensed as incurred and expenditures relating to pre-extraction activities are expensed as incurred until such time proven or probable reserves are established for that project, after which subsequent expenditures relating to development activities for that particular project are capitalized as incurred.
Where proven and probable reserves have been established, the project’s capitalized expenditures are depleted over proven and probable reserves upon commencement of production using the units-of-production method. Where proven and probable reserves have not been established, such capitalized expenditures are depleted over the estimated production life upon commencement of extraction using the straight-line method.
The carrying values of the mineral rights are assessed for impairment by management on a quarterly basis or when indicators of impairment exist. Should management determine that these carrying values cannot be recovered, the unrecoverable amounts are written off against earnings.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company applies the provisions of ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation (“ASC 718”), which requires the measurement and recognition of compensation expense for all stock-based awards made to employees, including employee stock options, in the statements of operations.
For stock options issued to employees and members of the board of directors for their services, the Company estimates the grant date fair value of each option using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The use of the Black-Scholes option pricing model requires management to make assumptions with respect to the expected term of the option, the expected volatility of the common stock consistent with the expected life of the option, risk-free interest rates and expected dividend yields of the common stock. For awards subject to service-based vesting conditions, including those with a graded vesting schedule, the Company recognizes stock-based compensation expense equal to the grant date fair value of stock options on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting term. Forfeitures are recorded as they are incurred as opposed to being estimated at the time of grant and revised.
Pursuant to ASU 2018-07 Compensation - Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting, the Company accounts for stock options issued to non-employees for their services in accordance ASC 718. The Company uses valuation methods and assumptions to value the stock options that are in line with the process for valuing employee stock options noted above.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
Any new and recently adopted accounting pronouncements are more fully described in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for the year ended November 30, 2020.