ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and other parts of this report contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in Item 1A “Risk Factors.”
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We have not selected any business combination target and we have not, nor has anyone on our behalf, initiated any substantive discussions, directly or indirectly, with any business combination target. The registration statement for the Company’s IPO was declared effective by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) on February 10, 2021 (the “Effective Date”). On February 16, 2021, the Company consummated the IPO of 22,500,000 units (the “Units”) at a price of $10.00 per Unit, for total gross proceeds of $225,000,000. On February 24, 2021, the underwriters exercised the over-allotment option in full, and the closing of the issuance and sale of the additional 3,375,000 Units (the “Over-Allotment Units”) occurred on February 24, 2021. The issuance by the Company of the Over-Allotment Units at a price of $10.00 per unit resulted in total gross proceeds of $33,750,000. Each Unit consists of one Common stock, $0.0001 par value, and one redeemable warrant entitling its holder to purchase one share of Common stock at a price of $11.50 per share.
Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, the Company consummated the sale of 600,000 units (the “Private Units”), at a price of $10.00 per Private Unit. On February 24, 2021, simultaneously with the issuance and sale of the Over-Allotment Units, the Company consummated the sale of an additional 67,500 Private Units (the “Over-Allotment Private Units” and, together with the IPO Private Placement, the “Private Placements”), generating gross proceeds of $6,675,000.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. The only activities through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the IPO, described below, and, after our IPO, those related to identifying a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination, at the earliest. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We will incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from October 26, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 we had a net loss of $1,126 which consisted of formation costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had $27,983 in cash and working capital deficit of $210,828 (excluding deferred offering costs). The Company’s liquidity needs up to December 31, 2020 had been satisfied through a capital contribution from the Sponsor of $25,000 (see Note 5) for the founder shares and the loan under an unsecured promissory note from the Sponsor of $106,051 (see Note 5).
Subsequent to December 31, 2020, on February 16, 2021 and February 24, 2021, the Company consummated the IPO as described above. As of February 24, 2021, the Company had approximately $1.2 million in its operating bank account, and working capital of approximately $1.0 million. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Company’s Initial Stockholders, or certain of the Company’s officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide the Company Working Capital Loans (see Note 5). To date, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loans.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that the Company will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or one year from this filing.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor or its affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into units of the post Business Combination entity at a price of $10.00 per unit. The units would be identical to the Private Units. To date, the Company had no borrowings under the Working Capital Loans.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if the estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete a Business Combination or because we may become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our Business Combination. If we are unable to complete a Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.