ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The information set forth below should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis contain forward-looking statements based on our current expectations, assumptions, estimates and projections. These forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those indicated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including those discussed in Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, entitled “Business,” under “Forward-Looking Statements” and Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, entitled “Risk Factors.” References in this discussion and analysis to “us,” “we,” “our,” or our “Company” refer to Pulmatrix, Inc., a Delaware corporation.
Overview
We are a clinical stage biotechnology company focused on the discovery and development of novel inhaled therapeutic products intended to prevent and treat respiratory diseases and infections with significant unmet medical needs.
We design and develop inhaled therapeutic products based on our proprietary dry powder delivery technology, iSPERSE (inhaled Small Particles Easily Respirable and Emitted), which enables delivery of small or large molecule drugs to the lungs by inhalation for local or systemic applications. The iSPERSE powders are engineered to be small, dense particles with highly efficient dispersibility and delivery to airways. iSPERSE powders can be used with an array of dry powder inhaler technologies and can be formulated with a broad range of drug substances including small molecules and biologics. We believe the iSPERSE dry powder technology offers enhanced drug loading and delivery efficiency that outperforms traditional lactose-blend inhaled dry powder therapies. We believe the advantages of using the iSPERSE technology include reduced total inhaled powder mass, enhanced dosing efficiency, reduced cost of goods and improved safety and tolerability profiles. We are developing iSPERSE-based therapeutic candidates targeted at the prevention and treatment of a range of diseases, including allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (“ABPA”) in patients with asthma, and in patients with cystic fibrosis (“CF”), lung cancer, and in patients suffering from neurological diseases such as acute migraine.
Our goal is to develop breakthrough therapeutic products that are safe, convenient, and more efficient than the existing therapeutic products for respiratory and other diseases where iSPERSE properties are advantageous. The iSPERSE technology may potentially improve upon the known efficacy and safety profile of currently available therapies. Our current pipeline is aligned to this goal with the Pulmazole program for inhaled antifungal therapy to treat ABPA in patients with asthma, the PUR3100 program for treatment of acute migraine, and the PUR1800 program, which has potential application in both lung cancer and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (“COPD”). All of these programs leverage improvements provided by iSPERSE. We intend to capitalize on our iSPERSE technology platform and our expertise in inhaled therapeutics to identify new product candidates for the prevention and treatment of diseases with significant unmet medical needs and to build our product pipeline beyond our existing candidates. In order to advance our clinical trials for our therapeutic candidates for respiratory and neurological diseases and leverage the iSPERSE platform to enable delivery of partnered compounds, we intend to form strategic alliances with third parties, including pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies or academic or private research institutes.
We do not have any products approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from our product sales. We fund our operations through proceeds from issuances of common stock, licensing agreements, collaborations with third parties and non-dilutive grants.
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for at least the next several years based on our drug development plans. We expect our expenses and capital requirements will increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, as we:
● initiate and expand clinical trials for Pulmazole for ABPA, and other indications for immunocompromised at-risk patients;
● expand clinical trials for PUR1800 focused on COPD and lung cancer prevention;
● continue preclinical studies of PUR3100 for treatment of acute migraine to enable a Phase 2 study start in early 2022
● seek regulatory approval for our product candidates;
● hire personnel to support our product development, commercialization and administrative efforts; and
● advance the research and development related activities for inhaled therapeutic products in our pipeline.
We will not generate product sales unless and until we successfully complete clinical developments and obtain regulatory approvals for our product candidates. Additionally, we currently utilize third-party contract research organizations (“CROs”) to carry out our clinical development activities and third-party contract manufacturing organizations (“CMOs”) to carry out our clinical manufacturing activities as we do not yet have a commercial organization. If we obtain regulatory approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant expenses related to developing our internal commercialization capability to support product sales, marketing and distribution. Accordingly, we anticipate that we will seek to fund our operations through public or private equity or debt financings or other sources, potentially including collaborative commercial arrangements. Likewise, we intend to seek to limit our commercialization costs by partnering with other companies with complementary capabilities or larger infrastructure including sales and marketing.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development, we are unable to predict the timing or amount of increased expenses or when or if we will be able to achieve or maintain profitability. Even if we are able to generate product sales, we may not become profitable. If we fail to become profitable or are unable to sustain profitability on a continuing basis, we may be unable to continue our operations at planned levels and be forced to reduce or terminate our operations.
Recent Developments
License, Development and Commercialization Agreement with JJEI
On December 26, 2019, we entered into a License, Development and Commercialization Agreement (the “JJEI License Agreement”) with Johnson & Johnson Enterprise Innovation, Inc. (“JJEI”). Under the terms of the JJEI License Agreement, we have granted JJEI an option to acquire (1) the Company’s rights to an intellectual property portfolio of materials and technology related to narrow spectrum kinase inhibitor compounds (the “Licensed Product”) and (2) an exclusive, worldwide, royalty bearing license to PUR1800, our inhaled iSPERSE drug delivery system as formulated with one of the kinase inhibitor compounds. We will conduct a clinical and chronic toxicology program in 2021 focused on COPD and lung cancer interception.
As consideration for our entry into the JJEI License Agreement, JJEI paid an upfront fee of $7.2 million to conduct the research on the Phase 1b clinical study and will also fund $3.4 million for the toxicology study costs. We are also eligible to earn a $2.0 million milestone payment for the completion of the Phase 1b study of the Licensed Product. If JJEI exercises the license option under the JJEI License Agreement, Pulmatrix is also eligible to receive a $14.0 million option exercise payment, up to an additional $32.0 million in development milestone payments, $45.0 million in commercial milestones, as well as royalty payments ranging from 1% to 2% of sales.
Under the terms of the JJEI License Agreement, JJEI will have three months from the later of (1) the completion of a Phase 1b clinical study for the Licensed Product and JJEI’s receipt of audited final reports and (2) JJEI’s receipt of audited draft reports for a toxicology study of the Licensed Product to exercise the option. If the option is not exercised, we may terminate the JJEI License Agreement by providing a 30-day written notice, and all licenses will revert back to Pulmatrix. The agreement may otherwise be terminated by JJEI for any reason upon 90 days advance notice, or upon notice of our entering into insolvency or bankruptcy proceedings. Either party may terminate the agreement for material breach of contract that is not cured within 60 days.
In February 2021, the first patient was dosed in the Phase 1b safety, tolerability and biomarker study that will enroll 15 patients with stable moderate-severe COPD. The Phase 1b study will be randomized and double-blind and will include 14 days of daily dosing with a 28 day follow up period. The COVID-19 pandemic could delay enrollment to the extent patients remain or become subject to government “stay at home” mandates, patients feel like they cannot safely visit trial sites or patients drop out due issues related to COVID-19.
Development and Commercialization Agreement with Cipla
On April 15, 2019, we entered into a Development and Commercialization Agreement (the “Cipla Agreement”) with Cipla Technologies LLC (“Cipla”) for the co-development and commercialization, on a worldwide exclusive basis, of Pulmazole, our inhaled iSPERSE drug delivery system enabled formulation of the antifungal drug, itraconazole, for the treatment of all pulmonary indications, including ABPA in patients with asthma.
Pursuant to the Cipla Agreement, Cipla made an initial upfront payment of $22.0 million to us in exchange for an irrevocable assignment of all existing and future technologies, current and future drug master files, dossiers, third-party contracts, regulatory filings, regulatory materials and regulatory approvals, patents, and intellectual property rights, as well as any other associated rights and assets with respect to Pulmazole, specifically in relation to pulmonary indications (the “Assigned Assets”) which Cipla then irrevocably licensed back to us only for non-pulmonary application. As a condition precedent to signing the agreement, we demonstrated to Cipla that we had at least $15.0 million of unencumbered cash available for the development of Pulmazole. Pursuant to the terms of the agreement, we dedicated $24.0 million of cash to the development of Pulmazole. After such $24.0 million is exhausted, each of us and Cipla will bear 50% of any costs incurred with respect to the development, regulatory and commercialization costs of Pulmazole. The parties will share equally the total free cash flow in relation to commercialization of Pulmazole. Pulmatrix will remain primarily responsible for the execution of the clinical development of Pulmazole, and Cipla will be responsible for the global commercialization of the product.
We initiated a Phase 2 study in 2019, entitled: “A Randomized, Double-Blind, Multicenter, Placebo-Controlled, Phase 2 Study to Evaluate the Safety, Tolerability, and Pharmacokinetics of Itraconazole Administered as a Dry Powder for Inhalation (PUR1900) in Adult Asthmatic Patients with ABPA. This study was terminated in July 2020 due to the ongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on patient enrollment and study conduct.
We conducted a Type C meeting with the FDA on January 27, 2021 and leveraging the insights gained from this meeting, now plan to commence the Phase 2b study when the risks to the conduct of the study presented by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic are reduced to an acceptable level. The Phase 2b study design includes a 16-week dosing regimen as well as an exploration of potential efficacy endpoints, whereas the terminated Phase 2 study comprised only a 4-week dosing regimen with safety and tolerability as its primary endpoint. The longer dosing regimen of the planned new Phase 2b study is supported by the 6-month inhalation toxicology study in dogs completed in April 2020.
In addition to the planned new Phase 2b study, as part of the contemplated amendments to the Cipla Agreement, we may assign to Cipla the exclusive rights to develop and commercialize Pulmazole in India, South Africa and other regional markets where Cipla has strong clinical development and business capabilities. We have not agreed to any amendments to the Cipla Agreement as of filing date of this Annual Report. However, we expect that discussions regarding amendments to the Cipla Agreement will continue. No assurance can be given that we will be able to reach a mutually acceptable arrangement with Cipla for the conduct of the Phase 2b clinical study in the future. Accordingly, if we are unable to agree with Cipla on such matters such as cost sharing for the new study, we may be forced to suspend further development of Pulmazole.
Collaboration and License Agreement with Sensory Cloud
On April 9, 2020, we entered into a Collaboration and License Agreement (the “Sensory Cloud Agreement”) with Sensory Cloud, Inc. (“Sensory Cloud”). Under the terms of the Sensory Cloud Agreement, we granted Sensory Cloud an exclusive, worldwide, royalty bearing license to PUR003 and PUR006, the Company’s proprietary aerosol salt solution for delivery or administration to or through the nasal passages also known as NasoCalm, as well as related patents and know-how, for use in the field. PUR003 and PUR006, was originally developed by the Company as a potential anti-infective biodefense medical countermeasure product. However, we decided to no longer develop these products and instead prioritized the development of other programs. Sensory Cloud will be using NasoCalm, now integral in their product FEND, a hypertonic calcium chloride salt solution with a nasal mister. For purposes of the Sensory Cloud Agreement, the field means the formulation and commercialization of over-the-counter products for the prophylaxis, prevention and treatment of upper and lower respiratory disease that are delivered or administered to or through the nasal passages. The license granted to Sensory Cloud does not cover the development or commercialization of any prescription products.
Under the Sensory Cloud Agreement, we are entitled to royalties on net sales of licensed products in each country in which there is a valid claim of a patent within the licensed intellectual property covering the licensed product. The royalty rates are as follows: (1) 7% of net sales during calendar year 2020, (2) 14% of net sales during calendar year 2021, and (3) 17% of net sales during calendar year 2022 and each calendar year thereafter during the royalty term. In addition, we are entitled to a milestone payment of $1.0 million following the achievement of aggregate net sales of all Licensed Products of $20.0 million.
Sensory Cloud launched product sales of FEND during the fourth quarter 2020 and minimal royalties have been recorded during the period ending December 31, 2020.
Financial Overview
To date, we have not generated any product sales. Our 2020 revenue was primarily generated through the recognition of revenue from both the Cipla Agreement and the JJEI Agreement and includes minimal royalties generated by sales of FEND by Sensory Cloud. Our 2019 recognized revenue resulted from the Cipla Agreement.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for the research and development of our preclinical and clinical candidates, and include:
● employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits and share-based compensation expense;
● expenses incurred under agreements with CROs or CMOs, and consultants that conduct our clinical trials and preclinical activities;
● the cost of acquiring, developing and manufacturing clinical trial materials and lab supplies;
● facility, depreciation and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent, maintenance of our facility, insurance and other supplies; and
● costs associated with preclinical activities and clinical regulatory operations
● consulting and professional fees associated with research and development activities
We expense research and development costs to operations as incurred. We recognize costs for certain development activities, such as clinical trials, based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using data such as patient enrollment, clinical site activations or information provided to us by our vendors.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. We utilize a combination of internal and external efforts to advance product development from early-stage work to clinical trial manufacturing and clinical trial support. External efforts include work with consultants and substantial work at CROs and CMOs. We support an internal research and development team and facility for our pipeline programs. To move these programs forward along our development timelines, a large portion, approximately 85%, of our staff are research and development employees. In addition, we maintain a 22,119 square foot research and development facility which includes laboratory space and capital equipment to promote our iSPERSE powders for our pipeline programs. As we identify opportunities for iSPERSE in additional indications, we anticipate additional head count, capital, and development costs will be incurred to support these programs.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development, however, we cannot determine with certainty the duration and completion costs of these or other current or future preclinical studies and clinical trials. The duration, costs and timing of clinical trials and development of our product candidates will depend on a variety of factors, including the uncertainties of future clinical and preclinical studies, uncertainties in clinical trial enrollment rates and significant and changing government regulation. In addition, the probability of success for each product candidate will depend on numerous factors, including competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist principally of salaries, benefits and related costs such as share-based compensation for personnel and consultants in executive, finance, business development, corporate communications and human resource functions, facility costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses, patent filing fees and legal fees. Other general and administrative expenses include travel expenses, expenses related to being a publicly traded company and professional fees for consulting, auditing and tax services.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as they relate to audit, legal, regulatory, and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with exchange listing and Securities and Exchange Commission requirements, director and officer liability insurance, investor relations costs and other costs associated with being a public company. Additionally, if and when we believe a regulatory approval of a product candidate appears likely, we anticipate an increase in staffing and related expenses as a result of our preparation for commercial operations, especially as it relates to the sales and marketing of our product candidates.
Impairment of Goodwill
Goodwill is not amortized but evaluated at year end for potential impairment. There was no goodwill impairment made in 2020. As of December 31, 2019, goodwill was impaired $7.3 million.
Critical Accounting Policies
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to accrued expenses and share-based compensation. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies to be most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
Effective January 1, 2019, the Company adopted ASU No. 2014-09 (Topic 606) “Revenue from Contracts with Customers.” The adoption of Topic 606 did not have any material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements. The Company only applies the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that the Company will collect the consideration it is entitled to in exchange for the goods or services it transfers to the customer. At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, the Company assesses the goods or services promised within each contract and determines those that are performance obligations and assesses whether each promised good or service is distinct. The Company then recognizes as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
Amounts received prior to revenue recognition are recorded as deferred revenue. Amounts expected to be recognized as revenue within the 12 months following the balance sheet date are classified as current portion of deferred revenue in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. Amounts not expected to be recognized as revenue within the 12 months following the balance sheet date are classified as deferred revenue, net of current portion.
Our principal sources of revenue during the reporting period were income that resulted through our collaborative arrangements and license agreements that related to the development and commercialization of Pulmazole and our license and reimbursement arrangement that related to the JJEI Agreement. In all instances, revenue is recognized only when the price is fixed or determinable, persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred or services have been rendered, and collectability of the resulting receivable is reasonably assured.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, our principal source of revenue was income that resulted from the JJEI and Cipla Agreements. During the year ended December 31, 2019, our principal source of revenue was income that resulted from the Cipla Agreement.
Milestone Payments
At the inception of each arrangement that includes research or development milestone payments, we evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable of being achieved and estimates the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. Milestone payments that are not within our control or the licensee, such as regulatory approvals, are not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received. We evaluate factors such as the scientific, clinical, regulatory, commercial, and other risks that must be overcome to achieve the particular milestone in making this assessment. There is considerable judgment involved in determining whether it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we reevaluate the probability of achievement of all milestones subject to constraint and, if necessary, adjust the estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect revenues and earnings in the period of adjustment. As of December 31, 2020, we have an active arrangement that contains a research or development milestone.
Royalties
For arrangements that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments upon first commercial sales and milestone payments based on a level of sales, which are the result of a customer-vendor relationship and for which the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied or partially satisfied. To date, we have recognized an insignificant amount of royalty revenue in the fourth quarter 2020 which resulted from a licensing arrangement.
Research and Development Costs
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred and include: salaries, benefits, bonus, share-based compensation, license fees, milestone payments due under license agreements, costs paid to third-party contractors to perform research, conduct clinical trials, and develop drug materials and delivery devices; and associated overhead and facilities costs. Clinical trial costs are a significant component of research and development expenses and include costs associated with third-party contractors, CROs and CMOs. Invoicing from third-party contractors for services performed can lag several months. We accrue the costs of services rendered in connection with third-party contractor activities based on our estimate of fees and costs associated with the contract that were rendered during the period and they are expensed as incurred. Research and development costs that are paid in advance of performance are capitalized as prepaid expenses and amortized over the service period as the services are provided. As of December 31, 2020, the Company has an active arrangement with JJEI that contains a research or development milestone.
Leases
At the inception of an arrangement, we determine whether the arrangement is, or contains a lease, based on the unique facts and circumstances present. Most leases with a term greater than one year are recognized on the balance sheet as right-of-use assets, lease liabilities and long-term lease liabilities. We have elected not to recognize on the balance sheet leases with terms of one year or less. Options to renew a lease are not included in our initial lease term assessment unless there is reasonable certainty that we will renew. We evaluate our plans to renew any material lease on a quarterly basis.
Operating lease liabilities and their corresponding right-of-use assets are recorded based on the present value of lease payments over the expected remaining lease term. However, certain adjustments to the right-of-use asset may be required for items, such as incentives received. The interest rate implicit in lease contracts is typically not readily determinable. As a result, we utilize our incremental borrowing rates, which are the rates incurred to borrow on a collateralized basis over a similar term an amount equal to the lease payments in a similar economic environment.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the difference between the consideration transferred and the fair value of the net assets acquired, and liabilities assumed under the acquisition method of accounting for push-down accounting. Goodwill is not amortized but is evaluated for impairment within our single reporting unit on an annual basis during the fourth quarter, or more frequently if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of our reporting unit below our carrying amount. When performing the impairment assessment, the accounting standard for testing goodwill for impairment permits a company to first assess the qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events and circumstances indicates that it is more likely than not that the goodwill is impaired. If we believe, as a result of the qualitative assessment, that it is more likely than not that the fair value of goodwill is impaired, we must perform a quantitative analysis to determine if the carrying value of the goodwill exceeds the fair value of the Company. Based on a quantitative analysis, goodwill was not deemed to be impaired as of December 31, 2020. Based on a qualitative and quantitative analysis performed at the end of 2019, goodwill was deemed impaired and a charge of $7.3 million was recorded as of December 31, 2019.
Basic and Diluted Net Loss Per Share
Basic net loss per share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted-average number of common stock outstanding during the period. Diluted net loss per share is computed by giving effect to all potential dilutive common stock equivalents outstanding for the period. In periods in which we report a net loss, diluted net loss per share is the same as basic net loss per share because common stock equivalents are excluded as their inclusion would be anti-dilutive.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are recorded in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board, or FASB, Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, Topic 740, Income Taxes (“ASC 740”), which provides for deferred taxes using an asset and liability approach. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements or tax returns. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the difference between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. A valuation allowance is provided if, based upon the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the net deferred tax assets will not be realized.
We account for uncertain tax positions in accordance with the provisions of ASC 740. When uncertain tax positions exist, we recognize the tax benefit of tax positions to the extent that the benefit will more likely than not be realized. The determination as to whether the tax benefit will more likely than not be realized is based upon the technical merits of the tax position, as well as consideration of the available facts and circumstances. As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, we did not have any significant uncertain tax positions. We recognize interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions in income tax expense.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table sets forth our results of operations for each of the periods set forth below (in thousands):
Revenue - Revenue was $12.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $7.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $4.7 million. The increase resulted from an increase in revenue recorded of $6.9 million as a result of the JJEI License Agreement which was executed in late 2019 and includes reimbursement of pass-through expenses, partially offset by a decrease in revenue recorded of $2.2 million as a result of the Cipla Agreement.
Research and development expenses - Research and development expense was $15.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $12.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 an increase of $2.8 million. The increase was primarily due to increased spending on manufacturing, clinical, and preclinical study costs of $4.4 million and $0.3 million, on the PUR1800 and PUR3100 programs, respectively, $1.1 million on employment costs in support of our programs, $0.6 million in allocated fixed expenses and lab services which were partially offset by a decrease of $3.6 million on the Phase 2 Pulmazole clinical trial costs.
General and administrative expenses - General and administrative expense was $6.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $8.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $1.6 million The decrease was primarily due to decreased employment costs of $1.2 million because of lower share-based compensation expense and salary costs, $0.1 million in patent and legal expenses and $0.3 million of a milestone payment to the CFFT made in 2019.
Impairment of goodwill - In 2020 and 2019, the Company performed an impairment assessment and concluded that during 2019, the carrying amount of the goodwill exceeded its fair value and recorded the resulting impairment charges of $7.3 million. We have concluded that during 2020, goodwill was not impaired.
Warrant inducement expenses - During 2020 we executed a warrant exercise inducement transaction with existing investors who held existing and outstanding warrants that had an exercise price of $1.35 per share. Upon the exercise, warrant holders were able to purchase on a cash basis up to an aggregate of 10,085,741 shares of common stock. In consideration of the exercise, we issued to the exercise holders new warrants that had a five-year expiry and an exercise price of $1.80 per share. The fair value on the grant date of the new warrants was $9.3 million and was recorded as warrant inducement expense with a corresponding offset to paid-in-capital.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2020, we had unrestricted cash of $31.7 million. We have incurred recurring losses and as of December 31, 2020 had an accumulated deficit of $234.5 million. During the year ended December 31, 2020, approximately $12.5 million was used in its operating activities. We have primarily financed operations to date through the sale of equity securities, a term loan, licensing and collaboration agreements. We will be required to raise additional capital to continue the development and commercialization of current product candidates and to continue to fund operations at the current cash expenditure levels.
We cannot be certain that additional funding will be available on acceptable terms, or at all. To the extent that we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, our stockholders may experience significant dilution. Any debt financing, if available, may involve restrictive covenants that impact our ability to conduct business. If unable to raise additional capital when required or on acceptable terms we may have to (i) delay, scale back or discontinue the development and/or commercialization of one or more product candidates; (ii) seek collaborators for product candidates at an earlier stage than otherwise would be desirable and on terms that are less favorable than might otherwise be available; or (iii) relinquish or otherwise dispose of rights to technologies, product candidates or products that we would otherwise seek to develop or commercialize ourselves on unfavorable terms.
Under the JJEI License Agreement, we are also eligible to earn a $2.0 million milestone payment for the completion of the Phase 1b clinical study of PUR1800, the data of which is expected during the fourth quarter 2021. If JJEI exercises the license option under the JJEI License Agreement, we are also eligible to receive a $14.0 million option exercise payment, up to an additional $32.0 million in development milestone payments, $45.0 million in commercial milestones, as well as royalty payments ranging from 1% to 2% of sales.
We expect that our existing cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2020 and anticipated interest income will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements for at least the 12 months following the filing date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including the scope and progress made in our research and development activities and our preclinical studies and clinical trials. We are currently assessing the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic which may adversely affect our ability to obtain additional future capital, we may be unable to complete our planned preclinical and clinical trials or obtain approval of any product candidates from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or the FDA, and other regulatory authorities.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we raised an aggregate of $21.0 million in net proceeds through the sale of our common stock, exercise of warrants and the exercise of pre-funded warrants (note 7 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements).
In February 2021, we raised $40.0 million in gross proceeds through the sale of our common stock.
The following table sets forth the major sources and uses of cash for each of the periods set forth below (in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $12.5 million, which was primarily the result of a net loss of $19.3 million, partially offset by $11.5 million of net non-cash adjustments and $4.7 million in cash outflows associated with changes in operating assets and liabilities. Our non-cash adjustments were primarily comprised of $9.3 million in warrant inducement expense, $1.2 million of share-based compensation expense, $0.8 million of amortization of operating lease right-of-use asset and $0.2 million of depreciation and amortization. The net cash outflows associated with changes in operating assets and liabilities were primarily due to increases of $7.1 million in accounts receivable and $0.3 million in accounts payable partially offset by decreases of $11.0 million in deferred revenue, $0.6 million in operating lease liabilities and $0.5 million in accrued expenses.
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $3.2 million, which was primarily the result of a net loss of $20.6 million, offset by $10.1 million of net non-cash adjustments and $13.7 million in cash inflows associated with changes in operating assets and liabilities. Our non-cash adjustments were primarily comprised of $7.3 million of goodwill impairment, $2.0 million of share-based compensation expense, $0.6 million of amortization of operating lease right-of-use asset and $0.2 million of depreciation and amortization. The net cash inflows associated with changes in operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to $21.2 million increase in deferred revenue and $0.9 million increase in accrued expenses partially offset by decreases of $7.2 million in accounts receivable, $0.6 million in operating lease liabilities, $0.5 million in accounts payable and $0.1 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 were both primarily due to purchases of property and equipment.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $21.0 million and was due to the issuance of common stock in two capital raises, exercises of warrants, pre-funded warrants and stock options.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $17.7 million and was due to the issuance of common stock in multiple capital raises during the first half of 2019 and the exercise of pre-funded warrants.
Financings
Based on our planned use for our existing cash resources, we believe that our available funds will enable us to support administrative, preclinical, clinical, and chemistry manufacturing and control activities in support our programs for at least 12 months following the filing date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We have based our projections of operating capital requirements on assumptions that may prove to be incorrect and we may use our available capital resources sooner than we expect. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of pharmaceutical products, we are unable to estimate the exact amount of our operating capital requirements. Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to:
● the initiation, progress, timing, costs and results of clinical studies for existing and new pipeline programs based on iSPERSE;
● the outcome, timing and cost of regulatory approvals by the FDA and European regulatory authorities, including the potential for these agencies to require that we perform studies in addition to those that we currently have planned;
● the cost of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing any patent claims and other intellectual property rights, or defend against claims of infringement by others;
● our need to expand our research and development activities;
● our need and ability to hire additional personnel;
● our need to implement additional infrastructure and internal systems;
● the cost of establishing and maintaining a commercial-scale manufacturing line; and
● the cost of establishing sales, marketing and distribution capabilities for any products for which we may receive regulatory approval.
Financings
On February 16, 2021 we closed on a registered direct offering with certain healthcare-focused institutional investors to purchase up to an aggregate of 20,000,000 shares of our common stock at $2.00 per share. The gross proceeds were $40.0 million, prior to deducting placement agent’s fees and other offering expenses. In connection with the offering, 1,300,000 warrants with a five-year expiry were issued to placement agent designees at an exercise price of $2.50 per share. The shares of common stock were offered by Pulmatrix pursuant to a “shelf” registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-230225) previously filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) on March 12, 2019 and declared effective by the SEC on March 15, 2019.
If we cannot expand our operations or otherwise capitalize on our business opportunities because we lack sufficient capital, our business, financial condition and results of operations could be materially adversely affected.
Financings
On July 9, 2020, we entered into letter agreements with certain existing accredited investors to exercise certain existing and outstanding warrants (“Existing Warrants”) to purchase up to an aggregate of 10,085,741 shares of our common stock at the existing exercise price per share of $1.35. The Existing Warrants were issued in an underwritten public offering pursuant to a registration statement on Form S-1 (File No. 333-230395) and an additional registration statement on Form S-1 (File No. 333-230714) filed pursuant to Rule 462(b) under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, that was consummated in April 2019. In consideration for the exercise of the Existing Warrants for cash, the exercising holders received new unregistered warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 10,085,741 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $1.80 per share and with an exercise period of five years from July 14, 2020. The gross proceeds to the Company from the exercise were approximately $13.6 million, prior to deducting placement agent fees and offering expenses. In addition, we issued s 655,573 unregistered warrants to placement agent designees at an exercise price of $2.25 and with an exercise period of five years from July 14, 2020. All warrants issued in the financing were subsequently registered pursuant to a registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-242341) which was declared effective on August 13, 2020.
On April 16, 2020, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with certain institutional investors (the “Purchasers”), pursuant to which on April 20, 2020, we issued and sold in a registered direct offering (the “Offering”) an aggregate of 4,787,553 shares of our common stock at an offering price of $1.671 per share, for gross proceeds of approximately $8.0 million before the deduction of placement agent fees and offering expenses. In a concurrent private placement, we issued to the Purchasers, for each share of common stock purchased in the Offering, a warrant (“Common Warrants”) to purchase one share of common stock. The Common Warrants have an exercise price of $1.55 per share and are exercisable to purchase an aggregate of up to 4,787,553 shares of common stock. In addition, we issued to the placement agent for the Offering warrants to purchase 311,191 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $2.0888 per share. Both the Common Warrants and the placement agent warrants are exercisable immediately upon issuance and terminate on April 20, 2022.
Financings
On January 31, 2019 and February 5, 2019, we closed confidentially marketed public offerings. In the two offerings, we sold a total of 688,471 shares of our common stock at a price of $1.70 per share that resulted in gross proceeds of $1.2 million.
On February 12, 2019, we closed a registered direct offering of 1,706,484 shares of our common stock at $1.465 per share that resulted in gross proceeds of $2.5 million.
After giving effect to $0.7 million in commissions, fees and expenses, the two financings resulted in $3.0 million of net proceeds.
On April 8, 2019, we closed our firm commitment underwritten public offering in which, pursuant to the underwriting agreement (the “Underwriting Agreement”) entered into between the Company and H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC, as representative of the underwriters (the “Underwriters”), dated April 3, 2019, we issued and sold an aggregate of (i) 1,719,554 Common Units (“Common Units”), with each Common Unit being comprised of one share of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.0001 per share and one warrant to purchase one share of common stock and (ii) 8,947,112 pre-funded units (the “Pre-Funded Units”) with each Pre-Funded Unit being comprised of one pre-funded warrant to purchase one share of common stock and one common warrant to purchase a share of common stock. The public offering price was $1.35 per Common Unit and $1.34 per Pre-Funded Unit. The common warrants have an exercise price of $1.35 per share. In addition, on April 8, 2019, we closed on the sale of an additional 1,599,999 Common Units purchased pursuant to the exercise in full of the underwriter’s option to purchase additional securities. Each Common Unit contains one share of common stock and one common warrant to purchase a share of common stock.
We recorded gross proceeds of $16.5 million and after commissions and fees of $1.9 million, the financing resulted in $14.6 million of net proceeds.
All of the 8,947,112 pre-funded warrants issued in the offering were exercised during 2019 which resulted in the issuance of an additional 8,647,112 shares of common stock with net proceeds of $0.1 million. The remaining 300,000 common shares underlying the outstanding pre-funded warrants were issued on January 2, 2020.
Exercise of Warrants
During January and February 2019, 697,500 pre-funded warrants were exercised, 697,500 common shares were issued and we recorded proceeds of $0.1 million.
Commitments
We contract with various other organizations to conduct research and development activities. As of December 31, 2020, we had aggregate commitments to pay approximately $1.1 million remaining on these contracts. The scope of the services under contracts for research and development activities may be modified and the contracts, subject to certain conditions, may generally be cancelled by us upon written notice. In some instances, the contracts, subject to certain conditions, may be cancelled by the third party.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.