ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This discussion and analysis reflects our consolidated financial statements and other relevant statistical data, and is intended to enhance your understanding of our financial condition and results of operations. You should read the information in this section in conjunction with the business and financial information regarding Provident Bancorp, Inc., including the financial statements, provided in this Annual Report.
COVID-19
The outbreak of COVID-19 has adversely impacted a broad range of industries in which the Company’s customers operate and could impair their ability to fulfill their financial obligations. The World Health Organization declared COVID-19 to be a global pandemic indicating that almost all public commerce and related business activities were to be, to varying degrees, curtailed with the goal of decreasing the rate of new infections. The spread of the outbreak has caused significant disruption in the U.S. economy and has disrupted banking and other financial activity in the areas in which the Company operates.
The U.S. government and regulatory agencies have taken several actions to provide support to the U.S. economy. Most notably, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) was signed into law on March 27, 2020 as a $2 trillion legislative package. The goal of the CARES Act is to prevent a severe economic downturn through various measures, including direct financial aid to American families and economic stimulus to significantly impacted industry sectors. The CARES Act also includes extensive emergency funding for hospitals and providers. In addition to the general impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, certain provisions of the CARES Act, as well as other recent legislative and regulatory relief efforts, are expected to have a material impact on the Company’s operations. Also, the actions of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (the “FRB”) to combat the economic contraction caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, including the reduction of the target federal funds rate and quantitative easing programs, could, if prolonged, adversely affect the Company’s net interest income, margins, and profitability.
Federal banking agencies issued guidance encouraging financial institutions to work with borrowers that may be unable to meet contractual obligations due to the effects of COVID-19. In addition, Section 4013 of the CARES Act states, “banks may elect not to categorize loan modifications as TDRs [troubled debt restructurings] if they are (1) related to COVID-19; (2) executed on a loan that was not more than 30 days past due as of December 31, 2019; and (3) executed between March 1, 2020, and the earlier of (A) 60 days after the date of termination of the National Emergency or (B) December 31, 2020.” The December 31, 2020 date was subsequently extended to January 1, 2022 under the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021. The Company did not classify any modifications related to COVID-19 which met either the agency guidance or the CARES Act conditions as TDRs.
The Company implemented its business continuity and pandemic plans, which include remote working arrangements for the majority of its workforce. While there has been no material impact to the Company’s employees as of this report date, if COVID-19 escalates further it could also potentially create business continuity issues. The Company does not currently anticipate significant challenges to its ability to maintain systems and controls in light of the measures the Company has taken in response to COVID-19. While it is not possible to know the full extent of these impacts as of the date of this filing, detailed below are potentially material items of which we are aware.
Financial position and results of operations
The Company’s fee income will be reduced due to COVID-19. In keeping with the guidance from regulators, during the second quarter of 2020 the Company actively worked with COVID-19 affected customers to waive fees from a variety of sources, such as, but not limited to, insufficient funds, account maintenance, minimum balance, and ATM fees. Management continues to monitor and measure the impact on its assets and operations.
The Company’s interest income could be reduced due to COVID-19. In keeping with the guidance from the regulators, the Company actively worked with COVID-19 affected borrowers to defer payments, interest and fees. While interest and fees will accrue to income through normal GAAP accounting, should eventual credit losses on these deferred payments emerge, interest income and fees accrued would need to be reversed. Management continues to monitor and measure the impact and potential future impact on operations.
Allowance for loan losses
Continued uncertainty regarding the severity and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and related economic effects will continue to affect the accounting for loan losses, which could cause the provision for loan losses to increase. It also is possible that asset quality could worsen, expenses associated with collection efforts could increase and loan charge-offs could increase. The Company actively participated in the first round of the Small Business Administration’s (“SBA’s”) Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”), providing loans to small businesses negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. PPP loans are fully guaranteed by the U.S. government; if that should change, the Company could be required to increase its allowance for loan losses through an additional provision for loan losses charged to earnings.
In accordance with guidance issued by federal banking agencies, the Company actively worked with borrowers that were unable to meet contractual obligations due to the effects of COVID-19. In order to mitigate the risk associated with these modifications the Company has incorporated covenants that require borrowers to submit quarterly financial statements, prohibits them from distributing funds to any owner or stockholder (with the exception of payroll) and also prohibits them from making any payments on debt owed to subordinated debt holders for the duration of their modification. If borrowers are unable to return to their normal payment plan following their modification period, the Company could be required to increase its allowance for loan losses through an additional provision for loan losses charged to earnings.
Valuation
Valuation and fair value measurement challenges may occur. For example, COVID-19 could cause further and sustained decline in the financial markets or the occurrence of what management would deem a valuation triggering event that could result in an impairment charge to earnings, such as our investment securities.
Critical Accounting Policies
A summary of our accounting policies is described in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this annual report. Critical accounting estimates are necessary in the application of certain accounting policies and procedures and are particularly susceptible to significant change. Critical accounting policies are defined as those involving significant judgments and assumptions by management that could have a material impact on the carrying value of certain assets or on income under different assumptions or conditions. Management believes that the most critical accounting policies, which involve the most complex or subjective decisions or assessments, are as follows:
Allowance for Loan Losses.
The allowance for loan losses is a valuation allowance for probable incurred credit losses. Loan losses are charged against the allowance when management believes the un-collectability of a loan balance is confirmed. Subsequent recoveries, if any, are credited to the allowance. Management estimates the allowance balance required using past loan loss experience, the size and composition of the portfolio, information about specific borrower situations and estimated collateral values, economic conditions, and other factors. Allocations of the allowance may be made for specific loans, but the entire allowance is available for any loan that, in management’s judgment, should be charged off.
The allowance consists of specific and general components. The specific component relates to loans that are individually classified as impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that the Company will be unable to collect all amounts due according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement. Loans for which the terms have been modified resulting in a concession, and for which the borrower is experiencing financial difficulties, are considered troubled debt restructurings (“TDRs”) and are classified as impaired.
The Company classifies a loan as impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that it will be unable to collect the scheduled payments of principal or interest when due according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement. Factors considered by management in determining impairment include payment status, collateral value, and the probability of collecting scheduled principal and interest payments when due. Loans that experience insignificant payment delays and payment shortfalls generally are not classified as impaired. Management determines the significance of payment delays and payment shortfalls on a case-by-case basis, taking into consideration the circumstances surrounding the loan and the borrower, including the length of the delay, the reasons for the delay, the borrower’s prior payment record, and the amount of the shortfall in relation to the principal and interest owed.
Large groups of smaller balance homogeneous loans are collectively evaluated for impairment. Accordingly, we do not separately identify individual consumer and residential loans for impairment disclosures.
Mortgage warehouse loans are facility lines to non-bank mortgage origination companies for sale into secondary markets, which is typically within 15 days of loan closure. Due to their short-term nature, these loans are assessed at a lower credit risk and do not carry the same allocation as traditional loans.
The general component of the allowance for loan losses is based on historical loss experience adjusted for qualitative factors stratified by all loan segments. Management uses a rolling average of historical losses based on a time frame appropriate to capture relevant loss data for each loan segment. The historical loss factors are adjusted for the following qualitative factors: levels/trends in delinquencies and non-accruals, economic conditions, portfolio trends, portfolio concentrations, loan grading and management’s discretion. There were no changes in our policies or methodology pertaining to the general component of the allowance for loan losses during 2020.
The qualitative factors are determined based on the various risk characteristics of each loan segment. Risk characteristics relevant to each portfolio segment are as follows:
Residential real estate: We generally do not originate loans with a loan-to-value ratio greater than 80% and do not grant subprime loans. Loans with loan to value ratios greater than 80% require the purchase of private mortgage insurance. All loans in this segment are collateralized by owner-occupied residential real estate and repayment is dependent on the credit quality of the individual borrower. The overall health of the economy, including unemployment rates and housing prices, will have an effect on the credit quality in this segment.
Commercial real estate: Loans in this segment are primarily income-producing properties throughout Massachusetts and New Hampshire. The underlying cash flows generated by the properties are adversely impacted by a downturn in the economy as evidenced by increased vacancy rates, which in turn, will have an effect on the credit quality in this segment. Management periodically obtains rent rolls and continually monitors the cash flows of these loans.
Construction and land development: Loans in this segment primarily include speculative and pre-sold real estate development loans for which payment is derived from sale of the property and a conversion of the construction loans to permanent loans for which payment is then derived from cash flows of the property. Credit risk is affected by cost overruns, time to sell at an adequate price, and market conditions.
Mortgage warehouse: Loans in this segment are primarily facility lines to non-bank mortgage origination companies. The underlying collateral of these loans are residential real estate loans. Loans are originated by the mortgage companies for sale into secondary markets, which is typically within 15 days of the loan closure. The primary source of repayment is the cash flow upon the sale of the loans. The credit risk associated with this type of lending is the risk that the mortgage companies are unable to sell the loans.
Commercial: Loans in this segment are made to businesses and are generally secured by assets of the business. Repayment is expected from the cash flows of the business. A weakened economy, and resultant decreased consumer spending, will have an effect on the credit quality in this segment.
Consumer: Loans in this segment are generally unsecured and repayment is dependent on the credit quality of the individual borrower.
The allocated component relates to loans that are classified as impaired. Impairment is measured on a loan by loan basis for commercial, commercial real estate and construction loans by either the present value of expected future cash flows discounted at the loan’s effective interest rate or the fair value of the collateral if the loan is collateral dependent. An allowance is established when the discounted cash flows (or collateral value) of the impaired loan is lower than the carrying value of that loan.
Troubled debt restructurings are individually evaluated for impairment and included in the separately identified impairment disclosures. TDRs are measured at the present value of estimated future cash flows using the loan’s effective rate at inception. If a TDR is considered to be a collateral dependent loan, the loan is reported, net, at the fair value of the collateral. For TDRs that subsequently default, the Company determines the amount of the allowance on that loan in accordance with the accounting policy for the allowance for loan losses on loans individually identified as impaired.
An unallocated component can be maintained to cover uncertainties that could affect management’s estimate of probable losses. The unallocated component of the allowance reflects the margin of imprecision inherent in the underlying assumptions used in the methodologies for estimating allocated and general reserves in the portfolio.
Income Taxes. The Company recognizes income taxes under the asset and liability method. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are established for the temporary differences between the accounting basis and the tax basis of the Company's assets and liabilities at enacted tax rates expected to be in effect when the amounts related to such temporary differences are realized or settled. A tax valuation allowance is established, as needed, to reduce net deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
A tax position is recognized as a benefit only if it is “more likely than not” that the tax position would be sustained in a tax examination, with a tax examination being presumed to occur. The amount recognized is the largest amount of tax benefit that is greater than 50% likely of being realized on examination.
For tax positions not meeting the “more likely than not” test, no tax benefit is recorded. The Company recognizes interest and/or penalties related to income tax matters in income tax expense.
Comparison of Financial Condition at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
Assets. Our total assets increased $384.0 million, or 34.2%, to $1.51 billion at December 31, 2020 from $1.12 billion at December 31, 2019. The primary reasons for the increase were increases in net loans, cash and cash equivalents, bank owned life insurance and accrued interest receivable partially offset by a decrease in investments in available-for-sale securities.
Cash and Cash Equivalents. Cash and cash equivalents increased $24.1 million, or 40.5%, to $83.8 million at December 31, 2020 from $59.7 million at December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily related to an increase in short-term investments of $24.3 million, or 51.0%. Short-term investments were increased as a result of an increase in deposits that exceeded loan growth.
Debt Securities Available-for-Sale. Investments in debt securities available-for-sale decreased $9.6 million or 22.9% to $32.2 million at December 31, 2020 from $41.8 million at December 31, 2019. The decrease resulted primarily from principal pay downs on government mortgage-backed securities.
Bank Owned Life Insurance. Bank owned life insurance increased $9.8 million, or 36.3%, to $36.7 million at December 31, 2020 from $26.9 million at December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to the purchase of additional insurance policies.
Accrued Interest Receivable. Accrued interest receivable increased $3.5 million, or 123.2%, to $6.4 million at December 31, 2020 from $2.9 million at December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to deferred interest on loan modifications as part of interagency guidance and Section 4013 of the CARES Act. The Company continues to monitor the accrued interest receivable related to these loan modifications for collectability.
Loan Portfolio Analysis. At December 31, 2020, net loans were $1.31 billion, or 87.3% of total assets, compared to $959.3 million, or 85.5% of total assets, at December 31, 2019. Increases in commercial loans of $114.2 million, or 25.3%, the acquisition and growth of mortgage warehouse loans to $265.4 million, and an increase in commercial real estate loans of $20.6 million, or 4.9% were partially offset by decreases in construction and land development loans of $17.8 million, or 38.1%, residential real estate loans of $12.9 million, or 28.3%, and consumer loans of $7.2 million, or 56.4%. Our commercial loan growth attributed to a continued focus on our specialty lending of, enterprise value loans, which increased $108.1 million, or 60.7%, to $286.1 million at December 31, 2020 from $178.0 million at December 31, 2019. Also included in commercial loans at December 31, 2020 are $41.8 million in SBA PPP loans originated in the second quarter of 2020. This growth was partially offset by a decrease in our specialty lending of renewable energy loans of $28.9 million, or 43.8%, to $37.2 million at December 31, 2020 from $66.1 million at December 31, 2019 due to loan payoffs.
The following table sets forth the composition of our loan portfolio by type of loan at the dates indicated, excluding loans held for sale.
___________________
(1) Includes home equity loans and lines of credit
(2) Includes multi-family real estate loans
Loan Maturity. The following table sets forth certain information at December 31, 2020 regarding the contractual maturity of our loan portfolio. Demand loans, loans having no stated repayment schedule or maturity, and overdraft loans are reported as being due in one year or less. The table does not include any estimate of prepayments that could significantly shorten the average life of all loans and may cause our actual repayment experience to differ from that shown below.
The following table sets forth our fixed and adjustable-rate loans at December 31, 2020 that are contractually due after December 31, 2021.
Asset Quality
Credit Risk Management. Our strategy for credit risk management focuses on having well-defined credit policies and uniform underwriting criteria and providing prompt attention to potential problem loans. Management of asset quality is accomplished by internal controls, monitoring and reporting of key risk indicators, and both internal and independent third-party loan reviews. The primary objective of our loan review process is to measure borrower performance and assess risk for the purpose of identifying loan weakness in order to minimize loan loss exposure. From the time of loan origination through final repayment, commercial real estate, construction and land development and commercial business loans are assigned a risk rating based on pre-determined criteria and levels of risk. The risk rating is monitored annually for most loans; however, it may change during the life of the loan as appropriate.
When entering a new lending line, we typically seek to manage risks and costs by limiting initial activity. We then decide whether it would be profitable and consistent with our risk tolerance levels to expand the activity, and continually calibrate and adjust our actions to maintain appropriate risk limitations. We typically enter a new lending line based upon the experience of our existing employees, or we may hire an experienced individual or group of individuals to manage new activities.
Internal and independent third-party loan reviews vary by loan type. Depending on the size and complexity of the loan, some loans may warrant detailed individual review, while other loans may have less risk based upon size, or be of a homogeneous nature reducing the need for detailed individual analysis. Assets with these characteristics, such as consumer loans and loans secured by residential real estate, may be reviewed on the basis of risk indicators such as delinquency or credit rating. In cases of significant concern, a total re-evaluation of the loan and associated risks are documented by completing a loan risk assessment and action plan. Some loans may be re-evaluated in terms of their fair market value or net realizable value in order to determine the likelihood of potential loss exposure and, consequently, the adequacy of specific and general loan loss reserves.
When a borrower fails to make a required loan payment, we take a number of steps to have the borrower cure the delinquency and restore the loan to current status, including contacting the borrower by letter and phone at regular intervals. When the borrower is in default, we may commence collection proceedings. If a foreclosure action is instituted and the loan is not brought current, paid in full, or refinanced before the foreclosure sale, the real property securing the loan generally is sold at foreclosure. Management informs the board of directors monthly of the amount of loans delinquent more than 30 days. Management provides detailed information to the board of directors quarterly on loans 60 or more days past due and all loans in foreclosure and repossessed property that we own.
Delinquent Loans. The following tables set forth our loan delinquencies by type and amount at the dates indicated.
The $4.4 million in commercial delinquencies 30-59 days past due at December 31, 2020 were primarily related two loan relationships that were in the process of receiving COVID modifications as of that date. The modifications were finalized in the first quarter of 2021. The $18.3 million in commercial real estate loans that were 60-89 days past due at December 31, 2019 were primarily related to one loan relationship that was placed on non-accrual status and analyzed and restructured in the first quarter of 2020. The relationship was returned to accrual status in the fourth quarter of 2020 after demonstrating the ability to pay the loan under the restructured terms, and as of December 31, 2020, the relationship was performing in accordance with its restructured repayment terms.
Non-performing Assets. Non-performing assets include loans that are 90 or more days past due or on non-accrual status, including troubled debt restructurings on non-accrual status, and real estate and other loan collateral acquired through foreclosure and repossession. Troubled debt restructurings include loans for which either a portion of interest or principal has been forgiven, loans modified at interest rates materially less than current market rates, or the borrower is experiencing financial difficulty. Loans 90 days or greater past due may remain on an accrual basis if adequately collateralized and in the process of collection. At December 31, 2020, we did not have any accruing loans past due 90 days or greater. For non-accrual loans, interest previously accrued but not collected is reversed and charged against income at the time a loan is placed on non-accrual status. Loans are returned to accrual status when all the principal and interest amounts contractually due are brought current and future payments are reasonably assured.
Real estate that we acquire as a result of foreclosure or by deed-in-lieu of foreclosure is classified as foreclosed real estate until it is sold. When property is acquired, it is initially recorded at the lower of cost or fair value less costs to sell at the date of foreclosure. Holding costs and declines in fair value after acquisition of the property result in charges against income.
The following table sets forth information regarding our non-performing assets at the dates indicated.
___________________
(1) Loans are presented before allowance for loan losses, but include deferred loan costs/fees.
The decrease in commercial real estate non-accrual loans at December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year was primarily due to workouts of loans in our portfolio. The increase in commercial non-accrual loans at December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year was primarily due to one $1.9 million commercial relationship, which is secured by business assets, and was placed on non-accrual status in the second quarter. The relationship was evaluated and specific reserves of $1.8 million was allocated to this relationship.
We have cooperative relationships with the vast majority of our non-performing loan customers. Substantially all non-performing loans are collateralized by business assets or real estate and the repayment is largely dependent on the return of such loans to performing status or the liquidation of the underlying collateral. We pursue the resolution of all non-performing loans through collections, restructures, voluntary liquidation of collateral by the borrower and, where necessary, legal action. When attempts to work with a customer to return a loan to performing status, including restructuring the loan, are unsuccessful, we will initiate appropriate legal action seeking to acquire property by deed in lieu of foreclosure or through foreclosure, or to liquidate business assets.
The following table sets forth the accruing and non-accruing status of troubled debt restructurings at the dates indicated.
Total troubled debt restructurings increased in 2020 primarily due to one commercial real estate loan relationship totaling $20.1 million. The Bank analyzed and modified the relationship during the first quarter of 2020. The loan was placed on non-accrual status but was subsequently returned to accrual status in the fourth quarter after demonstrating the ability to pay the loan under the restructured terms. During 2019 two commercial business loans totaling $2.6 million were modified under troubled debt restructures As of December 31, 2020, one of the two loans was paid off. The remaining loan is paying as agreed upon in the modified terms.
Potential Problem Loans. We classify certain commercial real estate, construction and land development, and commercial loans as “special mention”, “substandard”, or “doubtful”, based on criteria consistent with guidelines provided by our banking regulators. Certain potential problem loans represent loans that are currently performing, but for which known information about possible credit problems of the related borrowers causes management to have doubts as to the ability of such borrowers to comply with the present loan repayment terms and which may result in such loans becoming non-performing at some time in the future. Potential problem loans also include non-accrual or restructured loans presented above. We expect the levels of non-performing assets and potential problem loans to fluctuate in response to changing economic and market conditions, and the relative sizes of the respective loan portfolios, along with our degree of success in resolving problem assets.
Other potential problem loans are those loans that are currently performing, but where known information about possible credit problems of the borrowers causes us to have concerns as to the ability of such borrowers to comply with contractual loan repayment terms. At December 31, 2020, other potential problem loans totaled $21.5 million, consisting of 19 troubled debt restructured loans that were accruing interest in accordance with their modified terms.
The Company is working with customers affected by COVID-19. As a result of the current economic crisis caused by the COVID-19 virus, the Company is engaging in more frequent communication with borrowers to better understand their situation and challenges faced. The extent to which industries, or the tangential impact of those industries to other borrowers or industries are impacted, will likely be in direct proportion to the duration and depth of the COVID-19 pandemic. In determining “at-risk” industries we have used a threshold of 25% when comparing the value of COVID-19 modified loans to our total loans within that industry. As of December 31, 2020, total balances within the at-risk industries are as follows:
The Company has established a modification program in accordance with applicable regulations to provide economic relief. In working with our borrowers, the Company has provided up to six month payment deferrals. At the completion of the payment deferral, the Company has allowed for deferral extensions on an as-needed and case-by-case basis. Under agency guidance and Section 4013 of the CARES Act, these modifications will not be classified as troubled debt restructurings and are not considered delinquent. Throughout 2020, there were 287 outstanding loans, totaling $265.6 million, or 19.9% of total loans, that had been modified under agency guidance and Section 4013 of the CARES Act. Of these, 38 loans totaling $43.1 million, or 3.2% of total loans, remained modified at December 31, 2020.
Allowance for Loan Losses. The allowance for loan losses is maintained at levels considered adequate by management to provide for probable loan losses inherent in the loan portfolio as of the consolidated balance sheet reporting dates. The allowance for loan losses is based on management’s assessment of various factors affecting the loan portfolio, including portfolio composition, delinquent and non-accrual loans, national and local business conditions and loss experience and an overall evaluation of the quality of the underlying collateral.
The following table sets forth activity in our allowance for loan losses for the years indicated.
___________________
(1) Loans are presented before the allowance for loan losses but include deferred fees/costs
(2) Allowance to total loans outstanding at end of the year, excluding $41.8 million in PPP loans, was 1.43% at December 31, 2020.
The following tables set forth net (recoveries)/charge-offs to average loans outstanding during the year based on loan categories.
_____________________
(1) Loans are presented before the allowance for loan losses but include deferred fees/costs
Allocation of Allowance for Loan Losses. The following tables set forth the allowance for loan losses allocated by loan category. The allowance for loan losses allocated to each category is not necessarily indicative of future losses in any particular category and does not restrict the use of the allowance to absorb losses in other categories.
The allowance consists of general, specific, and unallocated components. The general component relates to pools of non-impaired loans and is based on historical loss experience adjusted for qualitative factors. The allocated component relates to loans that are classified as impaired, whereby an allowance is established when the discounted cash flows, collateral value, less estimated selling costs, or observable market price of the impaired loan is lower than the carrying value of that loan.
An unallocated component may be maintained to cover uncertainties that could affect management’s estimate of probable losses. The unallocated component of the allowance reflects the margin of imprecision inherent in the underlying assumptions used in the methodologies for estimating allocated and general reserves in the portfolio.
We had impaired loans totaling $25.7 million and $24.7 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Impaired loans totaling $4.0 million and $20.9 million had a valuation allowance of $2.0 million and $1.7 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our average investment in impaired loans was $26.2 million and $26.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
A loan is considered impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that we will be unable to collect the scheduled payments of principal or interest when due according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement. Factors considered by management in determining impairment include payment status, collateral value and the probability of collecting scheduled principal and interest payments when due. Loans that experience insignificant payment delays and payment shortfalls generally are not classified as impaired. Management determines the significance of payment delays and payment shortfalls on a case-by-case basis, taking into consideration the circumstances surrounding the loan and the borrower, including the length of the delay, the reasons for the delay, the borrower’s prior payment record, and the amount of the shortfall in relation to the principal and interest owed. Impairment is measured on a loan-by-loan basis for commercial business, commercial real estate and construction and land development loans by either the present value of expected future cash flows discounted at the loan’s effective interest rate, the loan’s obtainable market price, or the fair value of the collateral if the loan is collateral dependent.
Large groups of smaller balance homogeneous loans are collectively evaluated for impairment based on payment status. Accordingly, we do not separately identify individual one- to four-family residential and consumer loans for impairment disclosures, unless such loans are subject to a troubled debt restructuring. We periodically agree to modify the contractual terms of loans. When a loan is modified and a concession is made to a borrower experiencing financial difficulty, the modification is considered a troubled debt restructuring. All troubled debt restructurings are initially classified as impaired.
Mortgage warehouse loans are facility lines to non-bank mortgage origination companies for sale into secondary markets, which is typically within 15 days of loan closure. Due to their short-term nature, these loans are assessed at a lower credit risk and do not carry the same allocation as traditional loans.
We review residential and commercial loans for impairment based on the fair value of collateral, if collateral-dependent, or the present value of expected cash flows. Management has reviewed the collateral value for all impaired and non-accrual loans that were collateral dependent as of December 31, 2020 and considered any probable loss in determining the allowance for loan losses.
Loans that are partially charged off generally remain on non-accrual status until foreclosure or such time that they are performing in accordance with the terms of the loan and have a sustained payment history of at least six months. The accrual of interest is generally discontinued when the contractual payment of principal or interest has become 90 days past due or management has serious doubts about further collectability of principal or interest, even though the loan is currently performing. Loan losses are charged against the allowance when we believe the uncollectability of a loan balance is confirmed; for collateral-dependent loans, generally when appraised values (as adjusted values, if applicable) less estimated costs to sell, are less than our carrying values.
Although we believe that we use the best information available to establish the allowance for loan losses, future adjustments to the allowance for loan losses may be necessary and our results of operations could be adversely affected if circumstances differ substantially from the assumptions used in making the determinations. Furthermore, while we believe we have established our allowance for loan losses in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America, our regulators, in reviewing our loan portfolio, may require us to increase our allowance for loan losses. In addition, because future events affecting borrowers and collateral cannot be predicted with certainty, the existing allowance for loan losses may not be adequate or increases may be necessary should the quality of any loans deteriorate as a result of the factors discussed above. Any material increase in the allowance for loan losses may adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations.
Securities Portfolio
The following table sets forth the composition of our securities portfolio at the dates indicated,
At December 31, 2020, we had no investments in a single company or entity, other than government and government agency securities, that had an aggregate book value in excess of 10% of our equity.
Portfolio Maturities and Yields. The composition and maturities of the investment securities portfolio at December 31, 2020 are summarized in the following table. Certain mortgage-backed securities have adjustable interest rates and will reprice annually within the various maturity ranges. These repricing schedules are not reflected in the table below. No tax-equivalent yield adjustments have been made, as the amount of tax-free interest-earning assets is immaterial.
Each reporting period, we evaluate all securities with a decline in fair value below the amortized cost of the investment to determine whether or not the impairment is deemed to be other-than-temporary. Other-than-temporary impairment (“OTTI”) is required to be recognized if (1) we intend to sell the security; (2) it is more likely than not that we will be required to sell the security before recovery of its amortized cost basis; or (3) for debt securities, the present value of expected cash flows is not sufficient to recover the entire amortized cost basis. For impaired debt securities that we intend to sell, or more likely than not will be required to sell, the full amount of the depreciation is recognized as OTTI, resulting in a realized loss that is a charged to earnings through a reduction in our non-interest income. For all other impaired debt securities, credit-related OTTI is recognized through earnings and non-credit related OTTI is recognized in other comprehensive income/loss, net of applicable taxes. We did not recognize any OTTI during the years ended December 31, 2020 or 2019.
Deposits
Total deposits increased $387.5 million, or 45.6%, to $1.24 billion at December 31, 2020 from $849.9 million at December 31, 2019. Our continuing focus on the acquisition and expansion of core deposit relationships, which we define as all deposits except for certificates of deposit, resulted in net growth in these deposits of $303.7 million, or 40.2%, to $1.06 billion at December 31, 2020, or 85.6% of total deposits at that date. Included in the growth of our core deposit relationships is an increase in NOW and demand deposits of $184.7 million, or 50.0%, an increase of $83.3 million, or 30.8% in money market accounts and an increase of $35.7 million, or 30.9%, in savings account. NOW and demand deposits and money market deposits increased primarily due to funds from the origination of PPP loans and increased deposit balances from our existing customer base. The increase in savings accounts is primarily caused by decreased consumer spending which resulted in increased consumer savings. Certificates of deposit increased $83.8 million, or 88.7% primarily due to increases in brokered certificates of deposit of $65.5 million, or 134.9% and $31.3 million, or 361.6%, from QwickRate deposits, where we gather certificates of deposit nationwide by posting rates we will pay on these deposits.
The following tables set forth the distribution of total deposits by account type at the dates indicated.
As of December 31, 2020, our certificates of deposit included $114.1 million of brokered certificates of deposit and $39.9 million of QwickRate certificates of deposit. As of December 31, 2020, all deposits are insured in full through our participation in the Massachusetts Depositors Insurance Fund (“DIF”).
As of December 31, 2020, the aggregate amount of all our certificates of deposit in amounts greater than or equal to $250,000, which excludes all brokered certificates, was approximately $5.2 million. The following table sets forth the maturity of these certificates as of December 31, 2020.
Borrowings
Borrowings decreased $11.5 million, or 46.0%, to $13.5 million at December 31, 2020 from $25.0 million at December 31, 2019 primarily due to maturing borrowings not being repurchased as the liquidity provided from increased customer deposits was sufficient to support asset growth. All of the borrowings at December 31, 2020 and 2019 were Federal Home Loan Bank long-term advances with an original maturity of more than one year. The weighted average interest rate was 2.12% and 2.45% at December 31, 2020 and 2019 respectively.
We had no securities sold under agreements to repurchase during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Shareholders’ Equity
Total shareholders’ equity increased $5.0 million, or 2.1%, to $235.9 million at December 31, 2020, from $230.9 million at December 31, 2019. The increase was due primarily to net income of $12.0 million, stock-based compensation expense of $1.1 million, other comprehensive income of $600,000 and employee stock ownership plan shares earned of $841,000, partially offset by a decrease of $7.8 million related to the repurchase of common stock and $1.6 million from dividends declared.
Average Balance Sheets and Related Yields and Rates
The following tables set forth average balance sheets, average yields and costs, and certain other information for the years indicated. No tax-equivalent yield adjustments have been made, as we consider the amount of tax free interest-earning assets is immaterial. All average balances are daily average balances. Non-accrual loans were included in the computation of average balances. The yields set forth below include the effect of deferred fees, discounts, and premiums that are amortized or accreted to interest income or interest expense.
___________________
(1) Interest earned/paid on loans includes fee income related to SBA loan forgiveness of $1.8 million and mortgage warehouse loan origination fee income of $759,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
(2) Net interest rate spread represents the difference between the weighted average yield on interest-bearing assets and the weighted average rate of interest-bearing liabilities.
(3) Net interest-earning assets represent total interest-earning assets less total interest-bearing liabilities.
(4) Net interest margin represents net interest income divided by average total interest-earning assets.
‎
Rate/Volume Analysis
The following table sets forth the effects of changing rates and volumes on our net interest income. The rate column shows the effects attributable to changes in rate (changes in rate multiplied by prior volume). The volume column shows the effects attributable to changes in volume (changes in volume multiplied by prior rate). The net column represents the sum of the prior columns. For purposes of this table, changes attributable to changes in both rate and volume that cannot be segregated have been allocated proportionally based on the changes due to rate and the changes due to volume. There are no out-of-period adjustments excluded from the table below.
Comparison of Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
General. Net income increased $1.2 million, or 10.9%, to $12.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $10.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $11.1 million, or 25.5%, in net interest and dividend income partially offset by an increase in salaries and employee benefits expense of $4.9 million, or 27.0%, an increase in the provision for loan losses of $271,000, or 5.1%, a decrease in noninterest income of $568,000, or 13.8%, and write downs of other assets and receivables of $2.2 million.
Interest and Dividend Income. Interest and dividend income increased $8.9 million, or 17.2%, to $60.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $51.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This was caused by an increase in interest and fees on loans, which increased $9.7 million, or 19.5%, partially offset by a decrease in interest and dividends on securities of $636,000, or 41.1%.
The increase in interest income on loans was due to an increase in average loan balance of $302.8 million, or 33.4%, to $1.21 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $906.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was partially offset by a decrease in the yield on loans of 57 basis points, to 4.91% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 5.48% for the year ended December 31, 2019, due to lower market interest rates, the origination of PPP loans with a yield of 1.0% and mortgage warehouse loans which yield a lower rate.
The decrease in interest and dividends on securities was due to a decrease in the average balance of debt securities available-for-sale of $10.5 million, or 21.9%, to $37.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $47.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and a 59 basis point decrease in the yield on such securities to 2.22% for 2020 from 2.81% for 2019.
Interest Expense. Interest expense decreased $2.2 million, or 27.2%, to $5.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $8.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was caused by decreases in interest expense on deposits and borrowings. Interest expense on deposits decreased $1.1 million, or 16.9%, to $5.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $6.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This was primarily due to a decrease in the cost of interest-bearing deposits of 35 basis points to 0.71% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 1.06% for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was partially offset by an increase in the average balance of interest-bearing deposits of $139.9 million, or 23.6%, to $732.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $592.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase resulted primarily from an increase in the average balance of certificates of deposit, which increased $45.9 million, or 39.2%, and money market accounts, which increased $56.8 million, or 23.8%.
Interest expense on borrowings, which consists of advances from the Federal Home Loan Bank of Boston and borrowings from the Federal Reserve Bank borrower-in-custody program, decreased $1.2 million, or 61.5%, to $728,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $1.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily due to a decrease in the average balance of borrowings of $28.7 million, or 39.6%, to $43.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $72.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to increased deposits funding loan growth. Interest expense on borrowings also decreased due to the yield on borrowings decreasing 94 basis points to 1.67% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2.61% for the year ended December 31, 2019 due to a decrease in market rates.
Net Interest and Dividend Income. Net interest and dividend income increased $11.1 million, or 25.5%, to $54.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $43.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The growth in net interest and dividend income was primarily the result of an increase in our average interest-earning assets of $309.6 million, or 31.7%, offset by an increase in average interest-bearing liabilities of $111.2 million, or 16.7%, and a decrease in net interest margin of 21 basis points to 4.23%. The decrease in the net interest margin was the result of a combination of factors including a decreasing rate environment and an increase in mortgage warehouse and PPP loan balances, which yield a lower rate. The net interest margin benefitted from the accretion of fee income related to the forgiveness of the SBA PPP loans. The amount of income recognized from the forgiveness totaled $962,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, there was $993,000 in SBA PPP fee income remaining to be accreted.
Provision for Loan Losses. The provision for loan losses was $5.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $5.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which is an increase of $271,000, or 5.1%. The changes in the provision were based on management’s assessment of economic conditions, including the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, loan portfolio growth and composition changes, historical charge-off trends, levels of problem loans and other asset quality trends. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the increased provision as offset by a decrease in net charge-offs, which were $925,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The provision recorded resulted in an allowance for loan losses of $18.5 million, or 1.39% of total loans at December 31, 2020, compared to $13.8 million, or 1.42% of total loans at December 31, 2019. Included in total loans at December 31, 2020 was $41.8 million in PPP loans originated as part of the CARES Act that we believe have no credit risk due to a government guarantee, therefore, we have not provided for losses for these loans. Excluding these loans, the allowance for loan losses as a percentage of total loans was 1.43% as of December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, there was $265.4 million in outstanding mortgage warehouse loan balances. Loans in this segment are facility lines to non-bank mortgage origination companies for sale into secondary markets, which is typically within 15 days of loan closure. Due to their short-term nature, these loans are assessed at a lower credit risk and do not carry the same allocation as traditional loans. The allowance for loans losses as a percentage of non-performing loans was 341.72% as of December 31, 2020 compared to 237.58% as of December 31, 2019. Non-performing loans were $5.4 million, or 0.36% of total assets as of December 31, 2020 compared to $5.8 million, or 0.52% of total assets, as of December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, non-performing loans consisted primarily of two commercial relationships totaling $3.6 million. These loan relationships were evaluated for impairment and specific reserves of $1.9 million were allocated as of December 31, 2020.
Noninterest Income. Noninterest income information is as follows.
Gains on sales of securities, net, decreased $113,000, or 100.0%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 as we repositioned our investment portfolio in debt securities available-for-sale in 2019 by selling securities with maturity dates that were coming due and purchasing securities with longer terms to maturity. Customer service fees on deposit accounts decreased $121,000, or 8.3%, and other service charges and fees decreased $461,000, or 25.9%, primarily due to waived service charges and fees during the second quarter for customers impacted by COVID-19. Bank owned life insurance income increased $110,000, or 15.7%, due to the purchase of additional insurance policies.
Noninterest Expense. Noninterest expense information is as follows.
Salaries and employee benefits expense increased $4.9 million, or 27.0%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 from the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to a higher number of sales and operations positions compared to 2019, the addition of staff from the mortgage warehouse operations and ESOP expense which increased due to the acquisition of additional shares from our second-step conversion and related stock offering in October 2019. Write down of other assets and receivables were $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to zero for the year ended December 31, 2019. In the fourth quarter of 2020, a write-down of other investments was completed after the Company performed an evaluation and deemed $400,000 impaired. A write-down of an SBA receivable balance was completed in the third quarter of 2020 after the Company evaluated the collectability and determined that $1.3 million was uncollectible. In addition, a write-down of a notes receivable balance of $500,000 was completed in the first quarter of 2020 after the Company evaluated the collectability and determined it was uncollectible. Deposit insurance costs increased $213,000, or 104.9%, primarily due to decreased expenses in 2019 relating to FDIC assessment credits that were not available in 2020. Professional fees increased $658,000, or 54.4%, primarily due to increased audit and compliance costs as well as consulting services to aid in the development of deposit and lending services. The increase was also a result of a one-time credit received in 2019 relating to an insurance settlement. Occupancy expense decreased $284,000, or 14.4%, primarily due to the acceleration of amortization on our leasehold improvements related to the closure of our Hampton, New Hampshire branch in 2019. Marketing expense decreased $162,000, or 42.1%, primarily due to increased marketing costs in 2019 related to the development of the new BankProv brand, which was rolled out in 2020. Software amortization and implementation increased $225,000, or 30.7%, due to additional software needed to manage the mortgage warehouse operations, as well as new software purchased to assist with strategic initiatives.
Income Tax Provision. We recorded a provision for income taxes of $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, reflecting an effective tax rate of 27.8%, compared to $3.8 million, or an effective tax rate of 26.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Management of Market Risk
General. The majority of our assets and liabilities are monetary in nature. Consequently, our most significant form of market risk is interest rate risk. Our assets, consisting primarily of loans, have longer maturities than our liabilities, consisting primarily of deposits. As a result, a principal part of our business strategy is to manage interest rate risk and reduce the exposure of our net interest income to changes in market interest rates. Accordingly, we have established a management-level Asset/Liability Management Committee, which takes initial responsibility for developing an asset/liability management process and related procedures, establishing and monitoring reporting systems and developing asset/liability strategies. On at least a quarterly basis, the Asset/Liability Management Committee reviews asset/liability management with the Investment Asset/Liability Committee that has been established by the board of directors. This committee also reviews any changes in strategies as well as the performance of any specific asset/liability management actions that have been implemented previously. On a quarterly basis, an outside consulting firm provides us with detailed information and analysis as to asset/liability management, including our interest rate risk profile. Ultimate responsibility for effective asset/liability management rests with our board of directors.
We have sought to manage our interest rate risk in order to minimize the exposure of our earnings and capital to changes in interest rates. We have implemented the following strategies to manage our interest rate risk: originating loans with adjustable interest rates; promoting core deposit products; and adjusting the interest rates and maturities of funding sources, as necessary. In addition, we no longer originate single-family residential real estate loans, which often have longer terms and fixed rates. By following these strategies, we believe that we are better positioned to react to changes in market interest rates.
Net Interest Income Simulation. We analyze our sensitivity to changes in interest rates through a net interest income simulation model. Net interest income is the difference between the interest income we earn on our interest-earning assets, such as loans and securities, and the interest we pay on our interest-bearing liabilities, such as deposits and borrowings. We estimate what our net interest income would be for a 12-month period in the current interest rate environment. We then calculate what the net interest income would be for the same period under the assumption that interest rates increase 200 basis points from current market rates and under the assumption that interest rates decrease 100 basis points from current market rates, with changes in interest rates representing immediate and permanent, parallel shifts in the yield curve.
The following table presents the estimated changes in net interest income of BankProv, calculated on a bank-only basis, that would result from changes in market interest rates over twelve-month periods beginning December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Economic Value of Equity Simulation. We also analyze our sensitivity to changes in interest rates through an economic value of equity (“EVE”) model. EVE represents the present value of the expected cash flows from our assets less the present value of the expected cash flows arising from our liabilities adjusted for the value of off-balance sheet contracts. The EVE ratio represents the dollar amount of our EVE divided by the present value of our total assets for a given interest rate scenario. EVE attempts to quantify our economic value using a discounted cash flow methodology while the EVE ratio reflects that value as a form of capital ratio. We estimate what our EVE would be as of a specific date. We then calculate what EVE would be as of the same date throughout a series of interest rate scenarios representing immediate and permanent, parallel shifts in the yield curve. We currently calculate EVE under the assumptions that interest rates increase 100, 200, 300 and 400 basis points from current market rates, and under the assumption that interest rates decrease 100 basis points from current market rates.
The following table presents the estimated changes in EVE of BankProv, calculated on a bank-only basis, that would result from changes in market interest rates as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Certain shortcomings are inherent in the methodologies used in the above interest rate risk measurements. Modeling changes require making certain assumptions that may or may not reflect the manner in which actual yields and costs respond to changes in market interest rates. In this regard, the tables presented above assume that the composition of our interest-sensitive assets and liabilities existing at the beginning of a period remains constant over the period being measured and assume that a particular change in interest rates is reflected uniformly across the yield curve regardless of the duration or repricing of specific assets and liabilities. Accordingly, although the tables provide an indication of our interest rate risk exposure at a particular point in time, such measurements are not intended to and do not provide a precise forecast of the effect of changes in market interest rates on our net interest income and will differ from actual results.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity is the ability to meet current and future financial obligations of a short-term nature. Our primary sources of funds consist of deposit inflows, loan repayments and maturities and sales of securities. While maturities and scheduled amortization of loans and securities are predictable sources of funds, deposit flows and loan prepayments are greatly influenced by general interest rates, economic conditions and competition.
We regularly review the need to adjust our investments in liquid assets based upon our assessment of: (1) expected loan demand, (2) expected deposit flows, (3) yields available on interest-earning deposits and securities, and (4) the objectives of our asset/liability management program. Excess liquid assets are invested generally in interest-earning deposits and short- and intermediate-term securities.
Our most liquid assets are cash and cash equivalents. The levels of these assets are dependent on our operating, financing, lending and investing activities during any given period. At December 31, 2020, cash and cash equivalents totaled $83.8 million. Debt securities classified as available-for-sale, which provide additional sources of liquidity, totaled $32.2 million at December 31, 2020.
In the ordinary course of our operations, we enter into certain contractual obligations. Such obligations include operating leases for premises and equipment, agreements with respect to borrowed funds and deposit liabilities, agreements with respect to investments and employment agreements with certain of our executive officers.
At December 31, 2020, we had a borrowing capacity of $159.3 million with the Federal Home Loan Bank of Boston, of which $13.5 million in advances were outstanding. At December 31, 2020, we also had an available line of credit with the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston’s borrower-in-custody program of $194.1 million, none of which was outstanding as of that date.
We have no material commitments or demands that are likely to affect our liquidity other than as set forth below. In the event loan demand were to increase faster than expected, or any unforeseen demand or commitment were to occur, we could access our borrowing capacity with the Federal Home Loan Bank of Boston or obtain additional funds through brokered certificates of deposit.
We are a party to financial instruments with off-balance sheet risk in the normal course of business to meet the financing needs of our customers. These financial instruments include commitments to extend credit, which involve elements of credit and interest rate risk in excess of the amount recognized in the consolidated balance sheets. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had $31.9 million and $29.4 million in loan commitments outstanding, respectively. In addition to commitments to originate loans, at December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had $202.0 million and $201.9 million in unadvanced funds to borrowers, respectively. We also had $1.7 and $1.5 million in outstanding letters of credit at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
A significant decrease in deposits could result in the Company having to seek other sources of funds, including brokered certificates of deposit, QwickRate deposits, and Federal Home Loan Bank of Boston advances. Depending on market conditions, we may be required to pay higher rates on such deposits or other borrowings than we currently pay. We believe, however, based on past experience that a significant portion of our deposits will remain with us. We have the ability to attract and retain deposits by adjusting the interest rates offered.
The Company maintains access to multiple sources of liquidity. We have utilized wholesale funding markets and have remained open but with rates that have been volatile. If funding costs are elevated for an extended period of time, it could have an adverse effect on the Company’s net interest margin. If an extended recession causes large numbers of the Company’ deposit customers to withdraw their funds, the Company might become more reliant on volatile or more expensive sources of funding.
BankProv is subject to various regulatory capital requirements administered by Massachusetts Commissioner of Banks, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. At December 31, 2020, BankProv exceeded all applicable regulatory capital requirements, and was considered “well capitalized” under regulatory guidelines. See Note 12 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
In October 2019, the Company successfully completed its second-step mutual-to-stock conversion that raised $91.6 million in net proceeds. The Company down-streamed 50% of the net proceeds raised to the Bank. Based on the additional capital, the Company feels that it has sufficient capital to withstand an extended economic recession brought by the COVID-19. However, regulatory capital could be adversely impacted by further credit losses. With only 50% being down-streamed to the Bank, the Company has adequate cash to cover dividend payments in the near term.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For information with respect to recent accounting pronouncements that are applicable to Provident Bancorp, Inc., see Note 2 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Effect of Inflation and Changing Prices
The consolidated financial statements and related financial data included in this annual report have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America, which require the measurement of financial position and operating results in terms of historical dollars without considering the change in the relative purchasing power of money over time due to inflation. The primary impact of inflation on our operations is reflected in increased operating costs. Unlike most industrial companies, virtually all the assets and liabilities of a financial institution are monetary in nature. As a result, interest rates generally have a more significant impact on a financial institution’s performance than do general levels of inflation. Interest rates do not necessarily move in the same direction or to the same extent as the prices of goods and services.