Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
OVERVIEW
The following discussion and analysis is intended to help you understand us, our operations and our financial performance. It should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes, which are included elsewhere in this report.
We are one of the largest global apparel companies in the world and, in March 2020, we marked our 100-year anniversary as a listed company on the New York Stock Exchange. We manage a diversified brand portfolio, including TOMMY HILFIGER, Calvin Klein, Van Heusen, IZOD, ARROW, Warner’s, Olga, True&Co. and Geoffrey Beene, which are owned, as well as various other owned, licensed and, to a lesser extent, private label brands. We had a perpetual license for Speedo in North America and the Caribbean until April 6, 2020.
Our business strategy is to position our brands to sell globally at various price points and in multiple channels of distribution. This enables us to offer products to a broad range of consumers, while minimizing competition among our brands and reducing our reliance on any one demographic group, product category, price point, distribution channel or region. We also license the use of our trademarks to third parties and joint ventures for product categories and in regions where we believe our licensees’ expertise can better serve our brands.
We generated revenue of $7.1 billion and $9.9 billion in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Over 60% of our revenue in 2020 and over 50% of our revenue in 2019 was generated outside of the United States. Our business was significantly negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic during 2020, resulting in an unprecedented material decline in revenue. Our global lifestyle brands, TOMMY HILFIGER and Calvin Klein, accounted for over 85% of our revenue during 2020 and 2019.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
COVID-19 Pandemic Update
The COVID-19 pandemic has had, and is expected to continue to have, a significant impact on our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows from operations.
Our retail stores have been, and continue to be, impacted by temporary closures, reduced hours and limited occupancy as a result of the pandemic:
•Virtually all of our retail stores were temporarily closed for varying periods of time throughout the first quarter and into the second quarter of 2020, but had reopened by mid-June 2020.
•During the fourth quarter of 2020 and into the first quarter of 2021, our retail stores in Europe, North America and certain markets in Asia have faced significant pressure as a result of resurgences in COVID-19 cases there, including additional temporary store closures, particularly in Europe and Canada. Approximately 70% of our stores in Europe were temporarily closed throughout the fourth quarter of 2020. Approximately 75% of our stores in Europe were temporarily closed earlier in the first quarter of 2021 and 50% are currently closed.
In addition, our North America retail stores have been, and continue to be, challenged by the lack of international tourists coming to the United States, as stores located in international tourist destinations represent a significant portion of that business.
Our brick and mortar wholesale customers and licensing partners also have experienced significant business disruptions as a result of the pandemic, with several of our North America wholesale customers filing for bankruptcy. Our wholesale customers and franchisees globally generally have experienced temporary store closures at the same time as us. Although most of our wholesale customers’ and franchisees’ stores had reopened the majority of their locations across all regions by mid-June, there was a significant level of inventory that remained in their stores. The elevated inventory levels, as well as lower traffic and consumer demand throughout the year, resulted in a sharp reduction in shipments to these customers in 2020.
Our digital channels, which have historically represented a less significant portion of our overall business, have experienced strong growth during 2020 both with respect to sales to our traditional and pure play wholesale customers, as well
as within our own directly operated digital commerce businesses across all brand businesses and regions; these favorable trends have continued into 2021.
The COVID-19 pandemic also has impacted, and continues to impact, some of our suppliers, including third-party manufacturers, logistics providers and other vendors, with some operating at reduced capacity. A current vessel and container shortage globally is leading to delayed Spring 2021 inventory receipts and, in turn, has delayed deliveries to our wholesale customers and availability in our stores and for our directly operated digital commerce businesses, which is impacting our inventory and sales volume during the first quarter of 2021. In addition, the shipping disruption occurring as a result of the temporary blockage of the Suez Canal, while unrelated to the pandemic specifically, may also result in delays which impact our business, although currently such impact is expected to be minimal. We continue to monitor these delays and other potential disruptions in our supply chain and will implement mitigation plans if needed.
Throughout the pandemic, our top priority has been to ensure the health and safety of our associates, consumers and employees of our business partners around the world. Accordingly, we have implemented health and safety measures to support high standards in our retail stores, office and distribution centers, including temporary closures, reduced occupancy levels, and social distancing and sanitization measures, as well as changes to fitting room use in our stores. We have incurred and expect to continue to incur additional costs associated with these measures.
We took the following actions starting in the first quarter of 2020 to reduce our operating expenses in response to the pandemic: (i) reducing payroll costs, including temporary furloughs, salary and incentive compensation reductions, decreased working hours, and hiring freezes, as well as taking advantage of COVID-related government payroll subsidy programs primarily in international jurisdictions, (ii) eliminating or reducing expenses in all discretionary spending categories and (iii) reducing rent expense through rent abatements negotiated with landlords for certain stores affected by temporary closures. In addition, we announced in July 2020 plans to streamline our North American operations to better align our business with the evolving retail landscape, including (i) a reduction in our North America office workforce by approximately 450 positions, or 12%, across all three brand businesses and corporate functions, which is expected to result in annual cost savings of approximately $80 million, and (ii) the exit from our Heritage Brands Retail business by mid-2021. While certain of these initiatives were substantially completed in 2020, we continue to manage our cost structure proactively into 2021. We announced in March 2021 plans to reduce our workforce in certain international markets and to reduce our real estate footprint, including reductions in office space and select store closures, which are expected to result in annual cost savings of approximately $60 million.
We also have taken and continue to take actions to manage our working capital and liquidity. Please see the section entitled “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below for further discussion.
The impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in an unprecedented material decline in our revenue and earnings in 2020, including $1.021 billion of pre-tax noncash impairment charges recognized during the year, primarily related to goodwill, tradenames and other intangible assets, and store assets. There continues to be uncertainty with respect to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and the businesses of our licensees and wholesale customers, and our revenue and earnings in 2021 may be subject to significant material change. We currently expect the pandemic will continue to negatively impact our revenue and earnings in 2021, particularly in the first quarter due to ongoing store closures, predominantly in Europe. Despite these store closures in Europe, we expect our international businesses to exceed 2019 pre-pandemic revenue levels in the first half of 2021. Our North America businesses are expected to remain challenged throughout 2021 as international tourism, which is the source of a significant portion of regional revenue, is not expected to return to any significant level until the end of the year.
Operations Overview
We generate net sales from (i) the wholesale distribution to traditional retailers (both for stores and digital operations), pure play digital commerce retailers, franchisees, licensees and distributors of branded sportswear (casual apparel), jeanswear, performance apparel, intimate apparel, underwear, swimwear, dress shirts, neckwear, handbags, accessories, footwear and other related products under owned and licensed trademarks, and (ii) the sale of certain of these products through (a) approximately 1,730 Company-operated free-standing retail store locations worldwide under our TOMMY HILFIGER, Calvin Klein and certain of our heritage brands trademarks, (b) approximately 1,425 Company-operated shop-in-shop/concession locations worldwide under our TOMMY HILFIGER and Calvin Klein trademarks, and (c) digital commerce sites worldwide under our TOMMY HILFIGER and Calvin Klein trademarks and in the United States through our directly operated digital commerce sites for Van Heusen, IZOD, and, until April 6, 2020, Speedo. We announced in July 2020 a plan to exit our Heritage Brands Retail business, which will result in the closing of 162 heritage brands stores by mid-2021. Approximately 40 of these stores had been
closed by the end of 2020. Additionally, we generate royalty, advertising and other revenue from fees for licensing the use of our trademarks. We manage our operations through our operating divisions, which are presented as six reportable segments: (i) Tommy Hilfiger North America; (ii) Tommy Hilfiger International; (iii) Calvin Klein North America; (iv) Calvin Klein International; (v) Heritage Brands Wholesale; and (vi) Heritage Brands Retail. Our Heritage Brands Retail segment will cease operations following the closure of our directly operated Heritage Brands Retail stores.
The following actions and transactions have impacted our results of operations and the comparability among the years, including our 2021 expectations as compared to 2020, as discussed below:
•We announced in March 2021 plans to reduce our workforce in certain international markets and to reduce our real estate footprint, including reductions in office space and select store closures, which are expected to result in annual cost savings of approximately $60 million. We expect to incur pre-tax costs of approximately $70 million in 2021 in connection with these actions, of which approximately $30 million is expected to be noncash.
•We announced in July 2020 plans to streamline our North American operations to better align our business with the evolving retail landscape including (i) a reduction in our office workforce by approximately 450 positions, or 12%, across all three brand businesses and corporate functions (the “North America workforce reduction”), which is expected to result in annual cost savings of approximately $80 million, and (ii) the exit from our Heritage Brands Retail business by mid-2021. We recorded pre-tax costs of $69 million during 2020, including (i) $40 million related to the North America workforce reduction, primarily consisting of severance, and (ii) $29 million in connection with the exit from the Heritage Brands Retail business, consisting of $15 million of severance, $7 million of noncash asset impairments and $7 million of accelerated amortization of lease assets and other costs. We expect to incur additional pre-tax costs of approximately $21 million in 2021 in connection with the Heritage Brands Retail business closure, primarily consisting of severance, accelerated amortization of lease assets and contract termination and other costs. Please see Note 17, “Exit Activity Costs,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for further discussion.
•We completed the Speedo transaction in April 2020 for net proceeds of $169 million. Upon the closing of the transaction, we deconsolidated the net assets of the Speedo North America business. We recorded a pre-tax noncash loss of $142 million in the fourth quarter of 2019, when the transaction was announced, consisting of (i) a noncash impairment of our perpetual license right for the Speedo trademark and (ii) a noncash loss to reduce the carrying value of the business to its estimated fair value, less costs to sell. We recorded an additional pre-tax noncash loss of $3 million in the first quarter of 2020 upon the closing of the transaction, consisting of (i) a $6 million noncash loss resulting from the remeasurement of the loss recorded in the fourth quarter of 2019, primarily due to changes to the net assets of the Speedo North America business subsequent to February 2, 2020, partially offset by (ii) a $3 million gain on our retirement plans. Please see Note 3, “Acquisitions and Divestitures,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for further discussion.
•We completed a transaction in 2019 in connection with which we terminated early the licenses for the global Calvin Klein and Tommy Hilfiger North America socks and hosiery businesses in order to consolidate the socks and hosiery businesses for all of our brands in the United States and Canada in a newly formed joint venture, PVH Legwear, and to bring in-house the international Calvin Klein socks and hosiery wholesale businesses. We own a 49% economic interest in PVH Legwear. PVH Legwear was formed with a wholly owned subsidiary of our former heritage brands trademarks socks and hosiery licensee, and has licensed from us since December 2019 the rights to distribute and sell TOMMY HILFIGER, Calvin Klein, IZOD, Van Heusen and Warner’s socks and hosiery in the United States and Canada. We recorded a pre-tax charge of $60 million in 2019 in connection with these actions.
•We completed the Australia acquisition and the TH CSAP acquisition in the second quarter of 2019. Prior to the closing of the Australia acquisition, we, along with Gazal, jointly owned and managed a joint venture, PVH Australia, which licensed and operated businesses under the TOMMY HILFIGER, Calvin Klein and Van Heusen brands, along with other owned and licensed brands. PVH Australia came under our full control as a result of the acquisition and we now operate directly those businesses. The aggregate net purchase price for the shares acquired was $59 million, net of cash acquired and after taking into account the proceeds from the divestiture to a third party of an office building and warehouse owned by Gazal in June 2019. Additionally, pursuant to the terms of the acquisition agreement, key executives of Gazal and PVH Australia exchanged a portion of their interests in Gazal for approximately 6% of the outstanding shares of our previously wholly owned subsidiary that acquired 100% of the ownership interests in the Australia business, for which we recognized a liability on the date of the acquisition. We settled in June 2020 a portion of the liability for this mandatorily redeemable non-controlling interest for $17 million. The remaining liability, which is payable in the second quarter of 2021, was $24 million as of January 31, 2021, based on exchange rates in effect on that date. We completed the TH CSAP acquisition for $74 million, as a result of which we now operate directly the Tommy Hilfiger retail business in the Central and Southeast Asia market. Please see Note 3, “Acquisitions and Divestitures,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for further discussion.
In connection with the Australia and TH CSAP acquisitions, we recorded an aggregate net pre-tax gain of $83 million during 2019, including (i) a noncash gain of $113 million to write up our previously held equity investments in Gazal and PVH Australia to fair value, partially offset by (ii) $21 million of costs, primarily consisting of noncash valuation adjustments and one-time expenses recorded on our equity investments in Gazal and PVH Australia prior to the Australia acquisition closing, and (iii) a $9 million expense recorded in interest expense resulting from the remeasurement of the mandatorily redeemable non-controlling interest that was recognized in connection with the Australia acquisition. We recorded a pre-tax expense of $5 million during 2020 in interest expense resulting from the remeasurement of the mandatorily redeemable non-controlling interest that was recognized in connection with the Australia acquisition.
•We entered into a licensing agreement in May 2019 with G-III for the design, production and wholesale distribution of Calvin Klein Jeans women’s jeanswear collections in the United States and Canada, which resulted in the discontinuation of our directly operated Calvin Klein North America women’s jeanswear wholesale business in 2019.
•We closed our TOMMY HILFIGER flagship and anchor stores in the United States (the “TH U.S. store closures”) in the first quarter of 2019 and recorded pre-tax costs of $55 million, primarily consisting of noncash lease asset impairments. Please see Note 11, “Fair Value Measurements,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for further discussion of the noncash lease asset impairments.
•We announced in January 2019 a restructuring in connection with strategic changes for our Calvin Klein business (the “Calvin Klein restructuring”). The strategic changes included (i) the closure of the CALVIN KLEIN 205 W39 NYC brand (formerly Calvin Klein Collection), (ii) the closure of the flagship store on Madison Avenue in New York, New York, (iii) the restructuring of the Calvin Klein creative and design teams globally, and (iv) the consolidation of operations for the men’s Calvin Klein Sportswear and Calvin Klein Jeans businesses. All costs related to this restructuring were incurred by the end of 2019. We recorded pre-tax costs of $103 million during 2019 in connection with the Calvin Klein restructuring, consisting of a $30 million noncash lease asset impairment resulting from the closure of the flagship store on Madison Avenue in New York, New York, $26 million of contract termination and other costs, $26 million of severance, $13 million of inventory markdowns and $9 million of other noncash asset impairments. We recorded pre-tax costs of $41 million in the fourth quarter of 2018, consisting of $27 million of severance, $7 million of noncash asset impairments, $4 million of contract termination and other costs and $2 million of inventory markdowns.
Our Tommy Hilfiger and Calvin Klein businesses each have substantial international components that expose us to significant foreign exchange risk. Our Heritage Brands business also has international components but those components are not significant to the business. Our results of operations in local foreign currencies are translated into United States dollars using an average exchange rate over the representative period. Accordingly, our revenue is unfavorably impacted during times of a strengthening United States dollar against the foreign currencies in which we generate significant revenue and favorably impacted during times of a weakening United States dollar against those currencies. Our earnings are similarly affected by foreign currency translation in periods that we generate income. However, in periods that we generate losses, as we did in 2020, the opposite is true and our results are favorably impacted by a strengthening United States dollar against the foreign currencies in which we generate losses and unfavorably impacted by a weakening United States dollar against those currencies. Over 60%
of our 2020 revenue was subject to foreign currency translation. The United States dollar strengthened against most major currencies in 2019 and into the first half of 2020, but then weakened against those currencies in the latter half of 2020, particularly the euro, which is the foreign currency we transact the most business. As a result, foreign currency translation had a slight positive impact on our revenue and net loss in 2020 as compared to 2019. We currently expect our 2021 revenue and net income to increase by approximately $180 million and $20 million, respectively, due to the impact of foreign currency translation.
There is also a transactional impact on our financial results because inventory typically is purchased in United States dollars by our foreign subsidiaries. Our results of operations will be unfavorably impacted during times of a strengthening United States dollar, as the increased local currency value of inventory results in a higher cost of goods in local currency when the goods are sold, and favorably impacted during times of a weakening United States dollar, as the decreased local currency value of inventory results in a lower cost of goods in local currency when the goods are sold. We use foreign currency forward exchange contracts to hedge against a portion of the exposure related to this transactional impact. The contracts cover at least 70% of the projected inventory purchases in United States dollars by our foreign subsidiaries. These contracts are generally entered into 12 months in advance of the related inventory purchases. Therefore, the impact of fluctuations of the United States dollar on the cost of inventory purchases covered by these contracts may be realized in our results of operations in the year following their inception, as the underlying inventory hedged by the contracts is sold. Our 2020 net loss was negatively impacted compared to 2019 as a result of this foreign currency transactional impact. We currently expect our 2021 net income to increase by approximately $30 million due to the transactional impact of foreign currency.
Further, we have exposure to changes in foreign currency exchange rates related to our €1.125 billion aggregate principal amount of senior notes that are held in the United States. The strengthening of the United States dollar against the euro would require us to use a lower amount of our cash flows from operations to pay interest and make long-term debt repayments, whereas the weakening of the United States dollar against the euro would require us to use a greater amount of our cash flows from operations to pay interest and make long-term debt repayments. We designated the carrying amount of these senior notes issued by PVH Corp., a U.S. based entity, as net investment hedges of our investments in certain of our foreign subsidiaries that use the euro as their functional currency. As a result, the remeasurement of these foreign currency borrowings at the end of each period is recorded in equity.
Retail comparable store sales discussed below refer to sales from Company-operated retail stores that have been open and operated by us for at least 12 months, as well as sales from Company-operated digital commerce sites for those businesses and regions that have operated the related digital commerce site for at least 12 months. Sales from retail stores and Company-operated digital commerce sites that are shut down during the year are excluded from the calculation of retail comparable store sales. Sales for retail stores that are relocated, materially altered in size or closed for a prolonged period of time and sales from Company-operated digital commerce sites that are materially altered are also excluded from the calculation of retail comparable store sales until such stores or sites have been in their new location or in their newly renovated state, as applicable, for at least 12 months. Retail comparable store sales are based on local currencies and comparable weeks. Due to the extensive temporary store closures in 2020, retail comparable store sales are not reported for 2020, as we do not believe this metric would be meaningful.
The following table summarizes our statements of operations in 2020, 2019 and 2018:
Total Revenue
Total revenue was $7.133 billion in 2020, $9.909 billion in 2019 and $9.657 billion in 2018. The decrease in revenue of $2.776 billion, or 28%, in 2020 as compared to 2019 was due to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and included the aggregate effect of the following items:
•The reduction of an aggregate $1.075 billion of revenue, or a 23% decrease compared to the prior year, attributable to our Tommy Hilfiger International and Tommy Hilfiger North America segments, which included a positive impact of $98 million, or 2%, related to foreign currency translation. Tommy Hilfiger International segment revenue decreased 13% (including a 3% positive foreign currency impact). Revenue in our Tommy Hilfiger North America segment decreased 41%.
•The reduction of an aggregate $1.029 billion of revenue, or a 28% decrease compared to the prior year, attributable to our Calvin Klein International and Calvin Klein North America segments, which included a positive impact of $40 million, or 1%, related to foreign currency translation. Calvin Klein International segment revenue decreased 16% (including a 2% positive foreign currency impact). Revenue in our Calvin Klein North America segment decreased 43%.
•The reduction of an aggregate $672 million of revenue, or a 44% decrease compared to the prior year, attributable to our Heritage Brands Retail and Heritage Brands Wholesale segments, which included a 12% decline resulting from the April 2020 sale of the Speedo North America business.
Our 2020 revenue included a 30% decline in our wholesale sales and a 25% decline in our direct to consumer retail revenue, which included a 69% increase in sales through our directly operated digital commerce businesses driven by strong growth across all brand businesses and regions. Our sales through digital channels as a percentage of total revenue, including the digital businesses of our traditional and pure play wholesale customers and our directly operated digital commerce businesses, doubled in 2020 as compared to 2019.
The increase in revenue of $252 million, or 3%, in 2019 as compared to 2018 was due principally to the effect of the following items:
•The net addition of an aggregate $367 million of revenue, or an 8% increase over the prior year, attributable to our Tommy Hilfiger International and Tommy Hilfiger North America segments, which included a negative impact of $129 million, or 3%, related to foreign currency translation. Tommy Hilfiger International segment revenue increased 15% (including a 5% negative foreign currency impact), driven principally by outperformance in Europe and the addition of revenue resulting from the Australia and TH CSAP acquisitions. Tommy Hilfiger International comparable store sales increased 9%, including a benefit of 4% from sales on our digital commerce sites. Revenue in our Tommy Hilfiger North America segment decreased 1%, as growth in the North America wholesale business was more than offset by a 6% decline in Tommy Hilfiger North America comparable store sales due to weakness in traffic and consumer spending trends, especially in stores located in international tourist locations.
•The net reduction of an aggregate $63 million of revenue, or a 2% decrease compared to the prior year, attributable to our Calvin Klein International and Calvin Klein North America segments, which included a negative impact of $85 million, or 2%, related to foreign currency translation. Calvin Klein International segment revenue increased 3% (including a 4% negative foreign currency impact), as continued solid growth in Europe and the addition of revenue resulting from the Australia acquisition were partly offset by the negative impacts of (i) softness experienced in Asia due, in part, to the business disruptions caused by the protests in Hong Kong SAR and the trade tensions between the United States and China and (ii) the reduction of revenue resulting from the Calvin Klein Collection closure. Calvin Klein International comparable store sales decreased 1%. Revenue in our Calvin Klein North America segment decreased 7%, driven by the effect of the G-III license and a 2% decrease in Calvin Klein North America comparable store sales due to weakness in traffic and consumer spending trends, especially in stores located in international tourist locations.
•The reduction of an aggregate $52 million of revenue, or a 3% decrease compared the prior year, attributable to our Heritage Brands Retail and Heritage Brands Wholesale segments, primarily due to weakness in the North America wholesale business and a 2% decline in comparable store sales.
We currently expect that revenue in 2021 will continue to be impacted negatively by the COVID-19 pandemic, particularly in the first quarter due to ongoing store closures, predominantly in Europe. Despite these store closures in Europe, we currently expect our international businesses to exceed 2019 pre-pandemic revenue levels in the first half of 2021. Our North America businesses are expected to remain challenged as international tourism, which is the source of a significant portion of regional revenue, is not expected to return to any significant level until the end of the year. We currently expect revenue for the full year 2021 to increase 22% to 24% compared to 2020, inclusive of a positive impact of approximately 3% related to foreign currency translation. Our 2021 revenue outlook does not contemplate new or extended broad shutdowns under government orders, or any new temporary store closures beyond what is already known and may be subject to significant material change as a result of the occurrence of any of these uncontemplated events. There continues to be uncertainty in 2021 with respect to the impact of the pandemic on our business and the businesses of our licensees and other business partners.
Gross Profit
Gross profit is calculated as total revenue less cost of goods sold and gross margin is calculated as gross profit divided by total revenue. Included as cost of goods sold are costs associated with the production and procurement of product, such as inbound freight costs, purchasing and receiving costs and inspection costs. Also included as cost of goods sold are the amounts recognized on foreign currency forward exchange contracts as the underlying inventory hedged by such forward exchange contracts is sold. Warehousing and distribution expenses are included in SG&A expenses. All of our royalty, advertising and other revenue is included in gross profit because there is no cost of goods sold associated with such revenue. As a result, our gross profit may not be comparable to that of other entities.
The following table shows our revenue mix between net sales and royalty, advertising and other revenue, as well as our gross margin for 2020, 2019 and 2018:
Gross profit in 2020 was $3.777 billion, or 53.0% of total revenue, as compared to $5.388 billion, or 54.4% of total revenue, in 2019. The 140 basis point decrease in gross margin was primarily driven by (i) increased promotional selling and inventory liquidation as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the business, (ii) increased promotional selling and inventory liquidation in conjunction with the planned exit from our Heritage Brands Retail business and (iii) the unfavorable impact of the stronger United States dollar on our international businesses that purchase inventory in United States dollars, particularly our European businesses, as the increased local currency value of inventory resulted in higher cost of goods in local currency when the goods were sold, partially offset by (iv) the impact of a change in revenue mix of our International and North America segments, as our International segments revenue was a larger proportion in 2020 than in 2019, and generally carry higher gross margins.
Gross profit in 2019 was $5.388 billion, or 54.4% of total revenue, as compared to $5.308 billion, or 55.0% of total revenue, in 2018. The 60 basis point decrease in gross margin was principally driven by (i) a gross margin decline in our Tommy Hilfiger North America business due to more promotional selling as compared to the prior year, (ii) the impact of additional inventory reserves recorded in the fourth quarter of 2019 in anticipation of lower 2020 sales trends as a result of the onset of the COVID-19 outbreak, (iii) short-lived noncash inventory valuation adjustments recorded in connection with the Australia and TH CSAP acquisitions, and (iv) the negative impact of tariffs imposed on goods imported from China into the United States. These decreases were partially offset by the impact of a change in revenue mix of our International and North America segments, as our International segments revenue was a larger proportion in 2019 than in 2018, and generally carry higher gross margins, as well as gross margin improvements realized in our Calvin Klein North America business.
We currently expect that gross margin in 2021 will increase as compared to 2020 primarily due to (i) a significant reduction in the level of promotional selling and inventory liquidation as compared to 2020, as our inventories were significantly lower as of year-end 2020, (ii) the favorable impact of the weaker United States dollar on our international businesses that purchase inventory in United States dollars, particularly our European businesses, as the decreased local currency value of inventory results in lower cost of goods in local currency when the goods are sold and (iii) the impact of a change in revenue mix of our International and North America segments, as our International segments revenue is expected to be a larger proportion in 2021 than in 2020, and generally carry higher gross margins. There continues to be uncertainty with respect to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and the businesses of our licensees and other business partners, and our gross margin may be subject to significant material change.
SG&A Expenses
Our SG&A expenses were as follows:
SG&A expenses in 2020 were $3.983 billion, or 55.8% of total revenue, as compared to $4.715 billion, or 47.6% of total revenue in 2019. The significant basis point increase was principally attributable to (i) the deleveraging of expenses driven by the significant decline in revenue resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, (ii) the pre-tax noncash impairments of our store assets resulting from the impacts of the pandemic on our business, (iii) costs incurred in connection with the planned exit from our Heritage Brands Retail business, (iv) additional accounts receivable losses recorded as a result of the pandemic, (v) additional expenses associated with pandemic-related health and safety measures and (vi) the impact of the change in revenue mix of our International and North America segments, as our International segments revenue was a larger proportion in 2020 than in 2019, and generally carry higher SG&A expenses as percentages of total revenue. These increases were partially offset
by (i) a reduction in expenses as a result of the cost savings initiatives we implemented in April 2020, including temporary furloughs, salary and incentive compensation reductions, and lower discretionary spending, (ii) pandemic-related government payroll subsidy programs primarily in international jurisdictions, as well as rent abatements negotiated with certain of our landlords, and (iii) the absence in 2020 of costs that were incurred in 2019 in connection with the Calvin Klein restructuring, the Socks and Hosiery transaction and the TH U.S store closures.
SG&A expenses in 2019 were $4.715 billion, or 47.6% of total revenue, as compared to $4.433 billion, or 45.9% of total revenue in 2018. The 170 basis point increase in SG&A expenses as a percentage of total revenue was principally attributable to (i) an increase in costs incurred in connection with the Calvin Klein restructuring, (ii) the costs incurred in connection with the Socks and Hosiery transaction, and (iii) the costs incurred in connection with the TH U.S. store closures. Also contributing to the increase was the impact of the change in revenue mix of our International and North America segments, as our International segments revenue was a larger proportion in 2019 than in 2018, and generally carry higher SG&A expenses as percentages of total revenue.
We currently expect that SG&A expenses as a percentage of revenue in 2021 will decrease as compared to 2020 primarily as a result of (i) the leveraging of expenses driven by an expected increase in revenue as compared to the prior year, (ii) cost savings resulting from the North America workforce reduction, (iii) the absence in 2021 of accounts receivable losses recorded in 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, and (iv) the absence in 2021 of noncash store asset impairments recorded in 2020 resulting from the impacts of the pandemic on our business. These decreases are expected to be partially offset by (i) the absence in 2021 of pandemic-related government payroll subsidy programs, as well as rent abatements, (ii) the absence in 2021 of temporary cost savings initiatives implemented during the first quarter of 2020 in response to the pandemic, including temporary furloughs, and salary and incentive compensation reductions, (iii) the net impact of our planned reductions in our workforce in certain international markets and in our real estate footprint, (iv) the impact of the change in revenue mix of our International and North America segments, as our International segments revenue is expected to be a larger proportion in 2021 than 2020, and generally carry higher SG&A expenses as percentages of total revenue. There continues to be uncertainty with respect to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business in 2021 and our SG&A expenses may be subject to significant material change.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Asset Impairments
We recorded noncash impairment charges of $933 million during 2020 resulting from the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, including $879 million related to goodwill and $54 million related to other intangible assets, primarily our ARROW and Geoffrey Beene tradenames. The impairments resulted from interim impairment assessments of our goodwill and other intangible assets, which we were required to perform in the first quarter of 2020 due to the adverse impacts of the pandemic on our then current and estimated future business results and cash flows, as well as the significant decrease in our market capitalization as a result of a sustained decline in our common stock price. No impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets resulted from our annual impairment test in the third quarter of 2020. Please see Note 7, “Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for further discussion.
Non-Service Related Pension and Postretirement (Income) Cost
Non-service related pension and postretirement (income) in 2020 was $(76) million as compared to non-service related pension and postretirement cost of $90 million and $5 million in 2019 and 2018, respectively. Non-service related pension and postretirement (income) in 2020 included an actuarial gain on our retirement plans of $65 million. Non-service related pension and postretirement cost in 2019 and 2018 included actuarial losses on our retirement plans of $98 million and $15 million, respectively.
Please see Note 12, “Retirement and Benefit Plans,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for further discussion.
Non-service related pension and postretirement (income) cost recorded throughout the year is calculated using actuarial valuations that incorporate assumptions and estimates about financial market, economic and demographic conditions. Differences between estimated and actual results give rise to gains and losses that are recorded immediately in earnings, generally in the fourth quarter of the year, which can create volatility in our results of operations. We currently expect that non-service related pension and postretirement (income) for 2021 will be approximately $(16) million. However, our expectation of 2021 non-service related pension and post-retirement income does not include the impact of an actuarial gain or loss. As a result of the recent volatility in the financial markets due, in part, to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, there is significant uncertainty with respect to the actuarial gain or loss we may record on our retirement plans in 2021. We may incur a significant
actuarial gain or loss in 2021 if there is a significant increase or decrease in discount rates, respectively, or if there is a difference in the actual and expected return on plan assets. Our actual 2021 non-service related pension and postretirement (income) cost may be significantly different than our projections.
Debt Modification and Extinguishment Costs
We incurred costs totaling $5 million in 2019 in connection with the refinancing of our senior credit facilities. Please see the section entitled “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below for further discussion.
Other Noncash Loss, Net
We recorded a noncash loss of $3 million in the first quarter of 2020 in connection with the Speedo transaction.
We recorded a noncash loss of $142 million in the fourth quarter of 2019 in connection with the then-pending Speedo transaction to reduce the carrying value of the business to its estimated fair value, less costs to sell, which included a noncash impairment of our perpetual license right for the Speedo trademark.
We recorded a noncash gain of $113 million in the second quarter of 2019 to write up our previously held equity investments in Gazal and PVH Australia to fair value in connection with the Australia acquisition.
Please see Note 3, “Acquisitions and Divestitures,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for further discussion of these transactions.
Equity in Net Income (Loss) of Unconsolidated Affiliates
The equity in net (loss) income of unconsolidated affiliates was a $(5) million loss in 2020 as compared to $10 million and $21 million of income in 2019 and 2018, respectively. These amounts relate to our share of income (loss) from (i) our joint venture for the TOMMY HILFIGER, Calvin Klein, Warner’s, Olga, and other licensed trademarks in Mexico, (ii) our joint venture for the TOMMY HILFIGER and Calvin Klein brands in India (our two prior joint ventures in India merged in the third quarter of 2020), (iii) our joint venture for the TOMMY HILFIGER brand in Brazil, (iv) our PVH Legwear joint venture for the TOMMY HILFIGER, Calvin Klein, IZOD, Van Heusen and Warner’s brands and other owned and licensed trademarks in the United States and Canada that began operations in December 2019, (v) PVH Australia (prior to acquiring it on May 31, 2019 through the Australia acquisition) and (vi) our investments in Gazal (prior to acquiring it on May 31, 2019 through the Australia acquisition) and Karl Lagerfeld Holding B.V. (“Karl Lagerfeld”) (prior to its impairment in the first quarter of 2020). Please see Note 5, “Investments in Unconsolidated Affiliates,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for further discussion of our investment in Karl Lagerfeld.
The equity in net (loss) income for 2020 decreased as compared to 2019 primarily due to (i) a $12 million pre-tax noncash impairment of our investment in Karl Lagerfeld recorded in the first quarter of 2020 resulting from the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on its business, and (ii) a reduction in income on our investments due to the negative impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our unconsolidated affiliates’ businesses, partially offset by (iii) income on our investment in PVH Legwear in 2020. The equity in net income for 2019 decreased as compared to 2018, primarily due to having only a partial year of income from our investments in Gazal and PVH Australia. Our investments in the continuing joint ventures are being accounted for under the equity method of accounting. Subsequent to the closing of the Australia acquisition, we began to consolidate the operations of Gazal and PVH Australia into our financial statements. Please see the section entitled “Investments in Unconsolidated Affiliates” within “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below for further discussion.
We currently expect that our equity in net income (loss) of unconsolidated affiliates for 2021 will increase as compared to 2020 primarily due to the absence in 2021 of the $12 million noncash impairment of our investment in Karl Lagerfeld recorded in the first quarter of 2020.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net increased to $121 million in 2020 from $115 million in 2019 primarily due to (i) the issuance in April 2020 of an additional €175 million principal amount of 3 5/8% senior unsecured notes due 2024 and in July 2020 of $500 million principal amount of 4 5/8% senior unsecured notes due 2025, partially offset by (ii) lower interest rates on our senior unsecured credit facilities as compared to 2019. Also included in interest expense, net in 2020 and 2019 were expenses of $5 million and $9 million, respectively, resulting from the remeasurement of a mandatorily redeemable non-controlling interest that was recognized in connection with the Australia acquisition.
Interest expense, net decreased to $115 million in 2019 from $116 million in 2018 primarily due to (i) lower interest rates on our senior unsecured credit facilities as compared to 2018, partially offset by (ii) a $9 million expense resulting from the remeasurement of a mandatorily redeemable non-controlling interest that was recognized in connection with the Australia acquisition.
Please see the section entitled “Financing Arrangements” within “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below for further discussion.
Interest expense, net in 2021 is currently expected to be approximately $110 million compared to $121 million in 2020 primarily due to (i) the impact of planned long-term debt repayments in 2021, including a $400 million voluntary repayment made in March 2021 and (ii) the absence in 2021 of a $5 million expense resulting from the remeasurement of a mandatorily redeemable non-controlling interest that was recognized in connection with the Australia acquisition, as the measurement period ended in 2020, partially offset by (iii) a full year impact in 2021 of the issuance of senior unsecured notes in April 2020 and July 2020.
Income Taxes
Income tax (benefit) expense was as follows:
The United States government enacted the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) on March 27, 2020, which includes various income tax provisions aimed at providing economic relief. There was a slight favorable cash flow impact in 2020 as a result of the deferral of income tax payments under the CARES Act. We also considered the significant adverse impact of the pandemic on our business in assessing the realizability of our deferred tax assets. Based on this assessment, we determined that no additional valuation allowances were needed against our deferred tax assets. However, we will continue to monitor the impacts on our ability to realize our deferred tax assets.
The United States Tax Cuts and Job Act of 2017 (the “U.S. Tax Legislation”) was enacted on December 22, 2017. The U.S. Tax Legislation is comprehensive and significantly revised the United States tax code. We completed our final analysis of the impacts of the U.S. Tax Legislation in the fourth quarter of 2018 and recorded a net tax benefit of $25 million to adjust the provisional amount recorded in 2017, during the measurement period allowed by the Securities and Exchange Commission. The $25 million net tax benefit included the release of a $26 million valuation allowance on our foreign tax credits, partially offset by a $2 million expense related to the remeasurement of our net United States deferred tax liabilities.
We file income tax returns in more than 40 international jurisdictions each year. A substantial amount of our earnings are in international jurisdictions, particularly in the Netherlands and Hong Kong SAR, where income tax rates, coupled with special rates levied on income from certain of our jurisdictional activities, are lower than the United States statutory income tax rate. We expect to benefit from these special rates until 2022.
Our effective income tax benefit rate for 2020 was lower than the United States statutory income tax rate primarily due to (i) the unfavorable impact of the $879 million of pre-tax goodwill impairment charges, which were mostly non-deductible, and resulted in a 13.3% decrease to our effective income tax rate, (ii) the tax on foreign earnings in excess of a deemed return on tangible assets of foreign corporations (known as “GILTI”), (iii) the mix of foreign and domestic pre-tax results and (iv) a $33 million expense related to the remeasurement of certain of our net deferred tax liabilities in connection with the legislation enacted in the Netherlands known as the “2021 Dutch Tax Plan,” which became effective on January 1,
2021 and resulted in a decrease to our effective income tax rate of 2.8%, partially offset by (v) the favorable impact on certain liabilities for uncertain tax positions resulting from the expiration of applicable statutes of limitation, which resulted in an increase to our effective income tax rate of 2.1%.
The effective income tax rate for 2020 was 4.7% compared to 6.5% in 2019. The effective income tax rate for 2020 reflected a $(56) million income tax benefit recorded on $(1.193) billion of pre-tax losses. The effective income tax rate for 2019 reflected a $29 million income tax expense recorded on $444 million of pre-tax income. The 2020 effective income tax rate was lower than the effective income tax rate for 2019 primarily due to (i) the impact of the $879 million of pre-tax goodwill impairment charges, which were mostly non-deductible and (ii) a reduction in certain discrete items, including the favorable impact on certain liabilities for uncertain tax positions resulting from the expiration of applicable statutes of limitation and the settlement of a multi-year audit from an international jurisdiction in 2019. The variance between the 2020 and 2019 effective income tax rates is also affected by the substantial change in our pre-tax (loss) income. As a result, the effect that discrete tax amounts have on the effective income tax rate in each year is not comparable.
Our effective income tax rate for 2019 was lower than the United States statutory income tax rate primarily due to (i) the favorable impact on certain liabilities for uncertain tax positions resulting from the expiration of applicable statutes of limitation and the settlement of a multi-year audit from an international jurisdiction, which together resulted in a benefit to our effective income tax rate of 11.8%, and (ii) the favorable impact of a tax exemption on the noncash gain recorded to write-up our existing equity investments in Gazal and PVH Australia to fair value in connection with the Australia acquisition, which resulted in a 5.4% benefit to our effective income tax rate.
The effective income tax rate for 2019 was 6.5% compared with 4.0% in 2018. The 2019 effective income tax rate was higher than the effective income tax rate for 2018 primarily due to (i) the absence of a 5.3% benefit to our 2018 effective income tax rate related to the remeasurement of certain of our net deferred tax liabilities in connection with the legislation enacted in the Netherlands known as the “2019 Dutch Tax Plan” and (ii) the absence of a 3.2% benefit to our 2018 effective income tax rate related to the U.S. Tax Legislation, partially offset by (iii) a favorable change in our uncertain tax positions activity of 8.1%, which includes the benefit to our 2019 effective income tax rate resulting from settlement of a multi-year audit from an international jurisdiction. The variance between the 2019 and 2018 effective income tax rates is also affected by the substantial change in our pre-tax income, which was $444 million in 2019 and $776 million in 2018. As a result, the effect that discrete tax amounts have on the effective income tax rate in each year is not comparable.
Our effective income tax rate for 2018 was lower than the United States statutory income tax rate primarily due to (i) a $41 million benefit from the remeasurement of certain of our net deferred tax liabilities in connection with the enactment of the 2019 Dutch Tax Plan, which resulted in a benefit to our effective income tax rate of 5.3%, (ii) the favorable impact on certain liabilities for uncertain tax positions resulting from the expiration of applicable statutes of limitation, which resulted in a benefit to our effective income tax rate of 3.7%, (iii) a net tax benefit of $25 million recorded in 2018 to adjust the provisional amount recorded in 2017 in connection with the U.S. Tax Legislation, which resulted in a benefit to our effective income tax rate of 3.2%, and (iv) the benefit of overall lower tax rates in certain international jurisdictions where we file tax returns.
We currently expect that our effective income tax rate in 2021 will be in a range of 17.5% to 19.5%. Our expectation that our effective income tax rate in 2021 will be lower than the United States statutory income tax rate is principally due to the overall benefit of certain discrete items, including the favorable impact on certain liabilities for uncertain tax positions. There continues to be uncertainty with respect to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and results of operations, which could affect our current expectation of our effective income tax rate in 2021.
Our tax rate is affected by many factors, including the mix of international and domestic pre-tax earnings, discrete events arising from specific transactions and new regulations, as well as audits by tax authorities and the receipt of new information, any of which can cause us to change our estimate for uncertain tax positions. Please see Note 9, “Income Taxes,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for further discussion.
Redeemable Non-Controlling Interest
We have a joint venture in Ethiopia with Arvind Limited, in which we own a 75% interest. We consolidate the results of PVH Ethiopia in our consolidated financial statements. PVH Ethiopia was formed to operate a manufacturing facility that produces finished products for us for distribution primarily in the United States. The manufacturing facility began operations in 2017.
The net loss attributable to the redeemable non-controlling interest in PVH Ethiopia was immaterial in 2020, 2019 and 2018. We currently expect that the net loss attributable to the redeemable non-controlling interest for 2021 will also be immaterial. Please see Note 6, “Redeemable Non-Controlling Interest,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for further discussion.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Liquidity Update
The COVID-19 pandemic had a significant impact on our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows in 2020. We currently expect the pandemic will continue to impact our cash flows from operations in 2021, including as a result of its impacts on our 2021 revenue and earnings. Given the unprecedented effects of the pandemic on our business, we took the following actions to positively impact our financial position in 2020:
•Issued $500 million principal amount of 4 5/8% senior notes due 2025 in July 2020.
•Obtained a waiver in June 2020 of the leverage and interest coverage ratios under our senior unsecured credit facilities (referred to as the “June 2020 Amendment”).
•Issued an additional €175 million principal amount of 3 5/8% senior notes due 2024 in April 2020.
•Entered into a $275 million 364-day revolving credit facility in April 2020.
•Suspended our cash dividend beginning with the second quarter of 2020.
•Suspended share repurchases under the stock repurchase program in March 2020, following $111 million in repurchases completed earlier in the first quarter of 2020.
•Focused management of our working capital, with particular focus on inventories, including reducing and cancelling inventory commitments, redeploying basic inventory items to subsequent seasons and consolidating future seasonal collections, as well as extending payment terms with our suppliers.
•Reduced capital expenditures in 2020 to $227 million from $345 million in 2019.
We ended 2020 with $1.7 billion of cash on hand and approximately $1.5 billion of borrowing capacity available under our various debt facilities. Our cash position allowed us to make a voluntary long-term debt repayment of $400 million in March 2021. We believe that we have taken and continue to take appropriate actions to manage our working capital and liquidity through the uncertainty related to the COVID-19 pandemic and are continuously reevaluating all aspects of our spending and cash flow generation as the situation evolves.
Cash Flow Summary and Trends
Cash and cash equivalents at January 31, 2021 was $1.651 billion, an increase of $1.148 billion from the $503 million at February 2, 2020. The change in cash and cash equivalents included the impact of (i) $111 million of common stock repurchases under the stock repurchase program, (ii) $169 million of net proceeds in connection with the Speedo transaction, (iii) $186 million of net proceeds from the issuance of an additional €175 million principal amount of 3 5/8% senior notes due 2024 and (iv) $494 million of net proceeds from the issuance of $500 million principal amount of 4 5/8% senior notes due 2025.
Cash flow in 2021 will be impacted by various factors in addition to those noted above and below in this “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section, including (i) planned voluntary long-term debt repayments of approximately $700 million, including the $400 million voluntary repayment made in March 2021, and (ii) remaining mandatory long-term debt repayments of approximately $23 million, subject to exchange rate fluctuations. There continues to be uncertainty in 2021 with respect to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. Our cash flows may be subject to material significant change, including as a result of the impacts of the pandemic on our 2021 earnings, delays in collection of, or inability to collect on, certain trade receivables, and other working capital changes that we may experience as a result of the pandemic. We continue to evaluate our capital allocation, including stock repurchases and reinstating dividends on our common stock.
As of January 31, 2021, approximately $678 million of cash and cash equivalents was held by international subsidiaries. Our intent is to reinvest indefinitely outside of the United States substantially all of our earnings in foreign subsidiaries. However, if management decides at a later date to repatriate these earnings to the United States, we may be required to accrue and pay additional taxes, including any applicable foreign withholding tax and United States state income taxes. It is not practicable to estimate the amount of tax that might be payable if these earnings were repatriated due to the complexities associated with the hypothetical calculation.
Operations
Cash provided by operating activities was $698 million in 2020 compared to $1.020 billion in 2019. The decrease in cash provided by operating activities as compared to 2019 was primarily driven by a significant decrease in net (loss) income as adjusted for noncash charges, partially offset by a favorable change in our working capital, including favorable changes in (i) trade receivables, primarily driven by a decline in our wholesale revenue, (ii) inventories, primarily due to focused management of our inventory, including reducing and cancelling inventory commitments and increased promotional selling, and (iii) accounts payable, primarily due to extended vendor payment terms. Our cash flows from operations in 2020 were significantly impacted by widespread temporary store closures and other significant adverse impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. In an effort to mitigate the impacts of the pandemic and preserve liquidity, we have focused and continue to focus on working capital management, in particular tightly managing inventories, which in 2020 included reducing and cancelling inventory commitments, increasing promotional selling, redeploying basic inventory items to subsequent seasons and consolidating future seasonal collections, as well as extending payment terms with our suppliers.
In connection with our 2013 acquisition of Calvin Klein, Inc. and certain affiliated companies, we were obligated to pay Mr. Calvin Klein contingent purchase price payments based on 1.15% of total worldwide net sales (as defined in the acquisition agreement, as amended) of products bearing any of the Calvin Klein brands with respect to sales made through February 12, 2018. A significant portion of the sales on which the payments to Mr. Klein were made were wholesale sales by us and our licensees and other partners to retailers. Contingent purchase price payments totaled $16 million in 2018. The final payment due to Mr. Klein was made in the second quarter of 2018.
Supply Chain Finance Program
We have a voluntary supply chain finance program (the “SCF program”) that provides our inventory suppliers with the opportunity to sell their receivables due from us to participating financial institutions at the sole discretion of both the suppliers and the financial institutions. The SCF program is administered through third party platforms that allow participating suppliers to track payments from us, and sell their receivables due from us to financial institutions. We are not a party to the agreements between the suppliers and the financial institutions and have no economic interest in a supplier’s decision to sell a receivable. Our payment obligations, including the amounts due and payment terms, are not impacted by suppliers’ participation in the SCF program.
Accordingly, amounts due to suppliers that elected to participate in the SCF program are included in accounts payable in our consolidated balance sheets and the corresponding payments are reflected in cash flows from operating activities in our consolidated statements of cash flows. We have been informed by the third party administrators of the SCF program that suppliers had elected to sell approximately $320 million of our payment obligations that were outstanding as of January 31, 2021 to financial institutions and approximately $810 million had been settled through the program during 2020.
Capital Expenditures
Our capital expenditures in 2020 were $227 million compared to $345 million in 2019 as a result of our decision to limit discretionary spending to preserve cash. More specifically, we limited capital expenditures in 2020 to certain minimum required expenditures in our retail stores and expenditures for projects then in progress, primarily related to (i) investments to support the multi-year upgrade of our platforms and systems worldwide and (ii) enhancements to our warehouse and distribution network. We currently expect that capital expenditures for 2021 will be in a range of $300 million to $325 million and will include continued investments in (i) platforms and systems worldwide, including our digital commerce platforms, and (ii) enhancements to our warehouse and distribution network.
Investments in Unconsolidated Affiliates
We own a 49% economic interest in PVH Legwear. We made payments of $2 million and $28 million to PVH Legwear during 2020 and 2019, respectively, to contribute our share of the joint venture funding.
We held an approximately 22% ownership interest in Gazal and a 50% ownership interest in PVH Australia prior to May 31, 2019. These investments were accounted for under the equity method of accounting until the closing of the Australia acquisition on May 31, 2019, on which date we derecognized our equity investments in Gazal and PVH Australia and began to consolidate the operations of Gazal and PVH Australia into our financial statements. We received aggregate dividends of $6 million and $8 million from Gazal and PVH Australia during 2019 and 2018, respectively.
We, along with Grupo Axo, S.A.P.I. de C.V., formed a joint venture (“PVH Mexico”) in 2016, in which we own a 49% economic interest. We received dividends of $7 million from PVH Mexico during 2019.
Payments made to contribute our share of the joint ventures funding are included in our net cash used by investing activities in our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the respective period. The dividends received from our investments in unconsolidated affiliates are included in our net cash provided by operating activities in our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the respective period.
Speedo Transaction
We completed the sale of our Speedo North America business to Pentland on April 6, 2020 for net proceeds of $169 million. Please see Note 3, “Acquisitions and Divestitures,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for further discussion.
TH CSAP Acquisition
We completed the acquisition of the Tommy Hilfiger retail business in Central and Southeast Asia on July 1, 2019 for $74 million. Please see Note 3, “Acquisitions and Divestitures,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for further discussion.
Acquisition of the Geoffrey Beene Tradename
We acquired the Geoffrey Beene tradename on April 20, 2018 for $17 million, of which $16 million was paid in cash. Please see Note 3, “Acquisitions and Divestitures,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for further discussion.
Australia Acquisition
We completed the Australia acquisition on May 31, 2019. This transaction resulted in a net cash payment of $59 million, including (i) a payment of $118 million, net of cash acquired of $7 million, as cash consideration for the acquisition and (ii) proceeds of $59 million related to the sale of an office building and warehouse owned by Gazal. Please see Note 3, “Acquisitions and Divestitures,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for further discussion.
Mandatorily Redeemable Non-Controlling Interest
The Australia acquisition agreement provided for key executives of Gazal and PVH Australia to exchange a portion of their interests in Gazal for approximately 6% of the outstanding shares of our previously wholly owned subsidiary that acquired 100% of the ownership interests in the Australia business. We are obligated to purchase this 6% interest within two years of the acquisition closing in two tranches. We purchased for $17 million (based on exchange rates in effect on the payment date) tranche 1 (50% of the shares) on the first anniversary of the closing, as the holders did not exercise their option to defer half of this tranche to tranche 2. We will purchase tranche 2, consisting of all remaining shares, on the second anniversary of the closing. The purchase price for the tranche 1 and tranche 2 shares is based on a multiple of the subsidiary’s adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”) less net debt as of the end of the measurement year, and the multiple varies depending on the level of EBITDA compared to a target. The $17 million payment we made in 2020 for the tranche 1 shares was presented in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows as follows: (i) $13 million as a financing cash flow, which represents the initial fair value of the liability recognized for the tranche 1 shares on the acquisition date, and (ii) $5 million, attributable to interest, as an operating cash flow.
The liability for the mandatorily redeemable non-controlling interest was $24 million as of January 31, 2021 based on exchange rates in effect on that date, which is payable in the second quarter of 2021 for the purchase of the tranche 2 shares, and was included in accrued expenses in our Consolidated Balance Sheet. Please see Note 3, “Acquisitions and Divestitures,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for further discussion.
Dividends
Dividends on common stock totaled $3 million, $11 million and $12 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
We suspended our dividends following the payment of a $0.0375 per common share dividend on March 31, 2020 in order to increase our cash position and preserve financial flexibility in response to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business. Under the terms of the June 2020 Amendment, we are not permitted to declare or pay dividends during the relief period (as defined below). Please see the section entitled “2019 Senior Unsecured Credit Facilities” below for further discussion. Future determinations regarding the declaration and payment of dividends will be at the discretion of the PVH Board of Directors and will depend on the then-existing conditions, including our results of operations, capital requirements, financial condition, any limitations on payment of dividends under the terms of our credit facilities and other relevant factors.
Acquisition of Treasury Shares
The Board of Directors has authorized over time since 2015 an aggregate $2.0 billion stock repurchase program through June 3, 2023. The program may be modified by the Board of Directors, including to increase or decrease the repurchase limitation or extend, suspend, or terminate the program, at any time, without prior notice.
We suspended share repurchases under the stock repurchase program beginning in March 2020, following the purchase of 1.4 million shares in open market transactions for $111 million completed earlier in the first quarter, in order to increase our cash position and preserve financial flexibility in response to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business. Under the terms of the June 2020 Amendment, we are not permitted to make share repurchases during the relief period. Please see the section entitled “2019 Senior Unsecured Credit Facilities” below for further discussion. The existing stock repurchase program remains authorized by the Board of Directors and we may resume share repurchases after the restrictions under the June 2020 Amendment lapse.
Repurchases under the program, when it is being used, may be made from time to time over the period through open market purchases, accelerated share repurchase programs, privately negotiated transactions or other methods, as we deem appropriate. Purchases are made based on a variety of factors, such as price, corporate requirements and overall market conditions, applicable legal requirements and limitations, trading restrictions under our insider trading policy and other relevant factors.
During 2019 and 2018, we purchased approximately 3.4 million shares and 2.2 million shares, respectively, of our common stock under the program in open market transactions for $325 million and $300 million, respectively. Purchases of $500,000 that were accrued for in the Consolidated Balance Sheet as of February 2, 2020 were paid in the first quarter of 2020. Purchases of $2 million that were accrued for in the Consolidated Balance Sheet as of February 4, 2018 were paid in 2018. As of January 31, 2021, the repurchased shares were held as treasury stock and $573 million of the authorization remained available for future share repurchases.
Treasury stock activity also includes shares that were withheld principally in conjunction with the settlement of restricted stock units and performance share units to satisfy tax withholding requirements.
Financing Arrangements
Our capital structure was as follows at the end of 2020 and 2019:
In addition, we had $1.651 billion and $503 million of cash and cash equivalents as of January 31, 2021 and February 2, 2020, respectively.
Short-Term Borrowings
We have the ability to draw revolving borrowings under the senior unsecured credit facilities discussed below in the section entitled “2019 Senior Unsecured Credit Facilities.” We had no borrowings outstanding under these facilities as of January 31, 2021. We borrowed $746 million under these facilities in March 2020 as a precautionary measure in order to
increase our cash position and preserve liquidity, given the uncertainty of the COVID-19 pandemic, and repaid $578 million as of the end of the first quarter of 2020. We repaid the remaining outstanding balance under these facilities during the second quarter of 2020. We had no borrowings outstanding under these facilities as of February 2, 2020.
We also have the ability to draw revolving borrowings under our 364-day unsecured revolving credit facility discussed below in the section entitled “2020 Unsecured Revolving Credit Facility.” We had no borrowings outstanding under this facility during 2020.
Additionally, we have the ability to borrow under short-term lines of credit, overdraft facilities and short-term revolving credit facilities denominated in various foreign currencies. These facilities provided for borrowings of up to $250 million based on exchange rates in effect on January 31, 2021 and are utilized primarily to fund working capital needs. We had no borrowings outstanding under these facilities as of January 31, 2021 and $50 million outstanding under these facilities as of February 2, 2020. The weighted average interest rate on funds borrowed as of February 2, 2020 was 2.56%. The maximum amount of borrowings outstanding under these facilities during 2020 was $97 million.
Commercial Paper
We have the ability to issue, from time to time, unsecured commercial paper notes with maturities that vary but do not exceed 397 days from the date of issuance primarily to fund working capital needs. We had no borrowings outstanding under the commercial paper note program as of January 31, 2021 and February 2, 2020. The maximum amount of borrowings temporarily outstanding under the program during 2020 was $165 million.
The commercial paper program allows for borrowings of up to $675 million to the extent that we have borrowing capacity under the United States dollar-denominated revolving credit facility included in the 2019 facilities (as defined below). Accordingly, the combined aggregate amount of (i) borrowings outstanding under the commercial paper note program and (ii) the revolving borrowings outstanding under the United States dollar-denominated revolving credit facility at any one time cannot exceed $675 million. We borrowed an aggregate $660 million under the commercial paper program and the United States dollar-denominated portion of the revolving credit facility in the first quarter of 2020 as a precautionary measure in order to increase our cash position and preserve liquidity, given the uncertainty of the COVID-19 pandemic, and repaid $450 million as of the end of the first quarter of 2020. We repaid the remaining outstanding balance during the second quarter of 2020.
2020 Unsecured Revolving Credit Facility
On April 8, 2020, we entered into a 364-day $275 million United States dollar-denominated unsecured revolving credit facility (the “2020 facility”). We may increase the commitment under the 2020 facility by an aggregate amount not to exceed $100 million, subject to certain customary conditions. The 2020 facility will mature on April 7, 2021. We paid in 2020 $2 million of debt issuance costs in connection with the 2020 facility.
Currently, our obligations under the 2020 facility are unsecured and are not guaranteed by any of our subsidiaries. However, within 120 days after the occurrence of a specified credit ratings decrease (as set forth in the 2020 facility), (i) we must cause each of our wholly owned United States subsidiaries (subject to certain customary exceptions) to become a guarantor under the 2020 facility and (ii) we and each subsidiary guarantor will be required to grant liens in favor of the collateral agent on substantially all of our respective assets (subject to customary exceptions).
The outstanding borrowings under the 2020 facility are prepayable at any time without penalty (other than customary breakage costs). The borrowings under the 2020 facility bear interest at a rate equal to an applicable margin plus, as determined at our option, either (a) a base rate determined by reference to the greater of (i) the prime rate, (ii) the United States federal funds effective rate plus 1/2 of 1.00% and (iii) a one-month reserve adjusted Eurocurrency rate plus 1.00% or (b) an adjusted Eurocurrency rate, calculated in a manner set forth in the 2020 facility.
The current applicable margin with respect to the borrowings as of January 31, 2021 was 2.250% for adjusted Eurocurrency rate loans and 1.250% for base rate loans. The applicable margin for borrowings is subject to adjustment based upon our public debt rating after the date of delivery of notice of a change in our public debt rating by Standard & Poor’s or Moody’s.
The 2020 facility requires us to comply with affirmative, negative and financial covenants, including a minimum interest coverage ratio and maximum net leverage ratio, which are subject to change in the event that, and in the same manner as, the minimum interest coverage ratio and maximum net leverage ratio covenants under the 2019 facilities are amended. We
amended the 2019 facilities in June 2020 (referred to as the “June 2020 Amendment”). Refer to the section entitled “2019 Senior Unsecured Credit Facilities” below for further discussion.
Finance Lease Obligations
Our cash payments for finance lease obligations totaled $5 million in each of 2020, 2019 and 2018.
2016 Senior Secured Credit Facilities
On May 19, 2016, we entered into an amendment to our senior secured credit facilities (as amended, the “2016 facilities”). We replaced the 2016 facilities with new senior unsecured credit facilities on April 29, 2019 as discussed in the section entitled “2019 Senior Unsecured Credit Facilities” below. The 2016 facilities, as of the date they were replaced, consisted of a $2.347 billion United States dollar-denominated Term Loan A facility and senior secured revolving credit facilities consisting of (i) a $475 million United States dollar-denominated revolving credit facility, (ii) a $25 million United States dollar-denominated revolving credit facility available in United States dollars and Canadian dollars and (iii) a €186 million euro-denominated revolving credit facility available in euro, British pound sterling, Japanese yen and Swiss francs.
2019 Senior Unsecured Credit Facilities
We refinanced the 2016 facilities on April 29, 2019 (the “Closing Date”) by entering into senior unsecured credit facilities (the “2019 facilities”), the proceeds of which, along with cash on hand, were used to repay all of the outstanding borrowings under the 2016 facilities, as well as the related debt issuance costs.
The 2019 facilities consist of a $1.093 billion United States dollar-denominated Term Loan A facility (the “USD TLA facility”), a €500 million euro-denominated Term Loan A facility (the “Euro TLA facility” and together with the USD TLA facility, the “TLA facilities”) and senior unsecured revolving credit facilities consisting of (i) a $675 million United States dollar-denominated revolving credit facility, (ii) a CAD $70 million Canadian dollar-denominated revolving credit facility available in United States dollars or Canadian dollars, (iii) a €200 million euro-denominated revolving credit facility available in euro, British pound sterling, Japanese yen, Swiss francs, Australian dollars and other agreed foreign currencies and (iv) a $50 million United States dollar-denominated revolving credit facility available in United States dollars or Hong Kong dollars. The 2019 facilities are due on April 29, 2024. In connection with the refinancing of our senior credit facilities, we paid debt issuance costs of $10 million (of which $3 million was expensed as debt modification costs and $7 million is being amortized over the term of the debt agreement) and recorded debt extinguishment costs of $2 million to write off previously capitalized debt issuance costs.
Each of the senior unsecured revolving credit facilities, except for the $50 million United States dollar-denominated revolving credit facility available in United States dollars or Hong Kong dollars, also include amounts available for letters of credit and have a portion available for the making of swingline loans. The issuance of such letters of credit and the making of any swingline loan reduces the amount available under the applicable revolving credit facility. So long as certain conditions are satisfied, we may add one or more senior unsecured term loan facilities or increase the commitments under the senior unsecured revolving credit facilities by an aggregate amount not to exceed $1.5 billion. The lenders under the 2019 facilities are not required to provide commitments with respect to such additional facilities or increased commitments.
We had loans outstanding of $1.609 billion, net of debt issuance costs and based on applicable exchange rates, under the TLA facilities, no borrowings outstanding under the senior unsecured revolving credit facilities and $18 million of outstanding letters of credit under the senior unsecured revolving credit facilities as of January 31, 2021.
The terms of the TLA facilities require us to make quarterly repayments of amounts outstanding under the 2019 facilities, which commenced with the calendar quarter ended September 30, 2019. Such required repayment amounts equal 2.50% per annum of the principal amount outstanding on the Closing Date for the first eight calendar quarters following the Closing Date, 5.00% per annum of the principal amount outstanding on the Closing Date for the four calendar quarters thereafter and 7.50% per annum of the principal amount outstanding on the Closing Date for the remaining calendar quarters, in each case paid in equal installments and in each case subject to certain customary adjustments, with the balance due on the maturity date of the TLA facilities. The outstanding borrowings under the 2019 facilities are prepayable at any time without penalty (other than customary breakage costs). Any voluntary repayments we make would reduce the future required repayment amounts.
We made payments of $14 million on our term loans under the 2019 facilities during 2020. We made payments of $71 million on our term loans under the 2019 facilities and repaid the 2016 facilities in connection with the refinancing of the senior credit facilities during 2019. We made payments of $150 million during 2018 on our term loans under the 2016 facilities.
The United States dollar-denominated borrowings under the 2019 facilities bear interest at a rate equal to an applicable margin plus, as determined at our option, either (a) a base rate determined by reference to the greater of (i) the prime rate, (ii) the United States federal funds effective rate plus 1/2 of 1.00% and (iii) a one-month reserve adjusted Eurocurrency rate plus 1.00% or (b) an adjusted Eurocurrency rate, calculated in a manner set forth in the 2019 facilities.
The Canadian dollar-denominated borrowings under the 2019 facilities bear interest at a rate equal to an applicable margin plus, as determined at our option, either (a) a Canadian prime rate determined by reference to the greater of (i) the rate of interest per annum that Royal Bank of Canada establishes as the reference rate of interest in order to determine interest rates for loans in Canadian dollars to its Canadian borrowers and (ii) the average of the rates per annum for Canadian dollar bankers' acceptances having a term of one month or (b) an adjusted Eurocurrency rate, calculated in a manner set forth in the 2019 facilities.
Borrowings available in Hong Kong dollars under the 2019 facilities bear interest at a rate equal to an applicable margin plus an adjusted Eurocurrency rate, calculated in a manner set forth in the 2019 facilities.
The borrowings under the 2019 facilities in currencies other than United States dollars, Canadian dollars or Hong Kong dollars bear interest at a rate equal to an applicable margin plus an adjusted Eurocurrency rate, calculated in a manner set forth in the 2019 facilities.
The current applicable margin with respect to the TLA facilities and each revolving credit facility as of January 31, 2021 was 1.625% for adjusted Eurocurrency rate loans and 0.625% for base rate or Canadian prime rate loans, which reflects an increase of 0.25% as set forth in the June 2020 Amendment (as defined below). The applicable margin for borrowings under the TLA facilities and the revolving credit facilities is subject to adjustment (i) after the date of delivery of the compliance certificate and financial statements, with respect to each of our fiscal quarters, based upon our net leverage ratio, except during the relief period (as defined below), or (ii) after the date of delivery of notice of a change in our public debt rating by Standard & Poor’s or Moody’s.
We entered into interest rate swap agreements designed with the intended effect of converting notional amounts of our variable rate debt obligation to fixed rate debt. Under the terms of the agreements, for the outstanding notional amount, our exposure to fluctuations in the one-month LIBOR is eliminated and we pay a fixed rate plus the current applicable margin. The following interest rate swap agreements were entered into or in effect during 2020, 2019 and 2018:
The notional amounts of the outstanding interest rate swaps that commenced in February 2019 are adjusted according to pre-set schedules during the terms of the swap agreements such that, based on our projections for future debt repayments, our outstanding debt under the USD TLA facility is expected to always equal or exceed the combined notional amount of the then-outstanding interest rate swaps.
Our 2019 facilities require us to comply with customary affirmative, negative and financial covenants including a minimum interest coverage ratio and a maximum net leverage ratio. Given the disruption to our business caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and to ensure financial flexibility, we amended these facilities in June 2020 to provide temporary relief of certain financial covenants until the date on which a compliance certificate is delivered for the second quarter of 2021 (the “relief period”) unless we elect earlier to terminate the relief period and satisfy the conditions for doing so (the “June 2020 Amendment”). The June 2020 Amendment provides for the following during the relief period, among other things, the (i) suspension of compliance with the maximum net leverage ratio through and including the first quarter of 2021, (ii) suspension of the minimum interest coverage ratio through and including the first quarter of 2021, (iii) addition of a minimum liquidity covenant of $400 million, (iv) addition of a restricted payment covenant and (v) imposition of stricter limitations on the incurrence of indebtedness and liens. The limitation on restricted payments requires that we suspend payments of dividends on our common stock and purchases of shares under our stock repurchase program during the relief period. The June 2020 Amendment also provides that during the relief period the applicable margin will be increased 0.25%. In addition, under the June 2020 Amendment, in the event there is a specified credit ratings downgrade by Standard & Poor’s and Moody’s during the relief period (as set forth in the June 2020 Amendment), within 120 days thereafter (i) we must cause each of our wholly owned United States subsidiaries (subject to certain customary exceptions) to become a guarantor under the 2019 facilities and (ii) we and each subsidiary guarantor will be required to grant liens in favor of the collateral agent on substantially all of our respective assets (subject to customary exceptions). As of January 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all applicable financial and non-financial covenants (as amended) under these facilities.
We expect to maintain compliance with the financial covenants (as amended) under the 2019 facilities for at least the next 12 months based on our current forecasts. If the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business worsen and our earnings and operating cash flows do not recover as currently estimated by us, there can be no assurance that we will be able to maintain compliance with our financial covenants (as amended) in the future. There can be no assurance that we would be able to obtain future waivers in a timely manner, on terms acceptable to us, or at all. If we were not able to maintain compliance or obtain a future covenant waiver under our credit facilities, there can be no assurance that we would be able to raise sufficient debt or equity capital, or divest assets, to refinance or repay such facilities.
7 3/4% Debentures Due 2023
We have outstanding $100 million of debentures due November 15, 2023 that accrue interest at the rate of 7 3/4%. The debentures are not redeemable at our option prior to maturity.
3 5/8% Euro Senior Notes Due 2024
We have outstanding €525 million principal amount of 3 5/8% senior notes due July 15, 2024, of which €175 million principal amount was issued on April 24, 2020. Interest on the notes is payable in euros. We paid €3 million ($3 million based on exchange rates in effect on the payment date) of fees in connection with the issuance of the additional €175 million notes. We may redeem some or all of these notes at any time prior to April 15, 2024 by paying a “make whole” premium plus any accrued and unpaid interest. In addition, we may redeem some or all of these notes on or after April 15, 2024 at their principal amount plus any accrued and unpaid interest.
4 5/8% Senior Notes Due 2025
We issued on July 10, 2020, $500 million principal amount of 4 5/8% senior notes due July 10, 2025. The interest rate payable on the notes is subject to adjustment if either Standard & Poor’s or Moody’s, or any substitute rating agency, as defined in the indenture governing the notes, downgrades the credit rating assigned to the notes. We paid $6 million of fees in connection with the issuance of the notes. We may redeem some or all of these notes at any time prior to June 10, 2025 by paying a “make whole” premium plus any accrued and unpaid interest. In addition, we may redeem some or all of these notes on or after June 10, 2025 at their principal amount plus any accrued and unpaid interest.
3 1/8% Euro Senior Notes Due 2027
We have outstanding €600 million principal amount of 3 1/8% senior notes due December 15, 2027. Interest on the notes is payable in euros. We may redeem some or all of these notes at any time prior to September 15, 2027 by paying a “make whole” premium plus any accrued and unpaid interest. In addition, we may redeem some or all of these notes on or after September 15, 2027 at their principal amount plus any accrued and unpaid interest.
Our financing arrangements contain financial and non-financial covenants and customary events of default. As of January 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all applicable financial and non-financial covenants under our financing arrangements.
As of January 31, 2021, our issuer credit was rated BBB- by Standard & Poor’s with a negative outlook and our corporate credit was rated Baa3 by Moody’s with a stable outlook, and our commercial paper was rated A-3 by Standard & Poor’s and P-3 by Moody’s. In assessing our credit strength, we believe that both Standard & Poor’s and Moody’s considered, among other things, our capital structure and financial policies, our consolidated balance sheet, our historical acquisition activity and other financial information, as well as industry and other qualitative factors.
Please see Note 8, “Debt,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for further discussion of our debt.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes, as of January 31, 2021, our contractual cash obligations by future period:
______________________
(1)At January 31, 2021, the outstanding principal balance under our senior unsecured Term Loan A facilities was $1.614 billion, which requires mandatory payments through April 29, 2024 (according to the mandatory repayment schedules). We also had outstanding $100 million of 7 3/4% debentures due November 15, 2023, $637 million of 3 5/8% senior unsecured euro notes due July 15, 2024, $500 million of 4 5/8% senior unsecured notes due July 10, 2025 and $728 million of 3 1/8% senior unsecured euro notes due December 15, 2027.
(2)We lease Company-operated free-standing retail store locations, warehouses, distribution centers, showrooms, office space and a factory in Ethiopia, as well as certain equipment and other assets. Please see Note 16, “Leases,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for further information.
(3)Represents contractual commitments that are enforceable and legally binding for goods on order and not received or paid for as of January 31, 2021. Inventory purchase commitments also include fabric commitments with our suppliers, which secure a portion of our material needs for future seasons. Substantially all of these goods are expected to be received and the related payments are expected to be made in 2021. This amount does not include foreign currency forward exchange contracts that we have entered into to manage our exposure to exchange rate changes with respect to certain of these purchases. Please see Note 10, “Derivative Financial Instruments,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for further information.
(4)Our minimum contractual royalty payments arise under several license agreements we have with third parties, each of which has different terms. Agreements typically require us to make minimum payments to the licensors of the licensed trademarks based on expected or required minimum levels of sales of licensed products, as well as additional royalty payments based on a percentage of sales when our sales exceed such minimum sales. Certain of our license agreements require that we pay a specified percentage of net sales to the licensor for advertising and promotion of the licensed products, in some cases requiring a minimum amount to be paid. Any advertising payments, with the exception of minimum payments to licensors, are excluded from the minimum contractual royalty payments shown in the table. There is no guarantee that we will exceed the minimum payments under any of these license agreements.
(5)We have an unfunded, non-qualified supplemental defined benefit plan covering certain retired executives under which the participants will receive a predetermined amount during the 10 years following the attainment of age 65, provided that prior to the termination of employment with us, the participant has been in such plan for at least 10 years and has attained age 55.
(6)Information-technology, sponsorships and other commitments represent future cash obligations related to (i) information-technology related service agreements, (ii) sponsorship and advertising agreements, including agreements relating to our sponsorship of Mercedes-AMG Petronas Motorsport in Formula OneTM racing and certain other similar sponsorships, as well as agreements with celebrities and models and (iii) the mandatorily redeemable non-controlling interest that was recognized in connection with the Australia acquisition, of which the portion related to tranche 1 shares was paid in 2020 and the portion related to tranche 2 shares is payable in 2021 and is included in the table above. Please see Note 3, “Acquisitions and Divestitures,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for further discussion.
Not included in the above table are contributions to our qualified defined benefit pension plans, or payments to employees and retirees in connection with our unfunded supplemental executive retirement, supplemental pension and postretirement health plans. Contractual cash obligations for these plans cannot be determined due to the number of assumptions required to estimate our future benefit obligations, including return on assets, discount rate and future compensation increases. The liabilities associated with these plans, together with the liability for the non-qualified supplemental defined benefit plans included in the above table, are presented in Note 12, “Retirement and Benefit Plans,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report. Currently, we do not expect to make any material contributions to our pension plans in 2021. Our actual contributions may differ from our planned contributions due to many factors, including changes in tax and other benefit laws, or significant differences between expected and actual pension asset performance or interest rates.
Not included in the above table are $157 million of net potential cash obligations associated with uncertain tax positions due to the uncertainty regarding the future cash outflows associated with such obligations. Please see Note 9, “Income Taxes,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for further information related to uncertain tax positions.
Not included in the above table are $45 million of asset retirement obligations related to leased office and retail store locations due to the uncertainty of timing of future cash outflows associated with such obligations. Please see Note 22, “Other Comments,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for further information related to asset retirement obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have a material current effect, or that are reasonably likely to have a material future effect, on our financial position, changes in financial position, revenue, expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
MARKET RISK
Financial instruments held by us as of January 31, 2021 include cash and cash equivalents, short-term borrowings, long-term debt, foreign currency forward exchange contracts and interest rate swap agreements. Note 11, “Fair Value Measurements,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report outlines the fair value of our financial instruments as of January 31, 2021. Cash and cash equivalents held by us are affected by short-term interest rates, which are currently low. The potential for a significant decrease in short-term interest rates is low due to the currently low rates of return we are receiving on our cash and cash equivalents and, therefore, a further decrease would not have a material impact on our interest income. However, there is potential for a more significant increase in short-term interest rates, which could have a more material impact on our interest income. Given our balance of cash and cash equivalents at January 31, 2021, the effect of a 10 basis point change in short-term interest rates on our interest income would be approximately $1.7 million annually. Borrowings under the 2019 facilities and 2020 facility bear interest at a rate equal to an applicable margin plus a variable rate. As such, the 2019 facilities and 2020 facility expose us to market risk for changes in interest rates. We have entered into interest rate swap agreements for the intended purpose of reducing our exposure to interest rate volatility. As of January 31, 2021, after taking into account the effect of our interest rate swap agreements that were in effect as of such date, approximately 70% of our long-term debt was at a fixed interest rate, with the remainder at variable interest rates. Given our long-term debt position at January 31, 2021, the effect of a 10 basis point change in interest rates on our variable interest expense would be approximately $500,000 annually. Please refer to “Liquidity and Capital Resources” above for further discussion of our credit facilities and interest rate swap agreements.
Our Tommy Hilfiger and Calvin Klein businesses each have substantial international components that expose us to significant foreign exchange risk. Our Heritage Brands business also has international components but those components are not significant to the business. Over 60% of our $7.133 billion of revenue in 2020 and over 50% of our $9.909 billion of revenue in 2019 was generated outside of the United States. Changes in exchange rates between the United States dollar and other currencies can impact our financial results in two ways: a translational impact and a transactional impact.
The translational impact refers to the impact that changes in exchange rates can have on our results of operations and financial position. The functional currencies of our foreign subsidiaries are generally the applicable local currencies. Our consolidated financial statements are presented in United States dollars. The results of operations in local foreign currencies are translated into United States dollars using an average exchange rate over the representative period and the assets and liabilities in local foreign currencies are translated into United States dollars using the closing exchange rate at the balance sheet date.
Foreign exchange differences that arise from the translation of our foreign subsidiaries’ assets and liabilities into United States dollars are recorded as foreign currency translation adjustments in other comprehensive income (loss). Accordingly, our other comprehensive income (loss) will be unfavorably impacted during times of a strengthening United States dollar, particularly against the euro, the Brazilian real, the Japanese yen, the Korean won, the British pound sterling, the Australian dollar, the Canadian dollar and the Chinese yuan renminbi, and favorably impacted during times of a weakening United States dollar against those currencies. Our results of operations will be similarly affected by foreign currency translation in periods that we generate income. However, in periods that we generate losses, as we did in 2020, the opposite is true and our results are favorably impacted by a strengthening United States dollar against the foreign currencies in which we generate losses and unfavorably impacted by a weakening United States dollar against those currencies.
Foreign currency translation had a slight positive impact on our revenue and net loss in 2020 as compared to 2019. We currently expect our 2021 revenue and net income to increase by approximately $180 million and $20 million, respectively, due to the impact of foreign currency translation.
In 2020, we recognized favorable foreign currency translation adjustments of $279 million within other comprehensive income (loss) principally driven by a weakening of the United States dollar against the euro of 10% since February 2, 2020. Our foreign currency translation adjustments recorded in other comprehensive income (loss) are significantly impacted by the substantial amount of goodwill and other intangible assets denominated in the euro, which represented 38% of our $6.5 billion total goodwill and other intangible assets as of January 31, 2021. This translational impact was partially mitigated by the change in the fair value of our net investment hedges discussed below.
A transactional impact on financial results is common for apparel companies operating outside the United States that purchase goods in United States dollars, as is the case with most of our foreign operations. Our results of operations will be unfavorably impacted during times of a strengthening United States dollar, as the increased local currency value of inventory results in a higher cost of goods in local currency when the goods are sold, and favorably impacted during times of a weakening United States dollar, as the decreased local currency value of inventory results in a lower cost of goods in local currency when the goods are sold. We also have exposure to changes in foreign currency exchange rates related to certain intercompany transactions and SG&A expenses. We currently use and plan to continue to use foreign currency forward exchange contracts or other derivative instruments to mitigate the cash flow or market value risks associated with these inventory and intercompany transactions, but we are unable to entirely eliminate these risks. The foreign currency forward exchange contracts cover at least 70% of the projected inventory purchases in United States dollars by our foreign subsidiaries.
Our 2020 net loss was negatively impacted compared to 2019 as a result of this foreign currency transactional impact. We currently expect our 2021 net income to increase by approximately $30 million due to the transactional impact of foreign currency.
Given our foreign currency forward exchange contracts outstanding at January 31, 2021, the effect of a 10% change in foreign currency exchange rates against the United States dollar would result in a change in the fair value of these contracts of approximately $105 million. Any change in the fair value of these contracts would be substantially offset by a change in the fair value of the underlying hedged items.
In order to mitigate a portion of our exposure to changes in foreign currency exchange rates related to the value of our investments in foreign subsidiaries denominated in the euro, we designated the carrying amount of our €1.125 billion aggregate principal amount of senior notes issued by PVH Corp., a U.S.-based entity, as net investment hedges of our investments in certain of our foreign subsidiaries that use the euro as their functional currency. The effect of a 10% change in the euro against the United States dollar would result in a change in the fair value of the net investment hedges of approximately $135 million. Any change in the fair value of the net investment hedges would be more than offset by a change in the value of our investments in certain of our European subsidiaries. Additionally, during times of a strengthening United States dollar against the euro, we would be required to use a lower amount of our cash flows from operations to pay interest and make long-term debt repayments on our euro-denominated senior notes, whereas during times of a weakening United States dollar against the euro, we would be required to use a greater amount of our cash flows from operations to pay interest and make long-term debt repayments on these notes.
Included in the calculations of expense and liabilities for our pension plans are various assumptions, including return on assets, discount rates, mortality rates and future compensation increases. Actual results could differ from these assumptions, which would require adjustments to our balance sheet and could result in volatility in our future pension expense. Holding all other assumptions constant, a 1% change in the assumed rate of return on assets would result in a change to 2021 net benefit
cost related to the pension plans of approximately $7 million. Likewise, a 0.25% change in the assumed discount rate would result in a change to 2021 net benefit cost of approximately $48 million.
SEASONALITY
Our business generally follows a seasonal pattern. Our wholesale businesses tend to generate higher levels of sales in the first and third quarters, while our retail businesses tend to generate higher levels of sales in the fourth quarter. Royalty, advertising and other revenue tends to be earned somewhat evenly throughout the year, although the third quarter has the highest level of royalty revenue due to higher sales by licensees in advance of the holiday selling season. The COVID-19 pandemic has disrupted these patterns, however. We otherwise expect this seasonal pattern will generally continue. Working capital requirements vary throughout the year to support these seasonal patterns and business trends.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
Please see Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for a discussion of recently issued and adopted accounting standards.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Our consolidated financial statements are based on the selection and application of significant accounting policies, which require management to make significant estimates and assumptions. Our significant accounting policies are outlined in Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report. We believe that the following are the more critical judgmental areas in the application of our accounting policies that currently affect our financial position and results of operations:
Sales allowances and returns-We have arrangements with many of our department and specialty store customers to support their sales of our products. We establish accruals which, based on a review of the individual customer arrangements and the expected performance of our products in their stores, we believe will be required to satisfy our sales allowance obligations. We also establish accruals, which are based on historical experience, an evaluation of current sales trends and market conditions, and authorized amounts, that we believe are necessary to provide for sales allowances and inventory returns. It is possible that the accrual estimates could vary from actual results, which would require adjustment to the allowance and returns accruals.
Inventories-Inventories are comprised principally of finished goods and are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value, except for certain retail inventories in North America that are stated at the lower of cost or market using the retail inventory method. Cost for substantially all wholesale inventories in North America and certain wholesale and retail inventories in Asia is determined using the first-in, first-out method. Cost for all other inventories is determined using the weighted average cost method. We review current business trends, inventory aging and discontinued merchandise categories to determine adjustments which we estimate will be needed to liquidate existing clearance inventories and record inventories at either the lower of cost or net realizable value or the lower of cost or market using the retail inventory method, as applicable. We believe that all inventory write-downs required at January 31, 2021 have been recorded. Our historical estimates of inventory reserves have not differed materially from actual results. If market conditions were to change, including as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is possible that the required level of inventory reserves would need to be adjusted.
Asset impairments-We determined during 2020, 2019 and 2018 that certain long-lived assets were not recoverable, which resulted in us recording impairment charges. The long-lived asset impairments in 2020, primarily related to certain retail store and shop-in-shop assets, including property, plant and equipment and operating lease-right-of-use assets, were as a result of the significant adverse impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, the impact of the shift in consumer buying trends from our brick and mortar retail stores to digital channels, and our decision in July 2020 to exit from the Heritage Brands Retail business by mid-2021. We also determined during 2020 that certain finite-lived customer relationship intangible assets were impaired due to the adverse impacts of the pandemic on the current and projected performance of the underlying businesses. The long-lived asset impairments in 2019 and 2018, primarily related to certain retail store and shop-in-shop assets, including property, plant and equipment and operating lease right-of-use assets, were primarily as a result of the closure of certain flagship and anchor stores in the United States and the financial performance in certain of our retail stores and shop-in-shops.
In addition, we determined during 2020 that our equity method investment in Karl Lagerfeld was impaired as a result of the adverse impacts of the pandemic on recent and projected business results.
In order to calculate these impairment charges, we estimated the undiscounted future cash flows and the related fair value of each asset. Undiscounted future cash flows were estimated using current sales trends and other factors and, in the case of operating lease right-of-use assets, using estimated market rents. If different assumptions had been used, the recorded impairment charges could have been significantly higher or lower. Please see Note 5, “Investments in Unconsolidated Affiliates,” Note 7, “Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets,” and Note 11, “Fair Value Measurements,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for further discussion of the circumstances surrounding these impairments and the assumptions related to the impairment charges.
Allowance for credit losses on trade receivables-Trade receivables, as presented in our Consolidated Balance Sheets, are net of an allowance for credit losses. An allowance for credit losses is determined through an analysis of the aging of accounts receivable and assessments of collectibility based on historical trends, the financial condition of our customers and licensees, including any known or anticipated bankruptcies, and an evaluation of current economic conditions as well as our expectations of conditions in the future. Because we cannot predict future changes in economic conditions and in the financial stability of our customers with certainty, including as a result of uncertainties surrounding the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, actual future losses from uncollectible accounts may differ from our estimates and could impact our allowance for credit losses.
Income taxes-Deferred income tax balances reflect the effects of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities and their tax bases and are stated at enacted tax rates expected to be in effect when taxes are actually paid or recovered. Deferred tax assets are evaluated for future realization and reduced by a valuation allowance to the extent we believe a portion will not be realized. We consider many factors when assessing the likelihood of future realization of our deferred tax assets, including our recent earnings experience and expectations of future taxable income by taxing jurisdiction, the carryforward periods available to us for tax reporting purposes and other relevant factors. The actual realization of deferred tax assets may differ significantly from the amounts we have recorded.
During the ordinary course of business, there are many transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax determination is uncertain. Accounting for income taxes requires a two-step approach to recognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if available evidence indicates it is more likely than not that the tax position will be fully sustained upon review by taxing authorities, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount with a greater than 50 percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. For tax positions that are 50 percent or less likely of being sustained upon audit, we do not recognize any portion of that benefit in the financial statements. We consider many factors when evaluating and estimating our tax positions and tax benefits, which may require periodic adjustments and which may not accurately anticipate actual outcomes. Our actual results have differed materially in the past and could differ materially in the future from our current estimates.
Goodwill and other intangible assets-Goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment annually, at the beginning of the third quarter of each fiscal year, and between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would indicate that it is more likely than not that the carrying amount may be impaired. Impairment testing for goodwill is done at the reporting unit level. A reporting unit is defined as an operating segment or one level below the operating segment, called a component. However, two or more components of an operating segment will be aggregated and deemed a single reporting unit if the components have similar economic characteristics. Impairment testing for other indefinite-lived intangible assets is done at the individual asset level.
We assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is necessary to perform a more detailed quantitative impairment test for goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets. We may elect to bypass the qualitative assessment and proceed directly to the quantitative test for any reporting units or indefinite-lived intangible assets. Qualitative factors that we consider as part of our assessment include a change in our market capitalization and its implied impact on reporting unit fair value, a change in our weighted average cost of capital, industry and market conditions, macroeconomic conditions, trends in product costs and financial performance of our businesses. If we perform the quantitative test for any reporting units or indefinite-lived intangible assets, we generally use a discounted cash flow method to estimate fair value. The discounted cash flow method is based on the present value of projected cash flows. Assumptions used in these cash flow projections are generally consistent with our internal forecasts. The estimated cash flows are discounted using a rate that represents our weighted average cost of capital. The weighted average cost of capital is based on a number of variables, including the equity-risk premium and risk-free interest rate. Management believes the assumptions used for the impairment tests are consistent with those that would be utilized by a market participant performing similar analysis and valuations. Adverse changes in future market conditions or weaker operating results compared to our expectations may impact our projected cash flows and estimates of weighted average cost of capital, which could result in a potential impairment charge if we are unable to recover the carrying value of our
goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets. For goodwill, if the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess, limited to the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. For indefinite-lived intangible assets, an impairment loss is recognized to the extent the carrying amount of the asset exceeds its fair value. Our policy reflects an update to accounting guidance adopted in the first quarter of 2020 that eliminated the previous requirement to calculate the implied fair value of goodwill to measure the amount of the goodwill impairment charge, if any, under a second step to the goodwill impairment test. Please see the “Recently Adopted Accounting Guidance” section of Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for further discussion.
Goodwill Impairment Testing
2020 Goodwill Interim Impairment Test
We determined in the first quarter of 2020 that the significant adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, including an unprecedented material decline in revenue and earnings and an extended decline in our stock price and associated market capitalization, was a triggering event that required us to perform a quantitative interim goodwill impairment test. As a result of the interim test performed, we recorded $879 million of noncash impairment charges in the first quarter of 2020, which was included in goodwill and other intangible asset impairments in our Consolidated Statement of Operations. The impairment charges, which related to the Heritage Brands Wholesale, Calvin Klein Retail North America, Calvin Klein Wholesale North America, Calvin Klein Licensing and Advertising International, and Calvin Klein International reporting units, were recorded to our segments as follows: $198 million in the Heritage Brands Wholesale segment, $287 million in the Calvin Klein North America segment, and $394 million in the Calvin Klein International segment.
Of these reporting units, Calvin Klein Wholesale North America, Calvin Klein Licensing and Advertising International, and Calvin Klein International were determined to be partially impaired. The remaining carrying amount of goodwill allocated to these reporting units as of the date of our interim test was $162 million, $143 million and $347 million, respectively. Holding all other assumptions used in the interim test constant, a 100 basis point change in the annual revenue growth rate assumptions for these businesses would result in a change to the estimated fair value of the reporting units of approximately $80 million, $20 million and $140 million, respectively. Likewise, a 100 basis point change in the weighted average cost of capital would result in a change to the estimated fair value of the reporting units of approximately $60 million, $15 million and $125 million, respectively. While these reporting units were not determined to be fully impaired in the first quarter of 2020, they may be at risk of further impairment in the future if the related businesses do not perform as projected, including if they fail to recover as planned following the COVID-19 pandemic, or if market factors utilized in the impairment analysis deteriorate, including an unfavorable change in long-term growth rates or the weighted average cost of capital.
With respect to our other reporting units that were not determined to be impaired, the Tommy Hilfiger International reporting unit had an estimated fair value that exceeded its carrying amount, as of the date of our interim test, of $2,949 million by 5%. The carrying amount of goodwill allocated to this reporting unit was $1,558 million. Holding all other assumptions used in the interim test constant, a 100 basis point change in the annual revenue growth rate of the Tommy Hilfiger International business would result in a change to the estimated fair value of the reporting unit of approximately $355 million. Likewise, a 100 basis point change in the weighted average cost of capital would result in a change to the estimated fair value of the reporting unit of approximately $320 million. While the Tommy Hilfiger International reporting unit was not determined to be impaired in the first quarter of 2020, it may be at risk of future impairment if the related business does not perform as projected, including if it fails to recover as planned following the COVID-19 pandemic, or if market factors utilized in the impairment analysis deteriorate, including an unfavorable change in the long-term growth rate or the weighted average cost of capital.
The fair value of the reporting units for goodwill impairment testing was determined using an income approach and validated using a market approach. The income approach was based on discounted projected future (debt-free) cash flows for each reporting unit. The discount rates applied to these cash flows were based on the weighted average cost of capital for each reporting unit, which takes market participant assumptions into consideration. Estimated future operating cash flows used in the interim test were discounted at rates of 10.0%, 10.5% or 11.0%, depending on the reporting unit, to account for the relative risks of the estimated future cash flows. For the market approach, used to validate the results of the income approach method, we used both the guideline company and similar transaction methods. The guideline company method analyzes market multiples of revenue and EBITDA for a group of comparable public companies. The market multiples used in the valuation are based on the relative strengths and weaknesses of the reporting unit compared to the selected guideline companies. Under the similar transactions method, valuation multiples are calculated utilizing actual transaction prices and revenue and EBITDA data from target companies deemed similar to the reporting unit. We classified the fair values of our reporting units as Level 3 fair value measurements due to the use of significant unobservable inputs.
2020 Goodwill Annual Impairment Test
For the 2020 annual goodwill impairment test performed as of the beginning of the third quarter of 2020, we elected to perform a qualitative assessment first to determine whether it was more likely than not that the fair value of each reporting unit with allocated goodwill was less than the carrying amount.
We assessed relevant events and circumstances, including industry, market and macroeconomic conditions, as well as Company and reporting unit-specific factors. In performing this assessment, we considered the results of our quantitative interim goodwill impairment test performed in the first quarter of 2020 and the impact of (i) favorable changes in the weighted average cost of capital subsequent to the interim test, (ii) the change in our market capitalization and its implied impact on the fair value of our reporting units subsequent to the interim test, and (iii) our recent financial performance and updated financial forecasts, which were consistent with or exceeded the projections used in our interim goodwill impairment test.
After assessing these events and circumstances, we determined that it was not more likely than not that the fair value of each reporting unit with allocated goodwill was less than its carrying amount and concluded that the quantitative goodwill impairment test was not required. No impairment of goodwill resulted from our annual impairment test.
2019 Goodwill Annual Impairment Test
For the 2019 annual goodwill impairment test performed as of the beginning of the third quarter of 2019, we elected to bypass the qualitative assessment for all reporting units and proceeded directly to the quantitative impairment test using a discounted cash flow method to estimate the fair value of our reporting units. The annual goodwill impairment test during 2019 yielded estimated fair values in excess of the carrying amounts for all of our reporting units and therefore the second step of the quantitative goodwill impairment test (under previous accounting guidance in place at the time the test was performed) was not required. The reporting unit with the least excess fair value had an estimated fair value that exceeded its carrying amount by 15%. No impairment of goodwill resulted from our annual impairment test in 2019.
2019 Goodwill Interim Impairment Test
In the fourth quarter of 2019, the Speedo transaction was a triggering event that indicated that the amount of goodwill allocated to the Heritage Brands Wholesale reporting unit, the reporting unit that includes the Speedo North America business, could be impaired, prompting the need to perform an interim goodwill impairment test for this reporting unit. No goodwill impairment resulted from this interim test.
Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets Impairment Testing
2020 Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets Interim Impairment Test
We determined in the first quarter of 2020 that the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business was a triggering event that prompted the need to perform interim impairment testing of our indefinite-lived intangible assets. For the TOMMY HILFIGER, Calvin Klein, Van Heusen, Warner’s and Olga tradenames and the reacquired perpetual license rights for TOMMY HILFIGER in India, we elected to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it was more likely than not that the fair value of any asset was less than its carrying amount. For these assets, no impairment was identified as a result of our prior annual indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment test in 2019 and the fair values of these indefinite-lived intangible assets substantially exceeded their carrying amounts. The asset with the least excess fair value had an estimated fair value that exceeded its carrying amount by approximately 85% as of the date of our 2019 annual test. Considering this and other factors, we determined qualitatively that it was not more likely than not that the fair values of these indefinite-lived intangible assets were less than their carrying amounts and concluded that the quantitative impairment test in the first quarter of 2020 was not required.
For the ARROW and Geoffrey Beene tradenames and the reacquired perpetual license rights recorded in connection with the Australia acquisition, we elected to bypass the qualitative assessment and proceeded directly to the quantitative impairment test. As a result of this quantitative interim impairment testing, we recorded $47 million of noncash impairment charges in the first quarter of 2020 to write down the two tradenames. This included $36 million to write down the ARROW tradename, which had a carrying amount as of the date of our interim test of $79 million, to a fair value of $43 million, and $12 million to write down the Geoffrey Beene tradename, which had a carrying amount of $17 million, to a fair value of $5 million.
The $47 million of impairment charges recorded in the first quarter of 2020 was included in goodwill and other intangible asset impairments in our Consolidated Statement of Operations and allocated to our Heritage Brands Wholesale segment. Holding all other assumptions used in the interim test constant, a 100 basis point change in the annual revenue growth rate of the Arrow business would result in a change to the estimated fair value of the tradename of approximately $5 million. Likewise, a 100 basis point change in the weighted average cost of capital would result in a change to the estimated fair value of the ARROW tradename of approximately $5 million. Holding all other assumptions used in the interim test constant, a 100 basis point change to the annual revenue growth rate or weighted average cost of capital in the Geoffrey Beene business would result in an immaterial change to the estimated fair value of the Geoffrey Beene tradename.
With regard to the reacquired perpetual license rights recorded in connection with the Australia acquisition, we determined in the first quarter of 2020 that its fair value substantially exceeded its carrying amount and, therefore, the asset was not impaired.
The fair value of the ARROW and Geoffrey Beene tradenames was determined using an income-based relief-from-royalty method. Under this method, the value of an asset is estimated based on the hypothetical cost savings that accrue as a result of not having to license the tradename from another party. These cash flows are discounted to present value using a discount rate that factors in the relative risk of the intangible asset. We discounted the cash flows used to value the ARROW and Geoffrey Beene tradenames at a rate of 10.0%. The fair value of our reacquired perpetual license rights recorded in connection with the Australia acquisition was determined using an income approach, which estimates the net cash flows directly attributable to the subject intangible asset. These cash flows are discounted to present value using a discount rate that factors in the relative risk of the intangible asset. We discounted the cash flows used to value the reacquired perpetual license rights recorded in connection with the Australia acquisition at a rate of 10.0%. We classified the fair values of these indefinite-lived intangible assets as Level 3 fair value measurements due to the use of significant unobservable inputs.
2020 Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets Annual Impairment Test
For the 2020 annual indefinite-lived intangible assets impairment test performed as of the beginning of the third quarter of 2020, we elected to assess qualitative factors first to determine whether it was more likely than not that the fair value of any asset was less than its carrying amount.
We assessed relevant events and circumstances, including industry, market and macroeconomic conditions, as well as Company and asset-specific factors. In performing this assessment, we considered the results of our interim impairment testing performed in the first quarter of 2020 and the impact of (i) favorable changes in the weighted average cost of capital subsequent to the interim test and (ii) our recent financial performance and updated financial forecasts, which were consistent with or exceeded the projections used in our interim impairment testing.
After assessing these events and circumstances, we determined that it was not more likely than not that the fair value of our indefinite-lived intangible assets were less than their carrying amounts and concluded that a quantitative impairment test was not required. No impairment of indefinite-lived intangible assets resulted from our annual impairment test.
2019 Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets Annual Impairment Test
For the 2019 annual impairment test of all indefinite-lived intangible assets performed as of the beginning of the third quarter of 2019, except for the Australia reacquired perpetual license rights, we elected to bypass the qualitative assessment and proceeded directly to the quantitative impairment test using a discounted cash flow method to estimate fair value. For the Australia reacquired perpetual license rights, since only a few months had passed since the acquisition on May 31, 2019 and the business had performed better than initially expected, we determined qualitatively that it was not more likely than not that the fair value of these reacquired perpetual license rights were less than the carrying amount and concluded that the quantitative impairment test was not required. The fair values of all of our indefinite-lived intangible assets substantially exceeded their carrying amounts, with the exception of the Speedo perpetual license right, which had a fair value that exceeded its carrying amount by 3% at the testing date.
2019 Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets Interim Impairment Test
In the fourth quarter of 2019, the Speedo transaction was a triggering event that prompted the need to perform an interim impairment test of the Speedo perpetual license right. As a result of this interim test, the perpetual license right was determined to be impaired and an impairment charge of $116 million was recorded to other noncash loss, net in the
Consolidated Statement of Operations. Please see Note 3, “Acquisitions and Divestitures,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for further discussion of the Speedo transaction.
Please see Note 7, “Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for further discussion of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets.
There have been no significant events or change in circumstances since the date of the 2020 annual impairment testing that would indicate the remaining carrying amounts of our goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets may be impaired as of January 31, 2021. If different assumptions for our goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets impairment tests had been applied, significantly different outcomes could have resulted. There continues to be uncertainty about the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and there can be no assurance that the estimates and assumptions used in our goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets impairment testing performed in 2020 will prove to be accurate predictions of the future. For example, if general macroeconomic conditions caused by the pandemic do not recover as currently estimated by management or market factors utilized in the impairment analysis deteriorate or otherwise vary from current assumptions (including those resulting in changes in the weighted average cost of capital), industry conditions deteriorate, business conditions or strategies for a specific reporting unit change from current assumptions, including cost increases or loss of major customers, our businesses do not perform as projected, or there is an extended period of a significant decline in our stock price, we could incur additional goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment charges in the future.
Pension and Benefit Plans-Pension and benefit plan expenses are recorded throughout the year based on calculations using actuarial valuations that incorporate estimates and assumptions that depend in part on financial market, economic and demographic conditions, including expected long-term rate of return on assets, discount rate and mortality rates. These assumptions require significant judgment. Actuarial gains and losses, which occur when actual experience differs from our actuarial assumptions, are recognized in the year in which they occur and could have a material impact on our operating results. These gains and losses are measured at least annually at the end of our fiscal year and, as such, are generally recorded during the fourth quarter of each year.
The expected long-term rate of return on assets is based on historical returns and the level of risk premium associated with the asset classes in which the portfolio is invested as well as expectations for the long-term future returns of each asset class. The expected long-term rate of return for each asset class is then weighted based on the target asset allocation to develop the expected long-term rate of return on assets assumption for the portfolio. The expected return on plan assets is recognized quarterly and determined at the beginning of the year by applying the long-term expected rate of return on assets to the actual fair value of plan assets adjusted for expected benefit payments, contributions and plan expenses. At the end of the year, the fair value of the assets is remeasured and any difference between the actual return on assets and the expected return is recorded in earnings as part of the actuarial gain or loss.
The discount rate is determined based on current market interest rates. It is selected by constructing a hypothetical portfolio of high quality corporate bonds that matches the cash flows from interest payments and principal maturities of the portfolio to the timing of benefit payments to participants. The yield on such a portfolio is the basis for the selected discount rate. Service and interest cost is measured using the discount rate as of the beginning of the year, while the projected benefit obligation is measured using the discount rate as of the end of the year. The impact of the change in the discount rate on our projected benefit obligation is recorded in earnings as part of the actuarial gain or loss.
We revised during each of 2020, 2019 and 2018 the mortality assumptions used to determine our benefit obligations based on recently published actuarial mortality tables. These changes in life expectancy resulted in changes to the period for which we expect benefits to be paid. In each of these years, the decrease in life expectancy decreased our benefit obligations and future expense.
We also periodically review and revise, as necessary, other plan assumptions such as rates of compensation increases, retirement, and termination based on historical experience and anticipated future management actions. We have not historically had significant adjustments to these assumptions.
Actual results could differ from our assumptions, which would require adjustments to our balance sheet and could result in volatility in our future net benefit cost. Holding all other assumptions constant, a 1% change in the assumed rate of return on assets would result in a change to 2021 net benefit cost related to the pension plans of approximately $7 million. Likewise, a 0.25% change in the assumed discount rate would result in a change to 2021 net benefit cost of approximately $48 million.
Note 12, “Retirement and Benefit Plans,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report sets forth certain significant rate assumptions and information regarding our target asset allocation, which are used in performing calculations related to our pension plans.
Stock-based compensation-Accounting for stock-based compensation requires measurement of compensation cost for all stock-based awards at fair value on the date of grant and recognition of compensation cost over the service period for awards expected to vest. We use the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model to determine the fair value of our stock options. This model uses assumptions that include the risk-free interest rate, expected volatility, expected dividend yield and expected life of the options. The fair value of restricted stock units is determined based on the quoted price of our common stock on the date of grant. The fair value of our stock options and restricted stock units is recognized as expense over the service period, net of actual forfeitures.
The fair value of contingently issuable performance shares that are subject to market conditions is established using a Monte Carlo simulation model. Certain contingently issuable performance shares that are subject to market conditions are also subject to a holding period of one year after the vesting date. For such awards, the grant date fair value is discounted for the restriction of liquidity, which is calculated using the Chaffe model. We record expense for the awards that are subject to market conditions ratably over the vesting period, net of actual forfeitures, regardless of whether the market condition is satisfied.
Note 13, “Stock-Based Compensation,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report sets forth certain significant assumptions used to determine the fair value of our stock options and contingently issuable performance shares.