Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion is intended to assist you in understanding our financial condition and results of operations and should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Many of the amounts and percentages in this section have been rounded for convenience of presentation, but actual recorded amounts have been used in computations. Accordingly, some information may appear not to compute accurately.
Overview
PowerFleet, Inc. (together with its subsidiaries, “PowerFleet,” the “Company,” “we,” “our” or “us”) is a global leader and provider of subscription-based wireless Internet-of-Things (IoT) and machine-to-machine (M2M) solutions for securing, controlling, tracking, and managing high-value enterprise assets such as industrial trucks, trailers, containers, cargo, and light vehicles and heavy truck fleets.
As described more fully in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, on October 3, 2019, we completed the Transactions (as defined below) contemplated by (i) the Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated as of March 13, 2019 (the “Merger Agreement”), by and among I.D. Systems, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“I.D. Systems”), the Company, Pointer Telocation Ltd., a private company limited by shares formed under the laws of the State of Israel (“Pointer”), PowerFleet Israel Ltd. (f/k/a Powerfleet Israel Holding Company Ltd.), a private company limited by shares formed under the laws of the State of Israel and a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company (“PowerFleet Israel”), and Powerfleet Israel Acquisition Company Ltd., a private company limited by shares formed under the laws of the State of Israel and a wholly-owned subsidiary of PowerFleet Israel prior to the Transactions, and (ii) the Investment and Transaction Agreement, dated as of March 13, 2019, as amended by Amendment No. 1 thereto dated as of May 16, 2019, Amendment No. 2 thereto dated as of June 27, 2019 Amendment No. 3 thereto dated as of October 3, 2019 and Amendment No. 4 thereto dated as of May 13, 2020 (the “Investment Agreement,” and together with the Merger Agreement, the “Agreements”), by and among I.D. Systems, the Company, PowerFleet US Acquisition Inc., a Delaware corporation and a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company prior to the Transactions, and ABRY Senior Equity V, L.P., ABRY Senior Equity Co-Investment Fund V, L.P. and ABRY Investment Partnership, L.P. (the “Investors”), affiliates of ABRY Partners II, LLC. As a result of the transactions contemplated by the Agreements (the “Transactions”), I.D. Systems and PowerFleet Israel each became direct, wholly-owned subsidiaries of the Company and Pointer became an indirect, wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company. Prior to the Transactions, PowerFleet had no material assets, did not operate any business and did not conduct any activities, other than those incidental to its formation and matters contemplated by the Agreements. I.D. Systems was determined to be the accounting acquirer in the Transactions. As a result, the historical financial statements of I.D. Systems for the periods prior to the Transactions are considered to be the historical financial statements of PowerFleet and the results of Pointer have been included in our consolidated financial statements from the date of the Transactions.
We are headquartered in Woodcliff Lake, New Jersey, with offices located around the globe.
Our patented technologies address the needs of organizations to monitor and analyze their assets to improve safety, increase efficiency and productivity, reduce costs, and improve profitability. Our offerings are sold under the global brands PowerFleet, Pointer and Cellocator.
We deliver advanced mobility solutions that connect assets to increase visibility operational efficiency and profitability. Across our vertical markets we differentiate ourselves by being OEM agnostic and helping mixed fleets view and manage their assets similarly. All of our solutions are paired with software as a service, or SaaS, analytics platforms to provide an even deeper layer of insights. These insights include a full set of operational Key Performance Indicators, or KPI’s, to drive operational and strategic decisions. These KPI’s leverage industry comparisons to show how a company is performing versus their peers. The more data the system collects, the more accurate a client’s understanding becomes.
The analytics platform, which is integrated into our customers’ management systems, is designed to provide a single, integrated view of asset and operator activity across multiple locations that provides enterprise-wide benchmarks and peer-industry comparisons. We look for analytics, as well as the data contained therein, to differentiate us from our competitors, make a growing contribution to revenue, and add value to our solutions, and help keep us at the forefront of the wireless asset management markets we serve.
We sell our wireless mobility solutions to both corporate-level executives, division heads and site-level management within the enterprise. We also utilize channel partners such as independent dealers and original equipment manufacturers, or OEMs, who may opt for us to white label our product. Typically, our initial system deployment serves as a basis for potential expansion across the customer’s organization. We work closely with customers to help maximize the utilization and benefits of our system and demonstrate the value of enterprise-wide deployments. Post-implementation, we consult with our customers to further extend and customize the benefits to the enterprise by delivering enhanced analytics capabilities
We market and sell our solutions to a wide range of customers in the commercial and government sectors. Our customers operate in diverse markets, such as automotive manufacturing, heavy industry, retail food and grocery distribution, logistics, wholesale distribution, transportation, aviation, manufacturing, aerospace and defense, homeland security and vehicle rental.
We incurred net losses of approximately, $5.8 million, $12 million and $13.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2018, 2019 and 2020, respectively, and have incurred additional net losses since inception. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash (including restricted cash) and cash equivalents of $18.4 million, working capital of $28.9 million, and an accumulated deficit of $121.2 million. Our primary sources of cash are cash flows from operating activities, our holdings of cash, cash equivalents and investments from the sale of our capital stock and borrowings under our credit facility. To date, we have not generated sufficient cash flow solely from operating activities to fund our operations.
On January 30, 2019, we completed the acquisition (“CarrierWeb US Acquisition”) of substantially all of the assets of CarrierWeb, L.L.C. (“CarrierWeb”), an Atlanta-based provider of real-time in-cab mobile communications technology, electronic logging devices, two-way refrigerated command and control, and trailer tracking. On July 30, 2019, we completed the acquisition (the “CarrierWeb Ireland Acquisition” and together with the CarrierWeb US Acquisition, the “CarrierWeb Acquisitions”) of substantially all of the assets of CarrierWeb Services Ltd. (“CarrierWeb Ireland”), an affiliate of CarrierWeb, from e*freightrac Holding B.V., the owner of the outstanding equity of CarrierWeb Ireland. The assets we acquired in the CarrierWeb Acquisitions have been integrated into our products. The CarrierWeb Acquisitions allow the Company to offer a full complement of highly-integrated logistics technology solutions to its current customers and prospects and immediately add customers and subscriber units. The results of operations from each of the CarrierWeb Acquisitions have been included in our consolidated financial statements from the date of each such acquisition.
Critical Accounting Estimates
We have adopted various accounting policies that govern the application of accounting principles generally accepted in the United States in the preparation of our financial statements. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain accounting policies involve significant judgments and assumptions by our management that can have a material impact on the carrying value of certain assets and liabilities. We consider such accounting policies to be our critical accounting policies. The judgments and assumptions used by our management in these critical accounting policies are based on historical experience and other factors that our management believes to be reasonable under the circumstances. Because of the nature of these judgments and assumptions, actual results could differ significantly from these judgments and estimates, which could have a material impact on the carrying values of our assets and liabilities and our results of operations. Our critical accounting policies are described below.
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue from sales of systems and products and from customer SaaS and hosting infrastructure fees. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration the Company expects to receive in exchange for transferring goods or providing services. Sales, value add, and other taxes the Company collects concurrently with revenue-producing activities are excluded from revenue. Incidental items that are immaterial in the context of the contract are recognized as expense. The expected costs associated with the Company’s base warranties continue to be recognized as expense when the products are sold.
Revenue is recognized when performance obligations under the terms of a contract with our customer are satisfied. Product sales are recognized at a point in time when title transfers, when the products are shipped, or when control of the system is transferred to the customer, which usually is upon delivery of the system and when contractual performance obligations have been satisfied. For products which do not have stand-alone value to the customer separate from the SaaS services provided, the Company considers both hardware and SaaS services a bundled performance obligation. Under the applicable accounting guidance, all of the Company’s billings for equipment and the related cost for these systems are deferred, recorded, and classified as a current and long-term liability and a current and long-term asset, respectively. The deferred revenue and cost are recognized over the service contract life, ranging from one to five years, beginning at the time that a customer acknowledges acceptance of the equipment and service.
We recognize revenue for remotely hosted SaaS agreements and post-contract maintenance and support agreements beyond our standard warranties over the life of the contract. Revenue is recognized ratably over the service periods and the cost of providing these services is expensed as incurred. Amounts invoiced to customers which are not recognized as revenue are classified as deferred revenue and classified as short-term or long-term based upon the terms of future services to be delivered. Deferred revenue also includes prepayment of extended maintenance, hosting and support contracts.
We earn other service revenues from installation services, training and technical support services which are short-term in nature and revenue for these services are recognized at the time of performance or right to invoice.
We recognize revenue on non-recurring engineering services over time, on an input-cost method performance basis, as determined by the relationship of actual labor and material costs incurred to date compared to the estimated total project costs. Estimates of total project costs are reviewed and revised during the term of the project. Revisions to project costs estimates, where applicable, are recorded in the period in which the facts that give rise to such changes become known.
We also derive revenue from leasing arrangements. Such arrangements provide for monthly payments covering product or system sale, maintenance, support and interest. These arrangements meet the criteria to be accounted for as sales-type leases. Accordingly, an asset is established for the “sales-type lease receivable” at the present value of the expected lease payments and revenue is deferred and recognized over the service contract, as described above. Maintenance revenues and interest income are recognized monthly over the lease term.
Our contracts with customers may include multiple performance obligations. For such arrangements, the Company allocates revenue to each performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price. The Company generally determines standalone selling prices based on observable prices charged to customers or adjusted market assessment or using expected cost-plus margin when one is available. Adjusted market assessment price is determined based on overall pricing objectives taking into consideration market conditions and entity specific factors.
We recognize an asset for the incremental costs of obtaining the contract arising from the sales commissions to employees because the Company expects to recover those costs through future fees from the customers. The Company amortizes the asset over one to five years because the asset relates to the services transferred to the customer during the contract term of one to five years.
The Company does not disclose the value of unsatisfied performance obligations for (i) contracts with an original expected length of one year or less and (ii) contracts for which the Company recognizes revenue at the amount to which the Company has the right to invoice for services performed.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based employee compensation for all share-based payments, including grants of stock options and restricted stock, as an operating expense based on their fair values on the grant date. The Company recorded stock-based compensation expense of $2,163,000, $3,794,000 and $4,142,000 for the years ended December 31, 2018, 2019 and 2020, respectively.
We estimate the fair value of share-based option awards on the grant date using an option pricing model. The value of the portion of the award that is ultimately expected to vest is recognized as expense over the requisite service period in the Company’s consolidated statement of operations. The Company estimates forfeitures at the time of grant in order to estimate the amount of share-based awards that will ultimately vest. The estimate is based on the Company’s historical rates of forfeitures. Estimated forfeitures are revised, if necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates.
Long-lived Assets
Long-lived assets, which includes definite lived intangible assets and fixed assets, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is assessed by a comparison of the carrying amount of the assets to the future undiscounted net cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If such assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets exceeds the fair value of the assets and would be charged to earnings. Fair value is determined through various valuation techniques including discounted cash flow models, quoted market values and third-party independent appraisals, as considered necessary.
Business Combinations
Goodwill represents costs in excess of fair values assigned to the underlying net assets of acquired businesses. Goodwill and intangible assets deemed to have indefinite lives are not amortized and are tested for impairment on an annual basis and between annual tests whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. Intangible assets other than goodwill are amortized over their useful lives unless the lives are determined to be indefinite. Intangible assets are carried at cost, less accumulated amortization. Intangible assets consist of trademarks and trade names, patents, customer relationships and other intangible assets. Goodwill is tested at the reporting unit level, which is defined as an operating segment or one level below the operating segment. The Company operates in one reportable segment which is its only reporting unit. We test for an indication of goodwill impairment annually during the fourth quarter and when an indicator of impairment exists, by comparing the fair value of the reporting unit to its carrying value.
In the evaluation of goodwill for impairment, we have the option to perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether further impairment testing is necessary or to perform a quantitative assessment by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit to its carrying amount, including goodwill. Under the qualitative assessment, an entity is not required to calculate the fair value of a reporting unit unless the entity determines that it is more likely than not that its fair value is less than its carrying amount. By eliminating “Step 2” from the goodwill impairment test, the quantitative analysis of goodwill will result in an impairment loss for the amount that the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value which is limited to the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit. For the years ended December 31, 2018, 2019 and 2020, the Company performed a qualitative goodwill impairment test and did not incur an impairment charge.
We re-measure the fair value of the contingent consideration at each reporting period and any change in the fair value from either the passage of time or events occurring after the acquisition date, is recorded in earnings in the accompanying consolidated statement of operations. Actual results could differ from such estimates in future periods based on the re-measurement of the fair value.
Income taxes
We use the asset and liability method of accounting for deferred income taxes. Deferred income taxes are measured by applying enacted statutory rates to net operating loss carryforwards and to the differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets are reduced, if necessary, by a valuation allowance if it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
We recognize uncertainty in income taxes in the financial statements using a recognition threshold and measurement attribute of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. We apply the “more-likely-than-not” recognition threshold to all tax positions, commencing at the adoption date of the applicable accounting guidance, which resulted in no unrecognized tax benefits as of such date. Additionally, there have been no unrecognized tax benefits subsequent to adoption. We have opted to classify interest and penalties that would accrue according to the provisions of relevant tax law as selling, general, and administrative expenses, in the consolidated statement of operations. For the years ended December 31, 2018, 2019 and 2020, there was no such interest or penalty.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth certain items related to our statement of operations as a percentage of revenues for the periods indicated and should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our results reflect the operations of (i) Pointer from October 3, 2019, the closing date of the Transactions, (ii) the assets we acquired from CarrierWeb Ireland from July 30, 2019, the closing date of the CarrierWeb Ireland Acquisition, and (iii) the assets we acquired from CarrierWeb US from January 30, 2019, the closing date of the CarrierWeb US Acquisition. A detailed discussion of the material changes in our operating results is set forth below.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
REVENUES. Revenues increased by approximately $31.7 million, or 38.7%, to $113.6 million in 2020 from $81.9 million in 2019. The increase in revenue is attributable to a full year of revenue from the Pointer acquisition which was completed on October 3, 2019, offset by a decrease in revenue in PowerFleet due to the impact COVID-19.
Revenues from products increased by approximately $0.3 million, or 0.5%, to $45.7 million in 2020 from $45.4 million in 2019. The increase in product revenue is attributable to a full year of product revenue from the Pointer acquisition, offset by a decrease in product revenue in PowerFleet due to the impact of COVID-19.
Revenues from services increased by approximately $31.4 million, or 86.1%, to $67.9 million in 2020 from $36.5 million in 2019. The increase in service revenue is attributable to a full year of service revenue resulting from our acquisition of Pointer.
COST OF REVENUES. Cost of revenues increased by approximately $11.0 million, or 25.3%, to $54.6 million in 2020 from $43.6 million in 2019. Gross profit was $59.0 million in 2020 compared to $38.4 million in 2019. As a percentage of revenues, gross profit increased to 52.0% in 2020 from 46.8% in 2019.
Cost of products increased by approximately $0.2 million, or 0.8%, to $30.2 million in 2020 from $30.0 million in in 2019. Gross profit for products was $15.4 million in 2020 compared to $15.4 million in 2019. As a percentage of product revenues, gross profit decreased to 33.8% in 2020 from 33.9% in 2019.
Cost of services increased by approximately $10.8 million, or 79.5%, to $24.4 million in 2020 from $13.6 million in 2019. Gross profit for services was $43.6 million in 2020 compared to $22.9 million in 2019. The increase in the gross profit was attributable to the increase in service revenue resulting from a full year of operations from our acquisition of Pointer. As a percentage of service revenues, gross profit increased to 64.2% in 2020 from 62.8% in 2019.
SELLING, GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES. Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses increased by approximately $17.4 million, or 50.6%, to $51.9 million in 2020 compared to $34.5 million in 2019. The increase was principally due to our acquisition of Pointer.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT EXPENSES. Research and development expenses increased by approximately $2.1 million, or 24.1%, to $10.6 million in 2020 compared to $8.5 million in 2019 principally due to our acquisition of Pointer.
ACQUISITION-RELATED EXPENSES. Acquisition related expenses decreased to $-0- in 2020 from approximately $5.1 million in 2019 principally due to the completion of the Transactions in 2019.
INTEREST EXPENSE. Interest expense increased by $3.1 million, or 225.3%, to $4.5 million in 2020 from $1.4 million in 2019, principally due to a full year of our credit facility with Bank Hapoalim and convertible unsecured promissory notes in the aggregate principal amount of $5,000,000 (the “Notes”) that we issued to the Investors, compared to a partial year of such interest expense in 2019 and an increase in the foreign currency translation losses related to long-term debt included in interest expense.
NET LOSS ATTRIBUTABLE TO COMMON STOCKHOLDERS. Net loss was $13.6 million, or $(0.46) per basic and diluted share, for 2020 as compared to net loss of $12.0 million, or $(0.59) per basic and diluted share, for the same period in 2019. The decrease in the net loss was due primarily to the reasons described above.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018
REVENUES. Revenues increased by approximately $28.9 million, or 54.3%, to $81.9 million in 2019 from $53.1 million in 2018. The increase in revenue is attributable to an increase in revenue resulting from our acquisition of Pointer, which was completed on October 3, 2019, and an increase in PowerFleet for Vehicles solutions revenue which increased to $15.9 million in 2019 compared to $9.6 million in 2018.
Revenues from products increased by approximately $8.5 million, or 23.1%, to $45.4 million in 2019 from $36.9 million in 2018. The increase in product revenue is attributable to an increase in product revenue resulting from our acquisition of Pointer, and an increase in PowerFleet for Vehicles solutions product revenue which increased to $9.6 million in 2019 compared to $8.5 million in 2018.
Revenues from services increased by approximately $20.3 million, or 125.8%, to $36.5 million in 2019 from $16.2 million in 2018. The increase in service revenue is attributable to an increase in service revenue resulting from our acquisition of Pointer.
COST OF REVENUES. Cost of revenues increased by approximately $16.3 million, or 59.7%, to $43.6 million in 2019 from $27.3 million in 2018. Gross profit was $38.4 million in 2019 compared to $25.8 million in 2018. As a percentage of revenues, gross profit decreased to 46.8% in 2019 from 48.6% in 2018.
Cost of products increased by approximately $7.3 million, or 32.4%, to $30.0 million in 2019 from $22.6 million in in 2018. Gross profit for products was $15.4 million in 2019 compared to $14.3 million in 2018. As a percentage of product revenues, gross profit decreased to 33.9% in 2019 from 38.6% in 2018. The decrease in gross profit as a percentage of product revenue was principally due to the higher product revenue from PowerFleet for Vehicles solutions which have a lower gross profit percentage.
Cost of services increased by approximately $8.9 million, or 193.2%, to $13.6 million in 2019 from $4.6 million in 2018. Gross profit for services was $22.9 million in 2019 compared to $11.5 million in 2018. The increase in the service revenue gross profit was attributable to the increase in service revenue resulting from our acquisition of Pointer. As a percentage of service revenues, gross profit decreased to 62.8% in 2019 from 71.4% in 2018. The decrease in service gross profit as a percentage of service revenue was principally due to service revenue from the Pointer acquisition having a lower service gross margin than the historical service revenue.
SELLING, GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES. Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses increased by approximately $9.8 million, or 39.6%, to $34.5 million in 2019 compared to $24.7 million in 2018. The increase was principally due to our acquisition of Pointer.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT EXPENSES. Research and development expenses increased by approximately $1.7 million, or 24.4%, to $8.5 million in 2019 compared to $6.9 million in 2018 principally due to our acquisition of Pointer.
ACQUISITION-RELATED EXPENSES. Acquisition related expenses increased to approximately $5.1 million in 2019 compared to $-0- in 2018 principally due to the completion of the Transactions in 2019.
INTEREST EXPENSE. Interest expense increased by $1.2 million, or 693.6%, to $1.4 million in 2019 from $0.2 million in 2018, principally due to our credit facility with Bank Hapoalim and (the “Notes”) that we issued to the Investors at the closing of the Transactions, which were used to partially finance our acquisition of Pointer.
NET LOSS ATTRIBUTABLE TO COMMON STOCKHOLDERS. Net loss was $12.0 million, or $(0.59) per basic and diluted share, for 2019 as compared to net loss of $5.8 million, or $(0.34) per basic and diluted share, for the same period in 2018. The decrease in the net loss was due primarily to the reasons described above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Historically, our capital requirements have been funded primarily from the net proceeds from the issuance of our securities, including any issuances of our common stock upon the exercise of options. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash (including restricted cash), cash equivalents and marketable securities of $18.4 million and working capital of $28.9 million, compared to cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $16.7 million and working capital of $29.3 million as of December 31, 2019.
On October 3, 2019, in connection with the completion of the Transactions, we issued and sold 50,000 shares of the Series A Convertible Preferred Stock, par value $0.01 per share (the “Series A Preferred Stock”), to the Investors for an aggregate purchase price of $50,000,000 pursuant to the terms of the Investment Agreement. The proceeds received from such sale were used to finance a portion of the cash consideration payable in our acquisition of Pointer.
Also, on October 3, 2019, we issued and sold the Notes to the Investors at the closing of the Transactions. We repaid in full the aggregate principal amount of $5,000,000 and accrued interest under the Notes on October 1, 2020.
In addition, PowerFleet Israel and Pointer are party to a Credit Agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) with Bank Hapoalim B.M. (“Hapoalim”), pursuant to which Hapoalim agreed to provide PowerFleet Israel with two senior secured term loan facilities in an aggregate principal amount of $30 million (comprised of two facilities in the aggregate principal amount of $20 million and $10 million) and a five-year revolving credit facility to Pointer in an aggregate principal amount of $10 million. The proceeds of the term loan facilities were used to finance a portion of the cash consideration payable in our acquisition of Pointer. The proceeds of the revolving credit facility may be used by Pointer for general corporate purposes.
We have on file a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 that was declared effective by the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) on November 27, 2019. Pursuant to the shelf registration statement, we may offer to the public from time to time, in one or more offerings, up to $60.0 million of our common stock, preferred stock, warrants, debt securities, and units, or any combination of the foregoing, at prices and on terms to be determined at the time of any such offering. The specific terms of any future offering will be determined at the time of the offering and described in a prospectus supplement that will be filed with the SEC in connection with such offering.
On May 14, 2020, we entered into an equity distribution agreement for an “at-the-market offering” program (the “ATM Offering”) with Canaccord Genuity LLC (“Canaccord”) as sales agent, pursuant to which we issued and sold an aggregate of 809,846 shares of common stock for approximately $4.2 million in gross proceeds. We terminated the equity distribution agreement effective as of August 14, 2020.
On February 1, 2021, we closed an underwritten public offering (the “Underwritten Public Offering”) of 4,427,500 shares of common stock (which includes the full exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option) for gross proceeds of approximately $28.8 million, before deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and other estimated offering expenses. The offer and sale of common stock in the ATM Offering and the Underwritten Public Offering were made pursuant to our shelf registration statement.
Because of the recent outbreak of COVID-19, there is significant uncertainty surrounding the potential impact on our results of operations and cash flows. We are proactively taking steps to increase available cash on hand including, but not limited to, targeted reductions in discretionary operating expenses and capital expenditures and borrowing under the revolving credit facility.
Capital Requirements
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash (including restricted cash), cash equivalents and marketable securities of $18.4 million and working capital of $28.9 million. Our primary sources of cash are cash flows from operating activities, our holdings of cash, cash equivalents and investments from the sale of our capital stock and borrowings under our credit facility. To date, we have not generated sufficient cash flow solely from operating activities to fund our operations.
We believe our available working capital, anticipated level of future revenues and expected cash flows from operations will provide sufficient funds to cover capital requirements through at least March 18, 2022.
Our capital requirements depend on a variety of factors, including, but not limited to, the length of the sales cycle, the rate of increase or decrease in our existing business base, the success, timing, and amount of investment required to bring new products to market, revenue growth or decline and potential acquisitions. Failure to generate positive cash flow from operations will have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $8.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net cash used in operating activities of $7.3 million for the same period in 2019. The net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 reflects a net loss of $13.6 million and includes non-cash charges of $4.6 million for preferred dividends, $4.3 million for stock-based compensation, $8.4 million for depreciation and amortization expense and $2.8 million for right of use asset amortization. Changes in working capital items included:
● a decrease in deferred revenue of $4.3 million;
● a decrease in inventory of $3.1 million; and
● a decrease in lease liabilities of $3.0 million.
Net cash used in operating activities was $7.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to net cash used in operating activities of $1.7 million for the same period in 2018. The net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 reflects a net loss of $12.0 million and includes non-cash charges of $1.1 million for preferred dividends, $3.8 million for stock-based compensation, $3.3 million for depreciation and amortization expense and $1.0 million for right of use asset amortization. Changes in working capital items included:
● an increase in accounts receivable of $1.1 million;
● an increase in inventories of $3.3 million; and
● a decrease in lease liabilities of $1.1 million.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net cash used in investing activities of $65.5 million for the same period in 2019. The change from the same period in 2019 was primarily due to $-0- used for acquisitions in 2020 compared to $69.0 million used for our acquisitions of Pointer and CarrierWeb in 2019, $3.4 million used for the purchase of fixed assets in 2020 compared to $1 million used for the purchase of fixed assets in 2019 and $-0- provided by the proceeds from the sales and maturities of investments in 2020 compared to $4.6 million in 2019.
Net cash used in investing activities was $65.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to net cash provided by investing activities of $6.6 million for the same period in 2018. The change from the same period in 2018 was primarily due to $69.0 million used for our acquisitions of Pointer and CarrierWeb, $1.0 million used for the purchase of fixed assets in 2019 compared to $251,000 used for the purchase of fixed assets in 2018 and $4.6 million provided by the proceeds from the sale and maturities of investments in 2019 compared to $10.0 million in 2018.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities was $3.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $78.6 million for the same period in 2019. The change from the same period in 2019 was primarily due to net proceeds from our ATM Offering of $4 million in 2020 compared to net proceeds from our sale of Series A Preferred Stock to the Investors of $46.3 million in 2019, offset by the repayment of the Notes of $5 million and the repayment of long-term debt of $2.9 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $78.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $69,000 for the same period in 2018. The change from the same period in 2018 was primarily due to net proceeds from our sale of Series A Preferred Stock to the Investors of $46.3 million, $35.0 million for the proceeds of long-term debt and the Notes, partially offset by $2.0 million due to the repayment of long-term debt.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our significant contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2020:
Purchase orders or contracts for the purchase of raw materials and other goods and services are not included in the table above. We are not able to determine the aggregate amount of such purchase orders that represent contractual obligations, as purchase orders may represent authorizations to purchase rather than binding agreements. Although we have entered into contracts for services, the obligations under these contracts were not significant and the contracts generally contain clauses allowing for cancellation without significant penalty.
The expected timing or payment of obligations discussed above is estimated based on current information. Timing of payments and actual amounts paid may be different depending on changes to agreed-upon amounts for some obligations.
Inflation
We operate in several emerging market economies that are particularly vulnerable to the impact of inflationary pressures that could materially and adversely impact our operations in the foreseeable future.
Business Acquisitions
In addition to focusing on our core applications, we adapt our systems to meet our customers’ broader asset management needs and seek opportunities to expand our solution offerings through strategic acquisitions.
On January 30, 2019, we completed the CarrierWeb Acquisition. The assets we acquired in the CarrierWeb Acquisition have been integrated into our products. The CarrierWeb Acquisition allows us to offer a full complement of highly-integrated logistics technology solutions to its current customers and prospects and immediately adds more than 70 customers and 9,000 subscriber units.
On October 3, 2019, we completed the Transactions, as a result of which I.D. Systems and PowerFleet Israel each became direct, wholly-owned subsidiaries of the Company and Pointer became an indirect, wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company. For further discussion on the Transactions and related transactions, please see Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In December 2019, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2019-12, Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes which removes certain exceptions related to the approach for intraperiod tax allocation, the methodology for calculating income taxes in an interim period, the recognition of deferred tax liabilities for outside basis differences and clarifies the accounting for transactions that result in a step-up in the tax basis of goodwill. The guidance is generally effective as of January 1, 2021, with early adoption permitted. The Company has not early adopted the new standard for 2020 and is evaluating the impact of the new guidance on our financial statements.
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-13, “Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326) Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments,” which amends the guidance on measuring credit losses on financial assets held at amortized cost. The amendment is intended to address the issue that the previous “incurred loss” methodology was restrictive for an entity’s ability to record credit losses based on not yet meeting the “probable” threshold. The new language will require these assets to be valued at amortized cost presented at the net amount expected to be collected with a valuation provision. This updated standard is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021. The Company is currently evaluating the impact of this ASU on the consolidated financial statements.
In January 2017, the FASB issued ASU No. 2017-04, “Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (Topic 350): Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment,” which simplifies how an entity is required to test goodwill for impairment by eliminating Step 2 from the goodwill impairment test. Step 2 measures a goodwill impairment loss by comparing the implied fair value of a reporting unit’s goodwill with the carrying amount of that goodwill. Under the amendments in ASU 2017-04, an entity should recognize an impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value; however, the loss recognized should not exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. The updated guidance requires a prospective adoption. The guidance is effective beginning fiscal year 2020. Early adoption is permitted. The adoption of this standard did not have an impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.