Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Annual Report including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. When used in this Annual Report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on November 20, 2018 as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, recapitalization, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more target businesses. We intend to complete our business combination using cash from the proceeds of the initial public offering and the sale of the placement units that occurred simultaneously with the completion of the initial public offering, the proceeds of the sale of our shares in connection with our initial business combination, shares issued to the owners of the target, debt issued to bank or other lenders or the owners of the target, or a combination of the foregoing.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a business combination will be successful.
Recent Developments
On December 29, 2020, we entered into a Business Combination Agreement (the “Business Combination Agreement”), dated as of December 29, 2020, by and among the Company, FinTech Investor Holdings IV, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company, Fintech Masala Advisors, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (together with FinTech Investor Holdings IV, LLC, the “Sponsor”), PWP, PWP GP LLC, a Delaware limited liability company and the general partner of PWP (“PWP GP”), PWP Professional Partners LP, a Delaware limited partnership and a limited partner of PWP (“Professionals”), and Perella Weinberg Partners LLC, a Delaware limited liability company and the general partner of Professionals (“Professionals GP”) pursuant to which, among other things, the Company will acquire interests in PWP, which will become jointly-owned by the Company, Professionals, and certain existing partners of PWP and following the Closing will serve as the Company’s operating partnership as part of an umbrella limited partnership C-corporation (Up-C) structure.
Pursuant to the Business Combination Agreement, subject to certain conditions set forth therein, in connection with the closing of the transactions contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement (the “Closing”):
(i) the Company will acquire newly-issued common units of PWP in exchange for cash in an amount equal to the outstanding excess cash balances of the Company (including the proceeds from the PIPE Investment (as defined below)) as of Closing net of redemptions elected by the Company’s public stockholders pursuant to their redemption rights described below (such aggregate outstanding cash balances, “Company Cash”), with the number of such interests to be issued to be calculated based on the formula set forth on Schedule C to the Business Combination Agreement;
(ii) Professionals will contribute the equity interests of PWP GP, the general partner of PWP, to the Company;
(iii) the Company will issue (A) to Professionals, new shares of Class B-1 common stock, which will have 10 votes per share (for so long as Professionals or its limited partners as of the Closing maintain ownership of at least 10% of the issued and outstanding Class A common units of PWP, otherwise such Class B-1 common stock shall have one vote per share) and (B) to investor limited partners of PWP, new shares of Class B-2 common stock, which will have one vote per share, with the number of shares of such common stock to be issued to equal the number of common units of PWP that will be held by Professionals and such investor limited partners, respectively, following the Closing; and
(iv) the Company will repay certain indebtedness of PWP, pay certain expenses, retain up to $10 million of cash on its balance sheet, and subject to the availability of transaction proceeds, the Company will first redeem certain limited partnership interests held by certain electing third party investor limited partners of PWP and second redeem certain electing non-working limited partners of Professionals (collectively with the other transactions contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement, the “Business Combination”).
The Closing is subject to the satisfaction of customary conditions as set forth in the Business Combination Agreement.
On December 29, 2020, concurrently with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, we also entered into subscription agreements (“Subscription Agreements”) with certain investors (collectively, the “PIPE Investors”) pursuant to, and on the terms and subject to the conditions of which, the PIPE Investors have collectively subscribed for 12,500,000 shares of the Company’s Class A common stock for an aggregate purchase price equal to $125,000,000 (the “PIPE Investment”), a portion of which is expected to be funded by one or more affiliates of Sponsor. The PIPE Investment will be consummated substantially concurrently with the closing of the Business Combination.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from inception through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for our Initial Public Offering, described below, and, after our Initial Public Offering, identifying a target company for an initial Business Combination, activities in connection with the proposed acquisition of PWP. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $1,019,277, which consists of formation and operating costs of $1,025,138, offset by interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $5,861.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we had a net loss of $1,319, which consists of formation and operating costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Until the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, the Company’s only source of liquidity was an initial purchase of shares of Class B common stock by our Sponsor and loans from our Sponsor.
On September 29, 2020, we consummated our Initial Public Offering of 23,000,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $230,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of our Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 610,000 Placement Units to the Sponsor at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $6,100,000.
Following our Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Placement Units, a total of $230,000,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $14,255,791 in transaction costs, including $4,000,000 of underwriting fees, $9,800,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $455,791 of other costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $508,429. Net loss of $1,019,277 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $5,861 and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which provided $516,709 of cash from operating activities.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in operating activities was $977. Net loss of $1,319 was affected by expense paid by the Sponsor and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which provided $342 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and marketable securities of $230,005,861 held in the Trust Account. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less taxes paid and deferred underwriting commissions) to complete our initial Business Combination. We may withdraw interest to pay taxes. During the period ended September 30, 2020, we did not withdraw any interest earned on the Trust Account. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $1,158,934 outside of the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete our initial Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with our initial Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into units identical to the Placement Units, at a price of $10.00 per unit at the option of the lender.
We do not currently believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating our initial Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our Public Shares upon consummation of our initial Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our initial Business Combination. If we are unable to complete our initial Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our initial Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-balance sheet financing arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay the sponsor or an affiliate of the sponsor a monthly fee of $20,000 for office space, utilities, and shared personnel support services. We began incurring these fees on September 25, 2020 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the business combination or the Company’s liquidation.
Pursuant to a registration rights agreement entered into on September 24, 2020, the holders of the founder shares, placement units (including securities contained therein) and the units that may be issued upon conversion of the Working Capital Loans (and any shares of Class A common stock issuable upon the exercise of the placement warrants or the warrants included in the units issued upon conversion of the Working Capital Loans) will be entitled to registration rights requiring us to register such securities for resale (in the case of the founder shares, only after conversion to Class A common stock). The holders of these securities will be entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders will have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of a business combination and rights to require us to register for resale such securities pursuant to Rule 415 under the Securities Act. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. and Wells Fargo Securities, LLC, as representatives of the several underwriters, are entitled to a deferred fee of $9,800,000. The deferred fee will become payable to the representatives from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that the Company completes a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, the Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Loss per Common Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Net income per common share, basic and diluted for Class A redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the Trust Account, net of applicable taxes, by the weighted average number of shares of Class A redeemable common stock outstanding for the periods. Net income per common share, basic and diluted for Class A and Class B non-redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing net income less income attributable to Class A redeemable common stock, by the weighted average number of shares of Class A and Class B non-redeemable common stock outstanding for the periods presented.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.