ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS
OF OPERATIONS
Financial and Operating Performance
Pioneer's financial and operating performance for 2020 included the following highlights:
•Net loss attributable to common stockholders was $200 million ($1.21 per diluted share) for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to net income of $773 million ($4.59 per diluted share) in 2019. The primary components of the $973 million decrease in net income (loss) attributable to common stockholders include:
•a $1.3 billion decrease in oil and gas revenues, primarily due to a 31 percent decrease in average realized commodity prices per BOE, partially offset by a six percent increase in daily sales volumes due to the Company's successful horizontal drilling program in the Permian Basin;
•a $522 million decrease in net sales of purchased commodities due to a decrease in margins on the Company's downstream Gulf Coast refinery and export oil sales;
•a $336 million decrease in derivative results, primarily due to changes in forward commodity prices and the cash settlement of derivative positions in accordance with their terms; and
•a $143 million decrease in interest and other income (loss), primarily related to noncash valuation adjustments associated with the Company's investment in an affiliate, net proceeds received in 2019 from the sale of the Company's investment in its corporate headquarters and a decrease in interest income.
Partially offset by:
•a $486 million increase in the gain (loss) on disposition of assets (from a net loss on disposition of assets in 2019 to a net gain on disposition of assets in 2020), primarily due to the 2019 net loss recorded on the divestiture of the Company's Eagle Ford assets and other remaining South Texas assets in May 2019 (the "South Texas Divestiture");
•a $296 million reduction in income taxes primarily due to the decrease in earnings between 2020 and 2019;
•a $249 million decrease in production costs, including taxes, primarily attributable to (i) the Company's cost saving initiatives to lower production costs and (ii) the reduction in production taxes as a result of the aforementioned 31 percent decrease in average realized commodity prices per BOE;
•a $127 million decrease in other expense, primarily related to decreases of (i) $80 million in employee-related charges associated with the 2020 and 2019 corporate restructurings and the Company's 2020 staffing reduction in its well services business, (ii) $83 million related to asset divestitures, decommissioning and impairments, (iii) $58 million in firm transportation charges on excess pipeline capacity commitments and (iv) $42 million in corporate headquarters relocation-related costs, partially offset by increases of (i) $80 million in the Company's net forecasted deficiency fee obligation and receivable associated with the South Texas Divestiture, (ii) $55 million in idle frac fleet fees, stacked drilling rig charges and drilling rig early terminations charges and (iii) $27 million in early extinguishment of debt charges;
•an $80 million decrease in general and administrative expense primarily due to (i) the effect of the Company's 2019 and 2020 corporate restructurings, which resulted in employee headcount reductions and decreased salaries and benefits and (ii) the Company's reduction of additional overhead related costs during 2020 through voluntary salary reductions by the Company's officers and board of directors, reductions in estimated cash incentive compensation, benefit reductions and other cash cost reductions as a result of the Company's response to the COVID-19 pandemic's impact on oil demand and prices; and
•a $72 million decrease in DD&A expense, primarily due to additions to proved reserves attributable to the Company's successful Spraberry/Wolfcamp horizontal drilling program.
•During 2020, average daily sales volumes increased on a BOE basis by six percent to 367,253 BOEPD, as compared to 345,518 BOEPD during 2019, primarily due to the Company's successful Spraberry/Wolfcamp horizontal drilling program.
•Average oil and NGL prices decreased per Bbl in 2020 to $37.24 and $15.62, respectively, as compared to $53.77 and $19.33, respectively, in 2019. Average gas prices decreased per Mcf in 2020 to $1.73 as compared to $1.79 in 2019.
Parsley Acquisition
The Company completed the Parsley Acquisition on January 12, 2021. Parsley's results of operations will be consolidated with the Company's interim consolidated financial statements beginning on January 12, 2021. See Item 1.
Business - Acquisition Activities" and Note 19 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" for additional information.
First Quarter 2021 Outlook
The first quarter of 2021 is expected to continue to have a high degree of uncertainty related to how long it will take to return to a balanced oil supply and demand environment. As a result, the Company's future operating and financial results will depend on various factors beyond the Company's control, such as: the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and the speed and effectiveness of vaccine distributions to combat the virus, which is expected to directly impact the recovery of world economic growth and the demand for oil; the impact of U.S. energy, monetary, environmental and trade policies; fiscal challenges facing the United States federal government; geopolitical issues globally, especially in the Middle East; the extent to which OPEC members and some nonmembers, including Russia, adhere to and agree to extend cuts to their oil production quotas; and uncertainty in oil demand fundamentals associated with governmental policy aimed at redirecting fossil fuel consumption towards lower carbon energy.
Based on current estimates, the Company expects the following operating and financial results for the first quarter of 2021, which includes the effects of the Parsley Acquisition (from the date of acquisition) and the February 2021 winter storms in West Texas:
_____________________
(a)The cash flow impact from firm transportation is primarily based on the forecasted differential between WTI oil prices and Brent oil prices less the costs to transport purchased oil from the areas of the Company's production to the Gulf Coast. To the extent that the Company's Gulf Coast sales of purchased oil does not cover the purchase price and associated firm transport costs, the Company's results of operations will reflect the negative cashflow impact attributable to its firm transportation commitments.
During February 2021, the Company's operations in West Texas were significantly impacted by winter weather that brought abnormally cold temperatures, along with snow and icy conditions across the state of Texas. The extreme winter weather impacted production operations, midstream infrastructure and power providers throughout the state, along with many other services. As a result, most of the Company's production was offline for about a week. Early in the weather event, the Company attempted to perform or otherwise satisfy its firm gas sales commitments, but as the impacts of the winter weather became clearer, the Company subsequently issued force majeure notices to its customers given the inability to perform such contracts for a variety of reasons, including significant production being offline, interruptions to midstream operations, the inability to flow gas to markets due to infrastructure downtime and compliance with government orders to direct any available gas volumes towards supporting power generation. Certain of the Company's customers have alleged that the Company's force majeure notices were improper under the applicable contracts. The Company estimates that it incurred incremental cash costs of $75 million to $85 million in connection with its firm gas sales commitments early in the weather event.
2021 Capital Budget
The Company's capital budget for 2021 is expected to be in the range of $2.5 billion to $2.8 billion, consisting of $2.3 billion to $2.6 billion for drilling and completion related activities, including additional tank batteries and saltwater disposal facilities, $100 million of estimated Parsley integration costs and $90 million for water infrastructure, well services and vehicles. The 2021 capital budget excludes acquisitions, asset retirement obligations, capitalized interest and geological and geophysical general and administrative expense and corporate facilities.
PIONEER NATURAL RESOURCES COMPANY
The 2021 capital budget is expected to be funded from operating cash flow, and, if necessary, from cash and cash equivalents on hand or borrowings under the Company's credit facility.
Divestitures, Decommissioning and Restructuring Activities
Divestitures.
In May 2020, the Company completed the sale of certain vertical wells and approximately 1,500 undeveloped acres in Upton County of the Permian Basin to an unaffiliated third party for net cash proceeds of $6 million. The Company recorded a gain of $6 million associated with the sale.
In December 2019, the Company completed the sale of certain vertical and horizontal wells and approximately 4,500 undeveloped acres in Glasscock County of the Permian Basin to an unaffiliated third party for net cash proceeds of $64 million. The Company recorded a gain of $10 million associated with the sale.
In July 2019, the Company completed the sale of certain vertical wells and approximately 1,400 undeveloped acres in Martin County of the Permian Basin to an unaffiliated third party for net cash proceeds of $27 million. The Company recorded a gain of $26 million associated with the sale.
In June 2019, the Company completed the sale of certain vertical wells and approximately 1,900 undeveloped acres in Martin County of the Permian Basin to an unaffiliated third party for net cash proceeds of $38 million. The Company recorded a gain of $31 million associated with the sale.
In May 2019, the Company completed the South Texas Divestiture to an unaffiliated third party in exchange for total consideration having an estimated fair value of $210 million. The fair value of the consideration included (i) net cash proceeds of $2 million, (ii) $136 million in contingent consideration and (iii) a $72 million receivable associated with estimated deficiency fees to be paid by the buyer. The Company recorded a loss of $525 million and recognized employee-related charges of $19 million associated with the sale.
Contingent Consideration. Per the terms of the South Texas Divestiture, the Company was entitled to receive contingent consideration based on future annual oil and NGL prices during each of the five years from 2020 to 2024. The Company revalued the contingent consideration using an option pricing model each reporting period prior to the settlement of the contingent consideration in July 2020 when the Company received cash proceeds of $49 million from the buyer to fully satisfy the contingent consideration. The Company recorded a noncash loss of $42 million to interest and other income during the year ended December 31, 2020 associated with the settlement.
Deficiency Fee Obligation. The Company transferred its long-term midstream agreements and associated minimum volume commitments ("MVC") to the buyer. However, the Company retained the obligation to pay 100 percent of any deficiency fees associated with the MVC from January 2019 through July 2022. The Company determines the fair value of the deficiency fee obligation using a probability weighted discounted cash flow model. The deficiency fee obligation is included in current or noncurrent liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets, based on the estimated timing of payments. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a charge of $84 million in other expense in the consolidated statements of operations, to increase the Company's forecasted deficiency fee payments as a result of a reduction in planned drilling activities by the buyer of the assets. The estimated remaining deficiency fee obligation was $333 million as of December 31, 2020.
Deficiency Fee Receivable. The buyer is required to reimburse the Company for 18 percent of the deficiency fees paid under the transferred midstream agreements from January 2019 through July 2022. Such reimbursement will be paid by the buyer in installments beginning in 2023 through 2025. The Company determines the fair value of the deficiency fee receivable using a credit risk-adjusted valuation model. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded an increase to the Company's long-term deficiency fee receivable of $4 million in other expense in the consolidated statements of operations, to reflect the buyer's share of 2020 deficiency fees which were greater than originally forecasted as of the date of the sale. The deficiency fee receivable is included in noncurrent other assets in the consolidated balance sheets.
Decommissioning.
In November 2018, the Company announced plans to close its sand mine located in Brady, Texas and transition its proppant supply requirements to West Texas sand sources.
•During 2019, the Company recorded $23 million of accelerated depreciation, $13 million of inventory and other property and equipment impairment charges and $12 million of sand mine closure-related costs.
PIONEER NATURAL RESOURCES COMPANY
•During 2018, the Company recorded $443 million of accelerated depreciation and $7 million of employee-related charges associated with the shutdown.
Restructuring.
During the third quarter of 2020, the Company announced a corporate restructuring to reduce its staffing levels to correspond with a planned reduction in future activity levels. The restructuring resulted in approximately 300 employees being involuntarily separated from the Company in October 2020. The Company recorded $78 million of employee-related charges, including $5 million of noncash stock-based compensation expense related to the accelerated vesting of certain equity awards, in other expense in the consolidated statements of operations during the year ended December 31, 2020. See Note 3, Note 8 and Note 16 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" for additional information.
In June 2020, the Company implemented changes to its well services business, including a staffing reduction of approximately 50 employees. The changes were made to more closely align the well services cost structure and headcount with the Company's reduction in expected activity levels as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic's impact on oil prices. The Company recorded $1 million of employee-related charges in other expense in the consolidated statements of operations during the year ended December 31, 2020 related to the staffing reductions in its well services business.
During 2019, the Company implemented a corporate restructuring to align its cost structure with the needs of a Permian Basin-focused company (the "2019 Corporate Restructuring Program"). The 2019 Corporate Restructuring Program occurred in three phases as follows:
•In March 2019, the Company made certain changes to its leadership and organizational structure, which included the early retirement and departure of certain officers of the Company,
•In April 2019, the Company adopted a voluntary separation program ("VSP") for certain eligible employees, and
•In May 2019, the Company implemented an involuntary separation program ("ISP").
During 2019, the Company recorded $159 million of employee-related charges, including $26 million of noncash stock-based compensation expense related to the accelerated vesting of certain equity awards, associated with the 2019 Corporate Restructuring Program.
See Note 3 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" for additional information regarding Divestitures, Decommissioning and Restructuring activities.
Results of Operations
Results of operations should be read together with the Company's consolidated financial statements and related notes included in "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. See the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 for a discussion of the Company's 2019 results of operations as compared to the Company's 2018 results of operations.
Oil and gas revenues. The Company's revenues are derived from sales of oil, NGL and gas production. Increases or decreases in the Company's revenues, profitability and future production are highly dependent on commodity prices. Prices are market driven and future prices will fluctuate due to supply and demand factors, availability of transportation, seasonality, geopolitical developments and economic factors, among other items.
PIONEER NATURAL RESOURCES COMPANY
Average daily sales volumes are as follows:
____________________
(a)Gas production excludes gas produced and used as field fuel.
Average daily sales volumes per BOE increased for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019, primarily due to the Company's successful Spraberry/Wolfcamp horizontal drilling program. The increase in NGL and gas volumes primarily reflects (i) increasing wet gas production (as a percentage of a horizontal wells total production) over time, (ii) new processing facilities and takeaway capacity being placed into service during 2019 and 2020, which had the effect of lowering line pressures and (iii) increased recovery rates for NGLs. The decrease in oil volumes for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019, was primarily due to the Company's reduced drilling and completion activity and proactively curtailing lower-margin, higher-cost vertical well production during 2020 as a result of the reduced oil price environment.
The oil, NGL and gas prices reported by the Company are based on the market prices received for each commodity. The average prices are as follows:
Sales of purchased commodities. The Company enters into purchase transactions with third parties and separate sale transactions with third parties to diversify a portion of the Company's oil and gas sales to (i) Gulf Coast refineries, (ii) Gulf Coast and West Coast gas markets and (iii) international oil markets and to satisfy unused gas pipeline capacity commitments. Revenues and expenses from these transactions are generally presented on a gross basis as the Company acts as a principal in the transaction by assuming both the risks and rewards of ownership, including credit risk, of the commodities purchased and the responsibility to deliver the commodities sold. In conjunction with the Company's downstream sales, the Company also enters into pipeline capacity commitments in order to secure available oil, NGL and gas transportation capacity from the Company's areas of production to downstream sales points. The transportation costs associated with these transactions are included in purchased commodities expense.
The net effect of third party purchases and sales of commodities is as follows:
The $522 million decrease in net sales of purchased commodities for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019, is primarily due to (i) a $74 million loss during the first quarter of 2020 attributable to oil that was purchased and in transit via pipeline to the Gulf Coast or in Gulf Coast storage at the end of January and February, and was subsequently sold in February 2020 and March 2020, respectively, at lower prices (this oil inventory is sold in the following month at contracted prices that are generally tied to monthly average index oil prices (typically Brent oil prices)) and (ii) a decrease in 2020 margins on the Company's downstream Gulf Coast refinery and export oil sales.
Firm transportation payments on excess pipeline capacity are included in other expense in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations. See Note 16 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" for additional information.
PIONEER NATURAL RESOURCES COMPANY
Interest and other income (loss), net.
The decrease in interest and other income for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019, is primarily due to (i) a noncash loss of $64 million attributable to the decrease in fair value of the Company's investment in affiliate as compared to a noncash gain of $15 million for the same period in 2019, (ii) a net gain of $56 million related to the 2019 sale of the Company's investment in its corporate headquarters and (iii) a $12 million decrease in interest income, partially offset by a $7 million increase in sales and use tax refunds.
See Note 15 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" for additional information.
Derivative gain (loss), net.
____________________
(a)Includes a $22 million loss related to interest rate derivatives for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The Company primarily utilizes commodity swap contracts, collar contracts, collar contracts with short puts and basis swap contracts to (i) reduce the effect of price volatility on the commodities the Company produces and sells or consumes, and (ii) support the Company's capital budgeting and expenditure plans. The Company also, from time to time, utilizes interest rate contracts to reduce the effect of interest rate volatility on the Company's indebtedness.
Commodity derivatives and the relative price impact are as follows:
_____________________
(a)Excludes the effect of liquidating certain of the Company's 2020 and 2021 Brent collar contracts with short puts for cash payments of $11 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
(b)Excludes the effect of liquidating certain of the Company's 2021 NYMEX swap contracts for cash receipts of $1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The Company's open derivative contracts are subject to continuing market risk. See "