Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis summarizes the significant factors affecting the consolidated operating results, financial condition, liquidity, and cash flows of our company as of and for the periods presented below. The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this report. This discussion and analysis reflects our historical results of operations and financial position, and, except as otherwise indicated below, does not give effect to the consummation of the IPO or to the conversion of all our outstanding Series A Preferred Stock into common stock on a 1,517.18-for-1 basis, adjusted for the common stock split, that occurred at the closing of the IPO. The discussion contains forward-looking statements that are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. Actual results could differ materially from those discussed in or implied by forward-looking statements because of various factors, including those discussed below and elsewhere in this report, particularly Item 1A. “Risk Factors” and “Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
For comparisons of the results of operations for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, to the period from November 2, 2018 through June 30, 2019 (Successor Period), and the period from July 1, 2018 through November 1, 2018 (Predecessor Period), refer to the section entitled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” included in our IPO prospectus, dated July 20, 2021 filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on July 22, 2021.
Unless we state otherwise or the context otherwise requires, the terms “we,” “us,” “our,” and “Paycor” and similar references refer to the Company and its consolidated subsidiaries.
Overview
We are a leading SaaS provider of human capital management solutions for small and medium-sized businesses. Our unified, cloud-native platform is built to empower business leaders by producing actionable, real-time insights to drive workforce optimization. Our comprehensive suite of solutions enables organizations to streamline administrative workflows and achieve regulatory compliance while serving as the single, secure system of record for all employee data. Our highly flexible, scalable, and extensible platform is augmented by industry-specific domain expertise and offers award-winning ease-of-use with an intuitive user experience and deep third-party integrations. Over 28,000 customers across all 50 states trust Paycor to help their leaders develop winning teams.
Our Business Model
Our revenue is almost entirely recurring in nature and largely attributable to the sale of SaaS subscriptions to our cloud-native HCM software platform. We typically generate revenue from customers on a PEPM basis whereby our revenue is derived from the number of employees of a given customer, and the amount, type, and timing of products provided to a customer with respect to their employees. As a result, we increase our recurring revenue as we add more customers, and as our customers add more employees and purchase more product modules. Our highly recurring revenue model provides significant visibility into our future operating results. Recurring and other revenues are primarily revenues derived from the provision of our payroll, workforce management, and HR-related cloud-based computing services and nonrefundable implementation fees and represented 99% of total revenue for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021. In addition, we earn interest income on funds held for clients.
We have developed a robust organic sales and marketing engine and broad referral network of insurance and retirement benefits brokers. We market and sell our solutions through a direct sales force, which is organized into field and inside sales teams based on customer size, geography, and industry. We generated more than 7.4 million unique visitors to our website over the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021. Our highly efficient and multi-pronged go-to-market strategy is a key driver of our growth, which enabled us to generate $115.1 million and $80.5 million of total bookings for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020, respectively. Total bookings increased 43.0% period-over-period for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021.
*Adjusted Operating Income and Adjusted Operating Income Margin are non-GAAP financial measures. See Non-GAAP Financial Measures below for a definition of our non-GAAP measures and reconciliations to the most closely comparable GAAP measures.
COVID-19 Pandemic Impact
Many of our prospective and existing customers’ businesses have been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and related economic impacts, stay-at-home, business closure, and other restrictive orders, which has resulted in reduced customer employee headcount, temporary and permanent business closures, and/or delayed sales/starts. Because we charge our customers on a per-employee basis for certain services we provide, decreases in headcount of our customers as a result of the pandemic negatively impacted our recurring revenue beginning in our fiscal third quarter of 2020. As of the beginning of March 2020, our customers had approximately 1.9 million customer employees on our platform and we saw a 7% decline through April 18, 2020, which was the lowest point since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, as the U.S. unemployment rate increased to 14.8%. Furthermore, while the number of employees on our platform declined 7%, our number of customers was effectively unchanged over this period. Since then, the number of our customers’ employees on our platform has recovered rapidly. As of June 30, 2021, our existing customers that were active at the beginning of March 2020 had fully regained their lost employees. Including the addition of new customers, we now serve more than 2.0 million customer employees.
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to impact the global economy. The duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, and the long-term effects the pandemic will have on our customers, our operations and general economic conditions, remain uncertain and difficult to predict. Our business and financial performance may continue to be unfavorably impacted in future periods if a significant number of our customers are unable to continue as viable businesses or if they significantly reduce headcount, there is a reduction in business confidence and activity, a decrease in government and consumer spending, a decrease in HCM and payroll solutions spending by SMBs, a decrease in growth in the overall market, or a further decline of interest rates, among other factors. Therefore, we expect the COVID-19 pandemic to continue to have an unfavorable impact on the growth in both recurring and other revenue and interest income on funds held for clients in future periods for so long as such conditions persist.
In response to these developments, we implemented measures focusing on the safety of our employees, transitioning more than 97% of our associates to a virtual work arrangement and prohibiting non-critical business related travel, and we will continue to operate remotely for the foreseeable future. We did not experience any material disruptions in our ability to operate our business during this transition as our business model enables us to service our clients remotely. We were able to continue our implementation efforts and our sales team shifted from in-person meetings with prospective and existing clients to engaging with them virtually. As a result of the shift to virtual meetings, we have experienced a decrease in our sales and marketing expenses since the onset of the pandemic, primarily related to a decrease in travel costs. We expect this trend to continue at least in the near term, although such savings may be offset by increased costs when employees return to the office and we implement measures to ensure their safety. Our teams also quickly mobilized to analyze the various state and federal legislative changes enacted by the government in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act and added automated functionality and reporting to our systems for our customers.
Our total revenue growth during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 was impacted by the ongoing effects from the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect the COVID-19 pandemic to continue to unfavorably impact our revenue growth rates in future periods as we anticipate lower customer employee counts, potential increases in customer losses, a reduction in business confidence and activity, a continued low interest rate environment, and a decrease in the growth of the overall market, among other factors. In the quarter ending June 30, 2020, we implemented certain cost saving initiatives, including consolidating our
facilities footprint, reducing employee-related costs, including temporary salary reductions and implementing a hiring freeze, delaying non-essential maintenance projects and eliminating or minimizing discretionary spending. As of June 30, 2021, we have removed all temporary cost and hiring restrictions. Despite the economic challenges driven by the pandemic, we remain confident in the overall health of our business, the strength of our product offerings, and our ability to continue to execute on our strategy.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
Our historical financial performance has been, and we expect our financial performance in the future to be, driven by our ability to:
Expand Our Sales Footprint to Add New Customers
Our current customer base represents a small portion of the U.S. market for HCM and payroll solutions. We believe there is substantial opportunity to continue to broaden our customer base, particularly in Tier 1 markets by expanding our sales footprint. Our ability to do so will depend on several factors, including the effectiveness of our products, the relative pricing of our products, our competitors’ offerings, and the effectiveness of our marketing efforts.
As of June 30, 2021 and 2020, we had approximately 28,000 and 27,100 customers, respectively, representing a period-over-period increase of 3.3%. We define a customer as a parent company grouping, which may include multiple subsidiary client accounts with separate taxpayer identification numbers. As of June 30, 2021 and 2020, we had approximately 44,000 and 42,600 client accounts, respectively. We track client accounts as it provides an alternative measure of the scale of our business and customers. We believe the number of customer employees on our platform is a key indicator of the growth of our business. We define customer employees as the number of our customers’ employees at the end of any particular period. As of June 30, 2021 and 2020, we had approximately 2.0 million and 1.9 million customer employees, respectively.
In addition, we are also focused on expanding our broker referral relationships to drive the acquisition of new customers. Insurance and benefits brokers are trusted advisors to SMBs and are influential in the HCM selection process. As a result of this focus, we have increased the percentage of bookings that were originated by brokers to 40% of total bookings in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 as compared to 28% of total bookings in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020.
Increase Product Penetration with Existing and New Customers
In recent years we have increasingly focused our product pricing strategy away from sales of individual products and solutions towards a simplified bundled pricing approach whereby we market multi-product offerings to our customers. We believe that this strategy addresses a key need for SMB customers, while also allowing us to better serve the needs of business leaders through a more comprehensive product suite. This strategy has enabled us to effectively drive increased product penetration and PEPM growth at the initial point of sale, as well as stronger retention. Our “effective PEPM,” which we define as recurring and other revenue for the period divided by the average number of customer employees, which we calculate as the sum of the number of customer employees at the end of each month over the period divided by the total number of months in the period, was $15.21 and $14.25 for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We intend to advance this strategy by progressively expanding the breadth of features included in our core HCM product bundle. Additionally, apart from our sales to new customers, there is a substantial opportunity within our existing customer base to cross-sell additional products from our portfolio, including Workforce Management, Benefits Administration, Talent Management, and Employee Engagement.
Our ability to successfully increase revenue per customer is dependent upon several factors, including the number of paid employees working for our customers, the number of products purchased by each of our customers, our customers’ satisfaction with our solutions and support, and our ability to add new products to our suite.
We believe our ability to retain and expand our existing customers’ spending on our solutions is evidenced by our net revenue retention, which was approximately 88% and 94% for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Over the same periods, our net revenue retention for customers with 10 to 1,000 employees was approximately 89% and 95%, respectively. For the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, this customer segment represented 80% and 81% of our recurring billings, respectively. Our net revenue retention has been negatively impacted by stay-at-home, business closure and other restrictive orders, which resulted in reduced employee headcount, temporary and permanent business closures, and delayed sales and starts with many of our customers.
Ongoing Product Innovation and Optimization
We believe that our product features and functionality are key differentiators of our offerings. We intend to continue to invest in research and development, particularly regarding the functionality of our platform, to sustain and advance our product leadership. For instance, in 2019 we released our data analytics and scheduling products, and in 2020 we released our compensation management product. As a result of these and other product launches, we have increased the total list PEPM for our full suite of products to $39 as of June 2021 from $35 as of June 2020. Our effective PEPM was $15.21 and $14.25 for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our ability to innovate and introduce competitive new products is dependent on our ability to recruit and retain top technical talent and invest in research and development initiatives.
Components of Results of Operations
Factors Affecting the Comparability of our Results of Operations
IPO-Related Expenses
As a result of our July 2021 IPO, we incurred transaction-related expenses. These expenses include transaction bonuses, share-based compensation expense associated with two cash Long Term Incentive Plans (“LTIPs”) and outstanding performance awards under our Pride Aggregator, L.P. Management Equity Plan (“MEP”), and expenses related to the redemption of the Midco Redeemable Preferred Stock. The specifics of the LTIPs, MEP and Midco Redeemable Preferred Stock are presented below.
We have granted Long Term Incentive Plan units (“LTIP Units”) under our Pride Aggregator, L.P. Top Talent Incentive Plan and Sales Equity Incentive Plan. The LTIP Units are phantom awards which provided for, at our discretion, a cash or stock payment (“LTIP Payment”) to participants on certain determination dates, if an IPO occurred and if the LTIP Participant remained employed with us on such date. Our July 2021 IPO resulted in a determination date, for which each LTIP Participant is entitled to an LTIP Payment with respect to 20% of the LTIP Participant’s LTIP Units as of the IPO date and 20% on each of four subsequent payment dates that are six, twelve, eighteen and 24 months following the IPO date. As a result of our IPO, the LTIP Units converted into the entitlement to receive a fixed number of shares of common stock, based on the IPO price. We settled such entitlements by issuing restricted stock units, which will vest on the applicable payment dates and we will recognize approximately $47.6 million of compensation expense over the requisite service period relating to the LTIP Units. Because the IPO occurred after June 30, 2021, it did not have an impact on our financial statements for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021.
Under the terms of the MEP, one-half of the profits interest units vest based on an associate’s service time. The time-vesting units vest 25% on the first anniversary after the vesting commencement date and thereafter in twelve equal installments on each subsequent quarterly anniversary of the vesting commencement date, with 100% vesting of the time-vesting units occurring on the fourth anniversary of the vesting commencement date. MEP incentive units are subject to a floor amount established at the grant date, which acts as a participation threshold and permits the award to participate in distributions only to the extent the distribution amount for the units exceed the floor amount.
The second half of the MEP incentive units vest based on our performance relative to Apax Partners’ original invested amount, with the performance calculations defined in the plan, triggered by our IPO (implied performance condition). As a result of our July 2021 IPO, the performance-vesting incentive units converted to time-based vesting units, with 25% vesting upon successive six-month anniversary dates for the 24 months beginning on the date of the IPO.
The MEP incentive units are accounted for as equity awards and the compensation expense calculated based upon the fair market value of the MEP incentive units at the grant date and recognized as the incentive units vest. We estimate the fair value of the MEP incentive units using the Monte Carlo simulation method. As of June 30, 2021, there was approximately $7.2 million and $14.3 million of unrecognized compensation expense associated with unvested time-based and performance-based MEP incentive unit awards, respectively. The unrecognized compensation expense associated with unvested time-based MEP incentive unit awards outstanding at June 30, 2021 will be recognized over a weighted average period of 1.9 years from June 30, 2021. As a result of our July 2021 IPO, the unrecognized compensation expense associated with performance-based MEP incentive unit awards will be recognized over a period of 24 months beginning upon the date of the IPO.
In connection with the Apax Acquisition, Pride Midco issued $200 million in aggregate initial liquidation preference of Midco Redeemable Preferred Stock. The Midco Redeemable Preferred Stock accrued dividends at a rate of LIBOR plus 8.875%. The dividends were payable, or compounded, quarterly on March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31 of each
year. From the issue date through November 2, 2020, dividends were accrued and added to the then-prevailing liquidation preference of the Midco Redeemable Preferred Stock. From November 2, 2020 to November 2, 2021, we were required pay 50% of the accrued dividends in cash.
The shares of Midco Redeemable Preferred Stock were accounted for as a redeemable noncontrolling interest in the mezzanine section of our consolidated balance sheet and were accreted using the effective interest method to the redemption value through the net income attributable to redeemable noncontrolling interest line within our consolidated statement of operations.
We redeemed the Midco Redeemable Preferred Stock in connection with, and using proceeds from, our July 2021 IPO. The redemption price per share was equal to 101.0% of the liquidation preference, plus accrued and unpaid dividends to the redemption date, or approximately $260.0 million.
Basis of Presentation
Revenues
Recurring and Other Revenue
We derive our revenue from contractual agreements, which contain recurring and non-recurring service fees. The majority of our contracts are cancelable by the customer on 30 days’ notice. We recognize revenue when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration that we are entitled to for those goods or services. Recurring revenue consists primarily of revenues derived from the provision of our payroll, workforce management, and HR-related cloud-based computing services. The performance obligations related to recurring services are generally satisfied monthly as services are provided, with fees charged and collected based on a PEPM or per-employee-per-payroll basis. Recurring revenue is generally recognized as the services are provided during each client’s payroll period. Other revenue and non-recurring services fees consist mainly of nonrefundable implementation fees, which involve onboarding and configuring the customer within our cloud-based platform. These nonrefundable implementation fees provide certain clients with a material right to renew the contract, with revenue deferred and recognized over the period to which the material right exists. This is generally a period of 24 months from finalization of onboarding, which typically concludes within three to six months of the original booking. Nonrefundable upfront fees related to implementation services were $16.0 million as of June 30, 2021, with $19.0 million of revenue recognized for fiscal year ended June 30, 2021. Nonrefundable upfront fees related to implementation services and recurring subscription services were $15.9 million as of June 30, 2020, with $4.3 million of revenue recognized for fiscal year ended June 30, 2020. Deferred revenues include an immaterial portion related to recurring subscription services where revenue is recognized over the subscription period.
We defer certain commission costs that meet the capitalization criteria. We also capitalize certain costs to fulfill a contract related to our proprietary products if they are identifiable, generate or enhance resources used to satisfy future performance obligations and are expected to be recovered. We utilize the portfolio approach to account for both the cost of obtaining a contract and the cost of fulfilling a contract.
Capitalized costs to fulfill a contract and cost to obtain a contract are amortized over the expected period of benefit, which is generally six years based on our average client life and other qualitative factors, including rate of technological changes. We do not incur any additional costs to obtain or fulfill contracts upon renewal. We recognize additional selling and commission costs and fulfillment costs when an existing client purchases additional services. The additional costs only relate to the additional services purchased and do not relate to the renewal of previous services. We continue to expense certain costs to obtain a contract and cost to fulfill a contract if those costs do not meet the capitalization criteria.
See “-Critical Accounting Policies-Revenue Recognition” below. We expect recurring and other revenue to increase as we continue to add new customers and sell additional products to our existing customers.
Interest Income on Funds Held for Clients
We earn interest income on funds held for clients. We collect funds for employee payroll payments and related taxes in advance of remittance to employees and taxing authorities. Prior to remittance to employees and taxing authorities, we earn interest on these funds through demand deposit accounts with financial institutions with which we have automated clearing house (“ACH”) arrangements. We also earn interest by investing a portion of funds held for clients in highly liquid, investment-grade marketable securities. We expect funds held for our clients to generally grow as the employees per customer increase and
as we add customers. Interest income on funds held for clients will fluctuate based on market rates of demand deposit accounts, as well as the highly liquid, investment-grade marketable securities in which we invest the client funds.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues includes costs relating to the provision of ongoing customer support and implementation activities, payroll tax filing, distribution of printed checks and other materials providing our payroll and other HCM solutions. These costs primarily consist of employee-related expenses for associates who service customers, as well as third-party processing fees, delivery costs, hosting costs, and bank fees associated with client fund transfers. Costs for recurring support are generally expensed as incurred, while such costs for onboarding and configuring our products for our customers are capitalized and amortized over a period of six years.
We amortized $10.6 million and $5.7 million of capitalized contract fulfillment costs during the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We expect to realize increased amortization in future periods as the total capitalized contract fulfillment costs on our balance sheet increases.
We also capitalize a portion of our internal-use software costs including external direct costs of materials and services associated with developing or obtaining internal use software and certain payroll and payroll-related costs for associates who are directly associated with internal use software projects, which are then generally amortized over a period of three years into cost of revenues. We amortized $59.9 and $49.8 million of capitalized internal-use and acquired software costs during the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Our cost of revenues is expected to increase in absolute dollars as we expand our customer base. However, in the long-term we expect cost of revenues to reduce as a percentage of total revenues as our business scales.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of employee-related expenses for our direct sales and marketing staff, marketing, advertising and promotion expenses, and other related costs. We capitalize certain commission costs related to new contracts or purchases of additional services by our existing customers and amortize such items over a period of six years.
We amortized $8.9 million and $4.5 million of capitalized contract acquisition costs during the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We expect to realize increased amortization in future periods as the total capitalized contract acquisition costs on our balance sheet increases.
We seek to grow our number of new customers and upsell existing customers, and therefore our sales and marketing expense is expected to continue to increase in absolute dollars as we grow our sales organization and expand our marketing activities.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of employee-related costs for our administrative, finance, accounting, legal and human resources departments. Additional expenses include consulting and professional fees, occupancy costs, insurance, and other corporate expenses.
We amortized $79.5 million and $78.0 million of intangible assets, excluding acquired software amortized through cost of revenues, during the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in amortization expense in fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 is attributable to our asset acquisition in February 2021.
We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase in absolute dollars as we begin to operate as a public company.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of employee-related expenses for our software development and product management staff. Additional expenses include costs related to the development, maintenance, quality assurance and
testing of new technologies, and ongoing refinement of our existing solutions. Research and development expenses, other than internal-use software costs qualifying for capitalization, including costs associated with preliminary project stage activities, training, maintenance, and all other post-implementation stage activities are expensed as incurred.
We capitalize a portion of our development costs related to internal-use software, which are amortized over a period of three years into cost of revenues. The timing of our capitalized development projects may affect the amount of development costs expensed in any given period. The table below sets forth the amounts of capitalized and expensed research and development costs for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020:
We expect to increase our research and development expenses in absolute dollars as we continue to broaden our product offerings and extend our technological leadership by investing in the development of new technologies and introducing them to new and existing customers.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest payments and accruals relating to outstanding borrowings. We expect interest expense to vary each reporting period depending on the amount of outstanding borrowings and prevailing interest rates.
Other Income/(Expense)
Other income (expense) generally consists of other income and expense items outside of our normal operations, such as realized gains or losses on the sale of certain positions of funds held for clients, gains or losses on the extinguishment of debt and expenses relating to our financing arrangements.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated statement of operations for the periods indicated. Refer to the section entitled, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” included in our IPO prospectus, dated July 20, 2021 filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on July 22, 2021, for a discussion and comparison of results for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020 to the period from November 2, 2018 through June 30, 2019 (Successor Period), and the period from July 1, 2018 through November 1, 2018 (Predecessor Period).
Comparison of the Fiscal Years Ended June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020
Revenues
Total revenue for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 was $352.8 million and $327.9 million, respectively. In the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, recurring and other revenue accounted for $351.0 million and $317.6 million, respectively. Additionally, interest income on funds held for clients accounted for $1.8 million and $10.3 million, respectively, for the fiscal years ended ended June 30, 2021 and 2020. Total revenues increased primarily as a result of an increase in customers of 3.3% to approximately 28,000 at June 30, 2021 from approximately 27,100 at June 30, 2020 as well as from an increase in effective PEPM of 6.7% to $15.21 for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 from $14.25 for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020. Additionally, the average number of employees per customer increased by 5.9% to approximately 72 at June 30, 2021 from 68 at June 30, 2020. For the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, customer employees were approximately 2.0 million and 1.9 million, respectively.
Interest income on funds held for clients decreased primarily as a result of lower average interest rates across our portfolio of debt-security investments. The impact from the reduction in interest rates was partially offset by higher average
daily balances for funds held due to the addition of new customers. Average client funds balance for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 were $718.1 million and $666.9 million, respectively.
Cost of Revenues
Total cost of revenues for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 was $154.5 million and $139.7 million, respectively. Our total cost of revenues increased primarily as a result of a $6.9 million increase in amortization expense relating to capitalized software, a $5.0 million increase in amortization of deferred contract costs and a $3.3 million increase in intangible amortization expense primarily associated with our acquisition of Paltech Solutions, Inc. (“7Geese”) in September 2020.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 were $106.1 million and $100.0 million, respectively. The increase in sales and marketing expense was primarily the result of $4.2 million of additional employee-related costs and $3.0 million in additional marketing costs, principally those incurred to expand our sales coverage, partially offset by a $1.8 million reduction in travel related expenses due to decreased travel as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 were $145.5 million and $137.1 million, respectively. The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily driven by a $6.9 million increase in professional services, consulting fees and other related costs primarily associated with our efforts to become a public company and a $1.5 million increase in intangible amortization expense primarily associated with an asset acquisition completed in February 2021.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 were $36.0 million and $45.9 million, respectively. The decrease in research and development expenses was primarily the result of an $8.9 million decrease in employee-related costs and a $1.3 million decrease in consulting fees, in each case driven primarily by cost-saving initiatives as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 was $2.5 million and $1.8 million, respectively. This increase was primarily attributable to an increase in borrowings as a result of the 2019 Term Loan entered into in September 2020.
Other (Expense)/Income
Other expense was $1.4 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 compared to income of $9.0 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020. Other expense for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 primarily consists of $2.2 million relating to the write-off of debt acquisition costs and third party costs associated with entering into our New Credit Facility in June 2021 and $0.8 million in unrealized gains resulting from changes in foreign currency rates, while other income for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020 primarily consists of a $6.2 million gain resulting from the forgiveness of debt relating to satisfactory completion of certain requirements which were met under the New Market Tax Credits agreement with the City of Norwood and $2.5 million in realized gains on the sale of certain positions of funds held for clients.
Income Tax Benefit
Income tax benefit for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 was a benefit of $20.8 million and $20.2 million, respectively, reflecting effective tax rates for the periods of 22.3% and 23.1%, respectively.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our results determined in accordance with GAAP, we believe the following non-GAAP measures are useful in evaluating our operating performance. We believe that non-GAAP financial information, when taken collectively, may be helpful to investors because it provides consistency and comparability with past financial performance and assists in comparisons with other companies, some of which use similar non-GAAP financial information to supplement their GAAP results. The non-GAAP financial information is presented for supplemental informational purposes only and should not be considered a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with GAAP and may be different from similarly titled non-GAAP measures used by other companies. A reconciliation is provided below for each non-GAAP financial measure to the most directly comparable financial measure stated in accordance with GAAP. Investors are encouraged to review the related GAAP financial measures and the reconciliation of these non-GAAP financial measures to their most directly comparable GAAP financial measures.
Adjusted Gross Profit and Adjusted Gross Profit Margin
We define Adjusted Gross Profit as gross profit before amortization of intangible assets, stock-based compensation expenses, and certain corporate expenses, in each case that are included in costs of recurring revenues. We define Adjusted Gross Profit Margin as Adjusted Gross Profit divided by total revenues.
We use Adjusted Gross Profit and Adjusted Gross Profit Margin to understand and evaluate our core operating performance and trends. We believe these metrics are useful measures to us and to our investors to assist in evaluating our core
operating performance because it provides consistency and direct comparability with our past financial performance and between fiscal periods, as the metrics eliminate the effects of variability of items such as stock-based compensation expense and amortization of intangible assets, which are non-cash expenses that may fluctuate for reasons unrelated to overall operating performance.
Adjusted Gross Profit and Adjusted Gross Profit Margin have limitations as analytical tools, and you should not consider them in isolation, or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP and should not be considered as replacements for gross profit and gross profit margin, as determined by GAAP, or as measures of our profitability. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using non-GAAP measures only for supplemental purposes.
Adjusted Gross Profit was $244.9 million and $233.4 million, or 69.4% and 71.2% of Recurring and other revenue, for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Adjusted Gross Profit increased for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, primarily driven by the increase in revenue from customer growth and only partially offset by an increase in amortization of capitalized software and amortization of costs to fulfill contracts within cost of revenues.
* Gross Profit and Adjusted Gross Profit are burdened by depreciation expense of $2.6 million and $2.5 million for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Gross Profit and Adjusted Gross Profit are burdened by amortization of capitalized software of $13.8 million and $6.9 million for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Gross Profit and Adjusted Gross Profit are burdened by amortization of deferred contract costs of $10.6 million and $5.7 million for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
** Corporate adjustments for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020 primarily related to certain costs related to the transition of the new executive leadership team and closure of a standalone facility of $0.7 million and $0.9 million of costs related to implementing certain expense saving initiatives as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Adjusted Operating Income
We define Adjusted Operating Income as loss from operations before amortization of acquired intangible assets, stock-based award and liability incentive award compensation expenses, and other certain corporate expenses, such as costs related to acquisitions, including the Apax Acquisition. We define Adjusted Operating Income Margin as Adjusted Operating Income divided by total revenues.
We use Adjusted Operating Income and Adjusted Operating Income Margin to understand and evaluate our core operating performance and trends, to prepare and approve our annual budget, and to develop short-term and long-term operating plans. We believe that Adjusted Operating Income and Adjusted Operating Income Margin facilitate comparison of our operating performance on a consistent basis between periods, and when viewed in combination with our results prepared in accordance with GAAP, help provide a broader picture of factors and trends affecting our results of operations. While the amortization expense relating to intangible assets is excluded from Adjusted Operating Income, the revenue related to such intangible assets is reflected in Adjusted Operating Income as these assets contribute to our revenue generation.
Adjusted Operating Income and Adjusted Operating Income Margin have limitations as analytical tools, and you should not consider them in isolation, or as substitutes for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Because of these limitations, Adjusted Operating Income and Adjusted Operating Income Margin should not be considered as replacements for operating loss and operating loss margin, as determined by GAAP, or as measures of our profitability. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using non-GAAP measures only for supplemental purposes.
Adjusted Operating Income was $48.0 million and $46.3 million for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Adjusted Operating Income increased for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, primarily driven by an increase in gross profit and a reduction in research and development expenses as a result of a decrease in employee-related expenses and consulting fees, partially offset by an increase in costs related to expanding our sales coverage.
* Corporate adjustments for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 relate to certain costs related to the transition of the new executive leadership team and closure of a standalone facility of $1.0 million and $6.0 million, respectively, as well as costs associated with our efforts to become a public company, including the implementation of a new enterprise-resource planning system and professional, consulting, and other costs of $5.5 million and $2.2 million, respectively, transaction expenses and costs associated with the 7Geese Acquisition and other acquisitions totaling $0.7 million and $0.5 million, respectively, and costs related to implementing certain expense saving and other initiatives related to the COVID-19 pandemic totaling $0.5 million and $3.4 million, respectively.
Adjusted Operating Expenses
We define Adjusted Sales and Marketing expense as sales and marketing expenses before stock-based award and liability incentive award compensation expenses and other certain corporate expenses. We define Adjusted General and Administrative expense as general and administrative expenses before amortization of acquired intangible assets, stock-based award and liability incentive award compensation expenses, and other certain corporate expenses. We define Adjusted Research and Development expense as research and development expenses before stock-based award and liability award compensation expenses and other certain corporate expenses.
We use Adjusted Sales and Marketing expense, Adjusted General and Administrative expense and Adjusted Research and Development expense (collectively, “Adjusted Operating Expenses”) to understand and evaluate our core operating performance and trends, to prepare and approve our annual budget, and to develop short-term and long-term operating plans. We believe that Adjusted Operating Expenses facilitate comparison of our operating performance on a consistent basis between periods, and when viewed in combination with our results prepared in accordance with GAAP, help provide a broader picture of factors and trends affecting our results of operations.
Adjusted Operating Expenses have limitations as analytical tools, and you should not consider them in isolation, or as substitutes for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Because of these limitations, Adjusted Operating Expenses should not be considered as replacements for operating expenses, as determined by GAAP. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using non-GAAP measures only for supplemental purposes.
Adjusted Sales and Marketing expense was $103.7 million and $95.8 million for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020. Adjusted Sales and Marketing expenses increased for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, primarily driven by expanding our sales coverage.
Adjusted General and Administrative expense was $57.3 million and $47.7 million for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020. Adjusted General and Administrative expenses increased for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, primarily driven by additional employee-related costs and software-related expenses.
Adjusted Research and Development expense was $35.9 million and $43.6 million for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Adjusted Research and Development expenses decreased for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, primarily driven by a decrease in employee-related costs and consulting fees.
* Corporate adjustments for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 relate to certain costs related to the transition of the new executive leadership team and closure of a standalone facility of $0.6 million and $1.8 million, respectively, as well as costs related to implementing certain expense saving and other initiatives as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic totaling $0.5 million and $0.7 million, respectively.
** Corporate adjustments for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 relate to certain costs related to the transition of the new executive leadership team and closure of a standalone facility of $0.4 million and $3.3 million, respectively, as well as costs associated with our efforts to become a public company, including the implementation of a new enterprise-resource planning system and professional, consulting, and other costs, of $5.5 million and $2.0 million, respectively, and transaction expenses and costs associated with the 7Geese Acquisition and other acquisitions totaling $0.6 million and $0.3 million, respectively. Corporate adjustments for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020 also include costs related to implementing certain expense saving initiatives as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic totaling $0.9 million.
*** Corporate adjustments for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 relate to costs associated with the 7Geese acquisition and other acquisitions of $0.1 million and $0.2 million, respectively. Corporate adjustments for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020 also relate to certain costs related to the transition of the new executive leadership team and closure of a standalone facility of $0.3 million and costs related to implementing certain expense saving initiatives as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic totaling $1.0 million.
Adjusted Net Income Attributable to Paycor HCM, Inc.
We define Adjusted Net Income Attributable to Paycor HCM, Inc. as Net Loss Attributable to Paycor HCM, Inc. before the accretion of redeemable noncontrolling interests, amortization of acquired intangible assets, stock-based award and liability incentive award compensation expenses, gain or loss on the extinguishment of debt, and other certain corporate expenses, such as costs related to acquisitions, including the Apax Acquisition. All of the adjustments, except for the accretion of redeemable noncontrolling interests, are adjusted for the effect of income taxes using a 24% statutory tax rate for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020.
We use Adjusted Net Income Attributable to Paycor HCM, Inc. to understand and evaluate our core operating performance and trends, to prepare and approve our annual budget, and to develop short-term and long-term operating plans. We believe that Adjusted Net Income Attributable to Paycor HCM, Inc. facilitates comparison of our operating performance on a consistent basis between periods, and when viewed in combination with our results prepared in accordance with GAAP, help provide a broader picture of factors and trends affecting our results of operations. While the amortization expense relating to intangible assets is excluded from Adjusted Net Income Attributable to Paycor HCM, Inc., the revenue related to such intangible assets is reflected in Adjusted Net Income Attributable to Paycor HCM, Inc. as these assets contribute to our revenue generation.
Adjusted Net Income Attributable to Paycor HCM, Inc. has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider this in isolation, or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Because of these limitations, Adjusted Net Income Attributable to Paycor HCM, Inc. should not be considered as a replacement for Net Loss Attributable to Paycor HCM, Inc., as determined by GAAP, or as a measure of our profitability. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using non-GAAP measures only for supplemental purposes.
Adjusted Net Income Attributable to Paycor HCM, Inc. was $33.5 million and $35.1 million for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
* Corporate adjustments for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 relate to certain costs related to the transition of the new executive leadership team and closure of a standalone facility of $1.0 million and $6.0 million, respectively, as well as costs associated with our efforts to become a public company, including the implementation of a new enterprise-resource planning system and professional, consulting, and other costs of $5.5 million and $2.2 million, respectively, transaction expenses and costs associated with the 7Geese Acquisition and other acquisitions totaling $0.7 million and $0.5 million, respectively, and costs related to implementing certain expense saving and other initiatives related to the COVID-19 pandemic totaling $0.5 million and $3.4 million, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
As of June 30, 2021, our principal sources of liquidity were cash and cash equivalents totaling $2.6 million, which was held for working capital purposes, as well as $50.9 million of borrowing capacity available under our New Credit Facility, described further below. As of June 30, 2021, our cash and cash equivalents principally included demand deposit accounts. During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, our positive cash flows from operations enabled us to make continued investments to support the growth of our business. Following the completion of our IPO, we expect that our operating cash flows, in addition to our cash and cash equivalents and access to our New Credit Facility, will enable us to continue to make such investments in the future. We expect our operating cash flows to further improve as we increase our operational efficiency and experience economies of scale.
We have historically financed our operations primarily through cash received from operations and debt financing and, most recently, with the issuance of equity in our IPO. We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents, our New Credit Facility and cash provided by sales of our solutions and services will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure needs for at least the next twelve months. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors including our growth rate, the timing and extent of spending to support development efforts, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, and the introduction of new and enhanced products and services offerings. In the future, we may enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services, and technologies, including intellectual property rights.
We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. If additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital or generate cash flows necessary to expand our operations and invest in new technologies, this could reduce our ability to compete successfully and harm our results of operations.
The majority of the Company’s recurring fees are satisfied over time as the services are provided and invoiced by the customer payroll processing period or by month. The Company recognizes deferred revenue for nonrefundable upfront fees as well as for subscription services related to certain ancillary products invoiced prior to the satisfaction of the performance obligation. As of June 30, 2021, we had deferred revenue of $16.0 million, of which $11.9 million was recorded as a current liability and is expected to be recorded as revenue in the next twelve months, provided all other revenue recognition criteria have been met.
Midco Redeemable Preferred Stock
In connection with the Apax Acquisition, Pride Midco issued $200 million in aggregate initial liquidation preference of Redeemable Preferred Stock, which is reflected as a redeemable noncontrolling interest in our consolidated balance sheets. The Midco Redeemable Preferred Stock accrued dividends at a rate of LIBOR plus 8.875%. The dividends were payable, or compounded, quarterly on March 31, June 30, September 30, and December 31 of each year. From the issue date through November 2, 2020, dividends were accrued and added to the then-prevailing liquidation preference of the Midco Redeemable Preferred Stock. From November 2, 2020 to November 2, 2021, we were required pay 50% of the accrued dividends in cash.
We fully redeemed the Midco Redeemable Preferred Stock in connection with our July 2021 IPO. The redemption price per share was equal to 101.0% of the liquidation preference, plus the amount of all accrued dividends for the then current and all prior dividend payment periods, or approximately $260.0 million. We used a portion of the cash received from our July 2021 IPO proceeds to redeem the Midco Redeemable Preferred Stock.
New Senior Secured Credit Facility
In June 2021, Paycor, Inc. entered into the New Credit Agreement with PNC, as administrative agent and collateral agent, providing a $100.0 million senior secured revolving credit facility, of which $44.5 million was initially drawn at the closing date. The New Credit Facility includes an “accordion” feature that allows us, under certain circumstances, to increase the size of the New Credit Facility up to $300.0 million.
The New Loans have variable interest rates. The interest rate on the New Loans equals, at our option, either, (i) in the case of ABR borrowings, the highest of (a) the PNC prime rate, (b) the Federal Funds Rate plus 50 basis points, and (c) the adjusted LIBOR with a maturity of one month, plus 100 basis points (“ABR”) or (ii) in the case of LIBOR borrowings, the LIBOR rate, plus, in each case, an applicable margin of (A) prior to an initial public offering, (i) in the case of ABR borrowings, 95 basis points per annum and (ii) in the case of LIBOR borrowings, 195 basis points per annum or (B) following an initial public offering, (i) in the case of ABR borrowings, 37.5 basis points per annum or (ii) in the case of LIBOR borrowings, 137.5 basis points per annum, in each case, with step downs based on achievement of certain total leverage ratios.
The New Credit Facility requires us to pay a quarterly unused fee of (i) prior to an initial public offering, 0.25% and (ii) following an initial public offering, between 0.10% per annum and 0.175% per annum based on our total leverage ratio.
The New Credit Facility commitments will mature on June 11, 2026.
Borrowings under the Credit Agreement are guaranteed by our subsidiary, Pride Guarantor Inc. and certain of our other subsidiaries. These borrowings are secured by liens and security interests on substantially all of the assets of existing and future material domestic subsidiaries of Pride Guarantor Inc.
The New Credit Facility contains financial covenants, which are reviewed for compliance on a quarterly basis, including a total leverage ratio financial covenant of 3.50 to 1.00 and an interest coverage ratio financial covenant of 3.00 to 1.00. As of June 30, 2021, we were in compliance with all covenants.
Equity Issuance and Share Repurchase
In December 2020 and January 2021, we completed private placements of 7,715 shares of Series A Preferred Stock with certain institutional investors, which generated proceeds of approximately $270.0 million. Each share of Series A Preferred Stock had an initial liquidation preference of $35,000, subject to adjustment in accordance with our Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation.
Subsequent to our December 2020 Series A Preferred Stock issuance, we used the proceeds from the issuance and a promissory note of approximately $65.0 million with Pride Aggregator L.P. to repurchase 10,620,260 shares of our Common Stock at a price of $23.07 per share for approximately $245.0 million. We repaid the $65.0 million promissory note with proceeds from the January 2021 Series A Preferred Stock issuance. The Series A Preferred Stock converted into 11,705,039 shares of our Common Stock upon the closing of our July 2021 IPO, adjusted for the 1,517.18 for 1 share common stock split.
Cash Flows
The following table presents a summary of our consolidated cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020.
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $10.8 million and $0.1 million for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in net cash provided by operating activities for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 reflects an increase in adjustments to add back non-cash items, partially offset by an increase in net loss and a decrease in changes in assets and liabilities.
Investing Activities
Net cash (used in) provided by investing activities was $(52.6) million and $121.5 million, for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The change in investing activities for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 was primarily attributable to the timing of proceeds and purchases within our client funds portfolio as well as the acquisition of 7Geese in September 2020.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities was $55.3 million and $(20.9) million for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The change in financing activities for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 was primarily attributable to an increase in funds held to satisfy client funds obligations as well as proceeds from the issuance of preferred stock, net of cash used for the repurchase of common stock.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table sets forth the amounts of our significant contractual obligations and commitments with definitive payment terms as of June 30, 2021:
______________________
(1)Represents principal and variable interest payments due under our New Credit Agreement as of June 30, 2021. Interest payments are approximately as follows: $1.1 million for less than 1 year and $2.2 million for 1-3 years, and $2.1 million for 3-5 years. Variable interest payments were calculated using interest rates as of June 30, 2021. As discussed in Note 20 - Subsequent Events in Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, the outstanding borrowings as of June 30, 2021 have been repaid.
(2)Purchase obligations include our estimate of the minimum outstanding commitments under purchase orders to buy goods and services and legally binding contractual arrangements with future payment obligations. These obligations primarily include software licensing and support services.
Impact of Inflation
While inflation may impact our net revenues and costs of revenues, we believe the effects of inflation, if any, on our results of operations and financial condition have not been significant. However, there can be no assurance that our results of operations and financial condition will not be materially impacted by inflation in the future.
Indemnification Agreements
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into agreements of varying scope and terms pursuant to which we agree to indemnify customers, including, but not limited to, losses arising out of the breach of such agreements, services to be provided by us or from intellectual property infringement claims made by third parties. In addition, in connection with the completion of the IPO, we entered into indemnification agreements with our directors and certain officers and associates that require us, among other things, to indemnify them against certain liabilities that may arise by reason of their status or service as directors, officers or associates. No demands have been made upon us to provide indemnification under such agreements and there are no claims that we are aware of that could have a material effect on our consolidated balance sheets, consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss, or consolidated statements of cash flows.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that may be material to investors.
JOBS Act
We qualify as an “emerging growth company” pursuant to the provisions of the JOBS Act. For as long as we are an “emerging growth company,” we may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not “emerging growth companies,” including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements, exemptions from the requirements of holding advisory “say-on-pay” votes on executive compensation and shareholder advisory votes on golden parachute compensation.
The JOBS Act also permits an emerging growth company like us to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. We have elected to “opt-in” to this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards and, therefore, we will not be subject to the same new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that comply with such new or revised accounting standards on a non-delayed basis.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenue and expenses and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our financial statements. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions, impacting our reported results of operations and financial condition.
Certain accounting policies involve significant judgments and assumptions by management, which have a material impact on the carrying value of assets and liabilities and the recognition of income and expenses. Management considers these accounting policies to be critical accounting policies. The estimates and assumptions used by management are based on historical experience and other factors, which are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. The significant accounting policies which we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results are described below. Refer to Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements: “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” included elsewhere in this report for more detailed information regarding our critical accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition
Revenues are recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to clients in an amount that reflects the consideration we are entitled to for those goods or services. We derive our revenue from contracts predominantly from recurring and non-recurring service fees. The majority of our agreements are generally cancellable by the client on 30 days’ notice.
Recurring fees are derived from payroll, workforce management, and HR-related cloud-based computing services. The majority of our recurring fees are satisfied over time as the services are provided during each client’s payroll period. The performance obligations related to payroll services are delivered based upon the payroll frequency of the client with the fee charged and collected based on a per-employee-per-month or per employee-per-payroll basis. The performance obligations related to workforce management and HR-related services are generally satisfied each month with the fee charged and collected based on a per-employee-per-month basis. For subscription-based fees, which can include payroll, workforce management, and HR-related services, we recognize the applicable recurring fees each month with the fee charged and collected based on a per-employee-per-month basis.
Non-recurring service fees consist mainly of nonrefundable implementation fees. The implementation activities involve setting the client up and loading data into our cloud-based modules. We have determined that the nonrefundable upfront fees provide certain clients with a material right to renew the contract beyond the normal 30-day contractual period without payment of an additional upfront implementation fee. Implementation fees are deferred and recognized as revenue over the period to which the material right exists, which is the period the client is expected to benefit from not having to pay an additional nonrefundable implementation fee upon renewal of the service.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets, Net
An impairment of goodwill is recognized when the carrying amount of assets exceeds their implied fair value. The process of evaluating the potential impairment is subjective and requires the application of judgment. We perform an annual impairment review of goodwill in our fiscal fourth quarter and additional impairment reviews when events and circumstances indicate it is more likely than not that an impairment may have occurred.
In evaluating goodwill for impairment, we have the option to first perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether further impairment testing is necessary or to perform a quantitative assessment by comparing the fair value of our single reporting unit to its carrying amount, including goodwill. Under the qualitative assessment, an entity is not required to calculate the fair value of a reporting unit unless the entity determines that it is more likely than not that its fair value is less
than its carrying amount. Qualitative factors include macroeconomic conditions, industry and market conditions, cost factors, and overall financial performance, among others.
If under the quantitative assessment, the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then goodwill is written down for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the fair value. Fair values of the reporting units are estimated using a weighted methodology considering the output from both the income and market approaches. The income approach incorporates the use of a discounted cash flow (“DCF”) analysis. A number of significant assumptions and estimates are involved in the application of the DCF model to forecast operating cash flows, including markets and market shares, sales volumes and prices, costs to produce, tax rates, capital spending, discount rate, weighted average cost of capital, terminal values and working capital changes. The cash flow forecasts are based on approved strategic operating plans. The market approach is performed using the Guideline Public Companies method which is based on earnings multiple data.
We elected to perform a qualitative assessment during fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 and a quantitative assessment during fiscal year ended June 30, 2020 and determined for both periods that it is not more likely than not that the fair value is less than its carrying amount. The quantitative assessment during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020 indicated that the fair value was substantially in excess of the carrying value.
We evaluate other intangible assets, principally consisting of acquired software, customer relationships and trade names, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable. Events or changes in circumstances that could result in an impairment review include, but are not limited to, significant underperformance relative to historical or projected future operating results, significant changes in the manner of use of the acquired assets or the strategy for our overall business, and significant negative industry or economic trends. If an event occurs that would cause us to revise our estimates and assumptions used in analyzing the value of our other intangible assets, the revision could result in a non-cash impairment charge that could have a material impact on our financial results.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize stock-based compensation expense in accordance with the provisions of Accounting Standards Codification 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation (“ASC 718”). ASC 718 requires compensation expense for all stock-based compensation awards made to associates and directors to be measured and recognized based on the grant date fair value of the awards. Stock-based compensation expense for time-based awards is determined based on the grant-date fair value and is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the award, which is typically the vesting term of the award. Stock-based compensation expense for awards subject to market and performance conditions is determined based on the grant-date fair value and is recognized on a graded vesting basis over the term of the award once it is probable that the performance conditions will be met.
To estimate the grant date fair value of our time-based awards, we use a Monte Carlo simulation method, which utilizes multiple inputs to estimate the probability that market conditions will be achieved. The model involves inherent uncertainties and require the following highly subjective assumptions as inputs:
•Risk-free rate: We base the risk-free interest rate on the implied yield currently available on U.S. Treasury securities with a remaining term commensurate with the estimated expected term.
•Expected term: For awards subject to market and performance conditions, the expected term represents the period of time that the options granted are expected to be outstanding.
•Dividend yield: We estimate the dividend yield at zero, as we do not currently issue dividends and have no plans to issue dividends in the foreseeable future.
•Volatility: Since we do not have a trading history of our common stock, expected volatility is estimated based on the historical volatility of peer companies over the period commensurate with the estimated expected term.
•Fair value: Prior to our initial public offering, our common stock was not publicly traded, and thus, the fair value of the shares of common stock was established by the Board using various inputs. Following our initial public offering, our common stock is traded in the public market, and accordingly we will use the applicable closing price of our common stock to determine fair value.
The following assumptions were used for the awards subject to performance and market conditions that we granted during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021:
Adoption of Accounting Pronouncements
For a description of recently issued accounting standards not yet adopted, see Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements: “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies -Pending Accounting Pronouncements” appearing elsewhere in this report.