Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Forward-Looking Statements
Readers are cautioned that the statements contained in this report regarding expectations of our performance or other matters that may affect our business, results of operations, or financial condition are “forward-looking statements” as defined in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These statements, which are based on current expectations of future events, may be identified by the use of words such as “strategy,” “expects,” “continues,” “plans,” “anticipates,” “believes,” “will,” “estimates,” “intends,” “projects,” “goals,” “targets,” and other words of similar meaning. These statements also may be identified by the fact that they do not relate strictly to historical or current facts. If underlying assumptions prove inaccurate, or if known or unknown risks or uncertainties materialize, actual results could vary materially from those anticipated, estimated, or projected. Some of these risks and uncertainties include the risks, uncertainties, and other factors set forth in "Item 1A, Risk Factors" in this Annual Report and in our other filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. We do not undertake to update any forward-looking statements that we may make from time to time.
Executive Summary
In what was an unprecedented and challenging year, our Company adapted to constant change as we navigated the COVID-19 pandemic. We appreciate the continued support from all of our stakeholders and, in particular, we would like to thank the entire Pyxus team for their hard work and unwavering commitment to the Company and the communities in which we operate under extraordinary circumstances.
During fiscal 2021, we implemented a series of restructurings and process changes that allowed our business to continue to operate throughout the year and positioned us for success in fiscal 2022 and beyond. Through these actions, we were able to reduce our debt by $396.0 million and we made the strategic decision to exit our cash flow negative Canadian cannabis businesses. The pending divestiture of the Canadian cannabis businesses further supports our SG&A cost containment efforts and provides us with more flexibility to utilize our working capital for the opportunities we anticipate in the tobacco and e-liquids industries.
Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, our production facilities continued to operate although, in some instances, at lower production levels than planned due to social distancing requirements and safety practices implemented to reduce the spread of COVID-19 and protect our employees. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in shipping delays of leaf tobacco for certain customer orders from the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021 into fiscal 2022. However, the effect of COVID-19 on our business yielded innovative changes that will enable us to be more flexible in the future and potentially accelerate certain activities in the crop cycle. Also, COVID-19 has pushed the tobacco industry to continue to look for ways to reduce supply chain complexity in a responsible manner. As a leader in sustainable and traceable crop production, we have demonstrated our ability to service the evolving needs of the tobacco industry over time and will continue to do so in fiscal 2022 and beyond.
Overview
Historically, Pyxus’ core business has been as a tobacco leaf merchant, purchasing, processing, packing, storing and shipping tobacco to manufacturers of cigarettes and other consumer tobacco products throughout the world. Through our predecessor companies, we have a long operating history in the leaf tobacco industry with some customer relationships beginning in the early 1900s. Our core leaf tobacco operations continued to account for almost all of our revenues for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021.
We are committed to responsible crop production that supports economic viability for the grower, provides a safe working atmosphere for those involved in crop production and minimizes negative environmental impact. Our agronomists maintain frequent contact with growers prior to and during the growing and curing seasons to provide technical assistance to improve the quality and yield of the crop. Throughout the entire production process, from seed through processing and final shipment, our SENTRISM traceability system provides clear visibility into how products are produced throughout the supply chain, supporting product integrity.
In an increasing number of markets, we also provide agronomy expertise for growing leaf tobacco. Our contracted tobacco grower base often produces a significant volume of non-tobacco crop utilizing the agronomic assistance that our team provides. Pyxus is working to find markets for these crops as part of our ongoing efforts to improve farmer livelihoods and the communities in which they live.
Our consolidated operations are managed and reported in nine operating segments that are organized by product category and geographic area and aggregated into three reportable segments for financial reporting purposes: Leaf - North America, Leaf - Other Regions, and Other Products and Services. Refer to "Note 1. Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" to the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for additional information.
U.S. Bankruptcy Proceedings
On June 15, 2020, Old Pyxus (then named Pyxus International, Inc.) and its then subsidiaries Alliance One International, LLC, Alliance One North America, LLC, Alliance One Specialty Products, LLC and GSP Properties, LLC (collectively, the “Debtors”) filed voluntary petitions (the “Chapter 11 Cases”) under Chapter 11 of the United States Bankruptcy Code with the Bankruptcy Court for the District of Delaware (the “Bankruptcy Court”) to implement a prepackaged Chapter 11 plan of reorganization to effectuate a financial restructuring (the “Restructuring”) of Old Pyxus’ secured debt. On August 21, 2020, the Bankruptcy Court issued an order (the “Confirmation Order”) confirming the Amended Joint Prepackaged Chapter 11 Plan of Reorganization (the “Plan”) filed by the Debtors in the Chapter 11 Cases. On August 24, 2020, the Plan became effective in accordance with its terms, and the Debtors emerged from the Chapter 11 Cases. In connection with the satisfaction of the conditions to effectiveness as set forth in the Confirmation Order and the Plan, Old Pyxus completed a series of transactions pursuant to which the business assets and operations of Old Pyxus were vested in a new Virginia corporation, Pyxus Holdings, Inc., which is an indirect subsidiary of the Company. Pursuant to the Confirmation Order and the Plan, at the effectiveness of the Plan, all outstanding shares of common stock, and rights to acquire the common stock, of Old Pyxus were cancelled and the shares of common stock of the Company were delivered to certain creditors of Old Pyxus. Accordingly, upon the effectiveness of the Plan the Company, through its subsidiaries, operated all of the businesses operated by Old Pyxus and its subsidiaries immediately prior to the effectiveness of the Plan and the Company is the successor issuer to Old Pyxus. Other than our Chief Executive Officer, our Board of Directors does not include any of the individuals who served as directors of Old Pyxus at the time the Chapter 11 Cases were commenced or at the effectiveness of the Plan. Refer to "Note 3. Emergence from Voluntary Reorganization under Chapter 11" to the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for additional information.
Development of Businesses
Beginning in 2017, we undertook a strategic process designed to diversify the Company's products and services by leveraging our core strengths in agronomy and traceability. In general, our diversification strategy focused on products that were value-added, required some degree of processing and offered a higher margin potential than our core tobacco leaf business. In support of this strategy, the Company investments in e-liquids, industrial hemp/CBD, and legal cannabis in Canada. Refer to "Item 1. "Business" for additional information regarding these investments.
Following the effectiveness of the Plan and the election of additional members of our Board of Directors in October 2020, our Board of Directors determined to exit the industrial hemp, CBD and Canadian cannabis businesses in light of the Company’s limited capital resources and the continuing capital requirements to develop and expand these early-stage businesses. In December 2020, the Company commenced actions to exit operations of the industrial hemp businesses, including the production and sale of products containing extracts of industrial hemp, including CBD products, by Criticality. Criticality’s CBD extraction facility has ceased operations.
CCAA Proceeding and Deconsolidation and Disposition of Canadian Cannabis Subsidiaries
On January 21, 2021, Figr East, Figr Norfolk, and Figr Brands, Inc., an indirect subsidiary of the Company and the majority parent corporation of Figr East and Figr Norfolk (“Figr Brands”, and together with Figr East and Figr Norfolk, the “Canadian Cannabis Subsidiaries”) applied for relief from their respective creditors pursuant to Canada’s Companies’ Creditors Arrangement Act (the “CCAA”) in the Ontario Superior Court of Justice (Commercial List) (the “Canadian Court”) in Ontario, Canada as Court File No. CV-21-00655373-00CL (the “CCAA Proceeding”). On January 21, 2021 (the “Order Date”), upon application by the Canadian Cannabis Subsidiaries, the Canadian Court issued an order for creditor protection of the Canadian Cannabis Subsidiaries pursuant to the provisions of the CCAA and the appointment of FTI Consulting Canada Inc. to serve as the Canadian Court-appointed monitor of the Canadian Cannabis Subsidiaries during the pendency of the CCAA Proceeding (the “Monitor”). On January 29, 2021, the Canadian Court issued an order permitting the Canadian Cannabis Subsidiaries to initiate a sale and investment solicitation process to be conducted by the Monitor and its affiliate to solicit interest in, and opportunities for, a sale of, or investment in, all or substantially all, or one or more components, of the assets and/or the business operations of the Canadian Cannabis Subsidiaries. The Canadian Court also approved a debtor-in-possession financing facility (the "Canadian DIP Facility") provided to Figr Brands by another non-U.S. subsidiary of Pyxus (the "DIP Lender") in an initial amount of up to Cdn.$8.0 million, which following approval by the Canadian Court was increased to Cdn.$16.0 million, to fund the working capital needs of the Canadian Cannabis Subsidiaries.
While the Canadian Cannabis Subsidiaries have been majority owned by the Company, the administration of the CCAA Proceeding, including the Canadian Court’s appointment of the Monitor and the related authority of the Monitor, including approval rights with respect to significant actions of the Canadian Cannabis Subsidiaries during the pendency of the CCAA Proceeding, resulted in the Company losing control (in accordance with U.S. GAAP) of the Canadian Cannabis Subsidiaries,
and the deconsolidation of the Canadian Cannabis Subsidiaries’ assets and liabilities and elimination of their equity components from the Company’s consolidated financial statements as of January 21, 2021. The Canadian Cannabis Subsidiaries’ financial results are included in the Company’s consolidated results through January 20, 2021, which is the day prior to the Order Date. Prior to the deconsolidation of the Canadian Cannabis Subsidiaries, they comprised an operating segment within the Other Products and Services reportable segment.
On May 10, 2021, a definitive agreement for the sale of the assets of Figr Norfolk was entered into for an estimated purchase price of Cdn.$5.0 million. On June 10, 2021, the Canadian Court approved the sale agreement. The consummation of the sale under this agreement is subject to approval of the buyers by Health Canada and the satisfaction of certain other conditions.
On May 25, 2021, a definitive agreement was entered into with a separate buyer for the sale of the outstanding equity of Figr East and certain intangible assets of Figr Brands for an estimated aggregate purchase price of Cdn.$24.8 million. On June 10, 2021, the Canadian Court approved the sale agreement. On June 25, 2021, Health Canada approved the buyers of Figr East and certain intangible assets of Figr Brands. The consummation of the sale of Figr East and certain intangible assets of Figr Brands occurred on June 28, 2021.
The amount of recovery that the Company may receive from the sale of the assets of Figr Norfolk, the sale of the outstanding equity of Figr East, and the sale of certain intangible assets of Figr Brands will be impacted by the amount of claims against the Canadian Cannabis Subsidiaries submitted in the CCAA Proceeding, the extent to which such claims are approved by the Canadian Court, and the extent to which the Company's interest in the Canadian Cannabis Subsidiaries are determined by the Canadian Court to be debt claims entitled to recovery on the same basis as other unsecured creditor claims with respect to the Canadian Cannabis Subsidiaries. These and other related matters are discussed in greater detail in “Note 5. CCAA Proceeding and Deconsolidation of Subsidiaries” and “Note 30. Subsequent Events” to the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements”.
COVID-19
We continue to monitor the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on our Company and our workforce. In March 2020, the World Health Organization recognized the COVID-19 outbreak as a global pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic and government actions implemented to contain further spread of COVID-19 have severely restricted economic activity around the world. Our production facilities are still operating but, in some instances, at lower production levels than planned due to social distancing requirements and safety practices implemented in accordance with Company policy. We continue to monitor the measures we implemented to reduce the spread of COVID-19 and make updates and improvements, as necessary. While our supply chains and distribution channels continue to experience delays due to COVID-19, we currently have adequate supply of products to meet the near-term forecasted demand. In addition, we have experienced procedural delays during fulfillment of customer orders for leaf tobacco due to COVID-19.
We implemented various measures to reduce the spread of COVID-19 including the implementation of health safety practices, providing personal protective equipment, the implementation of travel restrictions, work-from-home policies where possible, restricting visitors to production locations, splitting production workforce, reducing the on-site production workforce levels, screening workers before they enter facilities, implementing social distancing, and encouraging employees to adhere to prevention measures recommended by the Center for Disease Control and the World Health Organization. In addition, we have developed a robust Return to Work Program to ensure our employees are returning to a safe working environment as federal, state, and local governments begin lifting their COVID-19 related restrictions.
Broad economic factors from the COVID-19 pandemic, including increasing unemployment rates and reduced consumer spending, may extend billing and collection cycles. Deterioration in the collectability of accounts receivable from extended billing and collection cycles would adversely affect our results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows, leading to working capital constraints. If general economic conditions in the markets in which we operate continue to deteriorate or remain uncertain for an extended period of time, our business, results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows will be adversely affected. Due to the scope of our operations, including emerging markets, and our sale to customers around the world, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations and the demand for our products may not coincide with impacts experienced in the United States in the event that the impacts in the United States improve over time due to increased vaccinations or improved medical treatments. Accordingly, to the extent that the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States may improve over time, results of operations may continue to be adversely affected by COVID-19 impacts in other areas of the world. We cannot predict the extent or duration of the COVID pandemic, the effects of the COVID pandemic on the global, national or local economy, or the effect of the COVID pandemic on our business, financial position, results of operations, and cash flows.
Fresh Start Reporting
The Company applied Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) ASC Topic 852 - Reorganizations (“ASC 852”) in preparing the consolidated financial statements. For periods subsequent to the commencement of the Chapter 11 Cases, ASC 852 requires distinguishing transactions associated with the reorganization separate from activities related to the ongoing
operations of the business. Upon the effectiveness of the Plan and the emergence of the Debtors from the Chapter 11 Cases, the Company determined it qualified for fresh start reporting under ASC 852, which resulted in the Company becoming a new entity for financial reporting purposes on the Effective Date (as defined below). Our financial results for the five months ended August 31, 2020 and for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2020 and 2019 are referred to as those of the “Predecessor.” Our financial results for the seven months ended March 31, 2021 are referred to as those of the “Successor.” Our results of operations as reported in our Consolidated Financial Statements for these periods are prepared in accordance with fresh start reporting, which requires that we report on our results for the periods prior to the Effective Date separately from the period following the Effective Date. The Company elected to apply fresh start reporting using a convenience date of August 31, 2020 (the "Fresh Start Reporting Date"). The Company evaluated and concluded the events between August 24, 2020 and August 31, 2020 were not material to the Company's financial reporting on both a quantitative or qualitative basis. Refer to "Note 4. Fresh Start Reporting" to the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for additional information.
We do not believe that reviewing the results of periods that span the Fresh Start Reporting Date in isolation would be useful in identifying any trends in or reaching any conclusions regarding our overall operating performance. Management believes that operating metrics for the Successor for the seven months ended March 31, 2021 when combined with those of the Predecessor for the five months ended August 31, 2020 provides a more meaningful comparison to the results for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020 and are useful in identifying current business trends. Accordingly, in addition to presenting our results of operations as reported in our Consolidated Financial Statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP, the table and discussion below also present the combined results for these periods. The combined results (referenced as “Combined (Non-GAAP)” or “combined”) for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 represent the sum of the reported amounts for the Predecessor period April 1, 2020 through August 31, 2020 combined with the Successor period from September 1, 2020 through March 31, 2021. These combined results are not considered to be prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The combined operating results are presented for supplemental purposes only, may not reflect the actual results we would have achieved absent our emergence from bankruptcy, may not be indicative of future results and should not be viewed as a substitute for the financial results of the Predecessor period and Successor period presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. In the following discussion of results of operations, comparisons of combined results for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 are to the comparable U.S. GAAP measures for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020.
Results of Operations
Years Ended March 31, 2021 and 2020
*Amounts may not equal column totals due to rounding.
Combined sales and other operating revenues decreased $195.4 million, or 12.8%, to $1,331.9 million for the year ended March 31, 2021 from $1,527.3 million for the year ended March 31, 2020. This decrease was due to a 4.8% decrease in leaf volume and a 10.3% decrease in leaf average selling prices. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in cannabinoid revenue attributable to sales occurring in most of the Canadian provinces, as well as the launch of the GO! cannabinoid product line in Canada. The 4.8% decrease in leaf volume was primarily due to smaller crop sizes in Africa and shipments delayed into fiscal 2022 by the COVID-19 pandemic in Africa, Asia, and North America as well as customer shipping instructions in North America. This decrease was partially offset by higher volume in South America driven by the timing of shipments. The 10.3% decrease in leaf average sales prices was due to changes in foreign exchange rates in Europe and South America and product mix in Africa and Europe having a lower concentration of lamina. This decrease was partially offset by product mix having a higher concentration of lamina in Asia, North America, and South America.
Combined cost of goods sold decreased $132.1 million, or 10.1%, to $1,170.5 million for the year ended March 31, 2021 from $1,302.6 million for the year ended March 31, 2020. This decrease was mainly due to the reduction in sales and other operating revenues. This decrease was partially offset by $32.1 million of inventory write-offs related to the Company's actions to exit operations of the industrial hemp businesses and shifts in expected future products mix in response to market supply conditions.
Combined gross profit as a percent of sales decreased to 12.1% for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 from 14.7% for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020. This decrease was mainly due to the inventory write-offs described above and product mix in Africa and Europe having a lower concentration of lamina.
Combined selling, general, and administrative expenses decreased $1.1 million, or 0.6%, to $197.9 million for the year ended March 31, 2021 from $199.0 million for the year ended March 31, 2020. This decrease was driven by lower travel expenses due to the COVID-19 pandemic, current-year savings from restructuring initiatives, and $13.8 million of costs incurred to evaluate and develop plans for a potential partial monetization of interests in subsidiaries in the Other Products and Services segment in the prior year. The decrease was partially offset by $21.8 million of expenses in the current year associated with the Chapter 11 Cases. Combined selling, general, and administrative expenses as a percent of sales increased to 14.9% for the year ended
March 31, 2021 from 13.0% for the year ended March 31, 2020 primarily due to the decrease in sales and other operating revenues.
Combined restructuring and asset impairment charges increased $6.8 million or 121.4% to $12.4 million for the year ended March 31, 2021 from $5.6 million for the year ended March 31, 2020. This increase was attributable to employee separation and impairment charges related to the CCAA Proceeding and the restructuring of certain U.S. operations, which included the industrial hemp and CBD businesses, and the continued restructuring of certain African operations.
Combined loss on deconsolidation of subsidiaries of $70.2 million in the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 related to the deconsolidation of the Canadian Cannabis Subsidiaries in connection with the commencement of the CCAA Proceeding.
Combined interest expense decreased $33.4 million, or 24.4%, to $103.3 million for the year ended March 31, 2021 from $136.7 million for the year ended March 31, 2020. This decrease was driven by lower outstanding long-term debt balances, as well as lower balances on the African seasonal lines of credit.
Combined reorganization items of $106.0 million for the year ended March 31, 2021 were comprised of the $462.3 million gain on settlement of liabilities subject to compromise as a result of the Chapter 11 Cases, partially offset by fees and costs incurred in connection with the Chapter 11 Cases, including with respect to the debtor-in-possession financing, and fresh start reporting adjustments.
Combined income tax expense decreased $118.3 million, or 89.8%, to $13.5 million for the year ended March 31, 2021 from $131.8 million for the year ended March 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily due to the reversal of valuation allowances recorded in the prior year, which were driven by substantial doubt regarding the Company's ability to continue as a going concern prior to the implementation of the Plan.
Combined total sales and other operating revenues decreased $29.8 million, or 13.3%, to $194.9 million for the year ended March 31, 2021 from $224.7 million for the year ended March 31, 2020. This decrease was due to an 18.8% decrease in volume attributable to shipments delayed into fiscal 2022 by the COVID-19 pandemic and customer shipping instructions. This decrease was partially offset by a 5.4% increase in average sales price due to product mix having a higher concentration of lamina and changes in customer mix.
Combined cost of goods and services sold decreased $27.6 million, or 14.0%, to $169.7 million for the year ended March 31, 2021 from $197.3 million for the year ended March 31, 2020. This decrease was mainly due to the decrease in sales and other operating revenues.
Combined gross profit as a percent of sales increased slightly to 12.9% for the year ended March 31, 2021 from 12.2% for the year ended March 31, 2020 due to a 5.4% increase in average sales price due to product mix having a higher concentration of lamina and changes in customer mix.
Combined total sales and other operating revenues decreased $174.8 million, or 13.6%, to $1,107.8 million for the year ended March 31, 2021 from $1,282.6 million for the year ended March 31, 2020. This decrease was due to an 11.7% decrease in average sales prices and a 3.2% decrease in volume. The decrease in average sales price was due to changes in foreign exchange rates in Europe and South America and product mix in Africa and Europe having a lower concentration of lamina. This decrease was partially offset by product mix in Asia and South America having a higher concentration of lamina. The decrease in volume was driven by smaller crop sizes in Africa and shipments delayed into fiscal 2022 by the COVID-19 pandemic in Africa and Asia. This decrease was partially offset by higher volume in South America driven by the timing of shipments.
Combined cost of goods and services sold decreased $149.3 million, or 13.7%, to $939.2 million for the year ended March 31, 2021 from $1,088.5 million for the year ended March 31, 2020. This decrease was mainly due to the decrease in sales and other operating revenues.
Combined gross profit as a percent of sales increased slightly to 15.2% for the year ended March 31, 2021 from 15.1% for the year ended March 31, 2020 due to changes in foreign currency exchange rates in Europe and South America.
Combined selling, general, and administrative expenses increased $2.6 million, or 2.2%, to $121.6 million for the year ended March 31, 2021 from $119.0 million for the year ended March 31, 2020 driven by higher accounts receivable write-offs and higher allocations of general corporate services. This increase was partially offset by lower travel expenses due to the COVID-19 pandemic and changes in foreign currency exchange rates in Europe and South America. Combined selling, general, and administrative expenses as a percent of sales increased to 11.0% for the year ended March 31, 2021 from 9.3% for the year ended March 31, 2020 due to the decrease in sales and other operating revenues.
Restructuring and asset impairment charges increased $1.3 million, or 23.6%, to $6.8 million for the year ended March 31, 2021 from $5.5 million for the year ended March 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to employee separation and impairment charges for certain African operations. Refer to "Note 8. Restructuring and Asset Impairment Charges" to the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for additional information.
Combined sales and other operating revenues increased $9.4 million, or 47.2%, to $29.3 million for the year ended March 31, 2021 from $19.9 million for the year ended March 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to an increase in cannabinoid revenue attributable to sales occurring in most of the Canadian provinces, as well as the launch of the GO! cannabinoid product line in Canada. This increase was partially offset by a decrease in e-liquids revenue related to a general industry slow-down amid health and regulatory concerns, and by the global impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Combined cost of goods and services sold increased $44.8 million, or 266.7%, to $61.6 million for the year ended March 31, 2021 from $16.8 million for the year ended March 31, 2020. This increase was mainly due to $32.1 million of inventory write-offs of cannabis and industrial hemp inventory driven by a shift in expected future products mix in response to market supply conditions and continued market price compression, as well as the Company's actions to exit operations of the industrial hemp businesses.
Combined gross (loss) profit as a percent of sales decreased to (110.2)% for the year ended March 31, 2021 from 15.6% for the year ended March 31, 2020. This decrease was mainly due to the inventory write-downs described above.
Combined selling, general, and administrative expenses decreased $3.7 million, or 5.7%, to $61.0 million for the year ended March 31, 2021 from $64.7 million for the year ended March 31, 2020. Combined selling, general, and administrative expenses as a percent of sales decreased to 208.2% for the year ended March 31, 2021 from 325.1% for the year ended March 31, 2020. These decreases were mainly due to the increase in combined sales and other operating revenues and higher expenses in the prior year for the evaluation of a partial monetization of the Company's investments in certain businesses in the segment.
Restructuring and asset impairment charges of $5.2 million for the year ended March 31, 2021 were incurred in connection with employee separation and impairment charges related to the CCAA Proceeding and the restructuring of certain U.S. operations, which included the industrial hemp and CBD businesses. Refer to "Note 8. Restructuring and Asset Impairment Charges" to the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for additional information.
Goodwill impairment charges of $1.1 million for the year ended March 31, 2021 were related to the full write-off of the carrying value of goodwill for the Other Products and Services - Cannabis reporting unit. Refer to "Note 17. Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, net" to the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for additional information.
Comparison of the Year Ended March 31, 2020 to the Year Ended March 31, 2019
For a comparison of our results of operations for the years ended March 31, 2020 to March 31, 2019, see "Part II, Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" of the Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020 of Old Pyxus, filed with the SEC on August 24, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our liquidity requirements are affected by various factors from our core tobacco leaf business, including crop seasonality, foreign currency and interest rates, green tobacco prices, customer mix, crop size, and quality. Our leaf tobacco business is seasonal, and purchasing, processing, and selling activities have several associated peaks where cash on-hand and outstanding indebtedness may vary significantly compared to fiscal year end. Although we believe that our sources of liquidity will be sufficient to fund our anticipated needs for the next twelve months, we anticipate periods during which our liquidity needs will approach the levels of our anticipated available cash and permitted borrowings under our credit facilities. Unanticipated developments affecting our liquidity needs, including with respect to the foregoing factors, and sources of liquidity, including impacts affecting our cash flows from operations and the availability of capital resources (including an inability to renew or refinance seasonal lines of credit), may result in a deficiency in liquidity. To address a potential liquidity deficiency, we may undertake plans to minimize cash outflows, which could include exiting operations that do not generate positive cash flow. It is possible that, depending on the occurrence of events affecting our liquidity needs and sources of liquidity, such plans may not be sufficient to adequately or timely address a liquidity deficiency.
As of March 31, 2021, we are in our leaf working capital build. In South America, we are in the process of purchasing and processing the most recent crop, while the peak tobacco sales season for South America is in its beginning stages. Africa is in the beginning of its buying, processing, and selling season and is utilizing working capital funding as well. Asia, Europe, and North America are still selling and planning for the next crop that is now being grown.
ABL Credit Facility
On the Effective Date, Pyxus Holdings entered into an Exit ABL Credit Agreement (the “ABL Credit Agreement”), dated as of August 24, 2020 by and among, amongst others, Pyxus Holdings, certain lenders party thereto (the “ABL Lenders”) and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as administrative agent and collateral agent to establish an asset-based revolving credit facility (the “ABL Credit Facility”). The ABL Credit Facility may be used for revolving credit loans and letters of credit from time to time up to an initial maximum principal amount of $75.0 million, subject to the limitations described below in this paragraph. Under certain conditions, Pyxus Holdings may solicit the ABL Lenders to provide additional revolving loan commitments under the ABL Credit Facility in an aggregate amount not to exceed $15.0 million. The ABL Credit Facility is required to be drawn at all times in an amount greater than or equal to the lesser of (i) 25% of total commitments under the ABL Credit Facility and (ii) $18.75 million. The amount available under the ABL Credit Facility is limited by a borrowing base consisting of eligible accounts receivable and inventory as follows:
•85% of eligible accounts receivable, plus
•the lesser of (i) 70% of eligible inventory valued at the lower of cost (based on a first-in first-out basis) and market value thereof (net of intercompany profits) or (ii) 85% of the appraised net-orderly-liquidation value of eligible inventory.
The ABL Credit Facility permits both base rate borrowings and LIBOR borrowings. Borrowings under the ABL Credit Facility bear interest at an annual rate equal to LIBOR plus 475 basis points or 375 basis points above base rate, as applicable, with a fee on unutilized commitments at an annual rate of 100 basis points.
Pyxus Holdings’ obligations under the ABL Credit Facility (and certain related obligations) are (a) guaranteed by Pyxus Parent, Inc. and the Company and all of Pyxus Holdings’ material domestic subsidiaries, and each of Pyxus Holdings’ future material domestic subsidiaries is required to guarantee the ABL Credit Facility on a senior secured basis (including Pyxus Holdings, collectively, the “ABL Loan Parties”) and (b) secured by certain collateral owned by the ABL Loan Parties.
Under the terms of the ABL Credit Facility, if (i) an event of default has occurred and is continuing or (ii) excess borrowing availability under the ABL Credit Facility (based on the lesser of the commitments thereunder and the borrowing base) (the “Excess Availability”) falls below the greater of (x) $7.5 million and (y) 10% of the lesser of (A) the commitments under the ABL Credit Facility at such time and (B) the borrowing base at such time (such greater amount being the “Cash Dominion Threshold”), the ABL Loan Parties will become subject to cash dominion, which will require daily prepayment of loans under the ABL Credit Facility with the cash deposited in certain deposit accounts of the ABL Loan Parties, including concentration accounts, and will restrict the ABL Loan Parties’ ability to transfer cash from their concentration accounts to their disbursement accounts. Such cash dominion period (a “Dominion Period”) shall end when (i) if arising as a result of a continuing event of default, such event of default ceases to exist, or (ii) if arising as a result of non-compliance with the Excess Availability threshold, Excess Availability shall be equal to or greater than the Cash Dominion Threshold for a period of 30 consecutive days. No Dominion Period existed as of March 31, 2021. The ABL Credit Agreement governing the ABL Credit Facility contains a covenant requiring that the Company’s fixed charge coverage ratio be no less than 1.00 to 1.00 during any Dominion Period.
The ABL Credit Facility matures on February 24, 2023, subject to extension on terms and conditions set forth in the ABL Credit Agreement. At March 31, 2021, $7.5 million was available for borrowing under the ABL Credit Facility, after reducing availability by the aggregate borrowings under the ABL Credit Facility of $67.5 million outstanding on that date. As of March 31, 2021, Pyxus Holdings was in compliance with all covenants under the ABL Credit Agreement.
Term Loan Credit Facility
On the Effective Date, Pyxus Holdings entered into an Exit Term Loan Credit Agreement (the “Term Loan Credit Agreement”), dated as of August 24, 2020 by and among, amongst others, Pyxus Holdings, certain lenders party thereto and Alter Domus (US) LLC, as administrative agent and collateral agent to establish a term loan credit facility in an aggregate principal amount of approximately $213.4 million (the “Term Loan Credit Facility”). The aggregate principal amount of loans outstanding under Debtors’ debtor-in-possession financing facility, and related fees, were converted into, or otherwise satisfied with the proceeds of, the Term Loan Credit Facility.
The Term Loan Credit Facility permits both base rate borrowings and LIBOR borrowings. Borrowings under the Term Loan Credit Facility bear interest at an annual rate equal to LIBOR plus 800 basis points or 700 basis points above base rate, as applicable. In addition to the cash interest payments, from and after the first anniversary of the Term Loan Credit Agreement, the term loans (the “Term Loans”) under the Term Loan Credit Facility bear “payment in kind” interest in an annual rate equal to 100 basis points, which rate increases by an additional 100 basis points on each of the second, third and fourth anniversaries of the Term Loan Credit Agreement.
Pyxus Holdings’ obligations under the Term Loan Credit Facility (and certain related obligations) are (a) guaranteed by Pyxus Parent, Inc. and the Company, all of Pyxus Holdings’ material domestic subsidiaries and certain of Pyxus Holdings’ foreign subsidiaries (the “Foreign Guarantors”), and each of Pyxus Holdings’ future material domestic subsidiaries is required to guarantee the Term Loan Credit Facility on a senior secured basis (including Pyxus Holdings, collectively, the “Term Facility Loan Parties”) and (b) secured by certain collateral owned by the Term Facility Loan Parties.
The Term Loans and the Term Loan Credit Facility mature on February 24, 2025. At March 31, 2021, the aggregate principal amount of the Term Loans outstanding was approximately $215.6 million. As of March 31, 2021, Pyxus Holdings was in compliance with all covenants under the Term Loan Credit Agreement.
Senior Secured First Lien Notes
On the Effective Date, Pyxus Holdings issued approximately $280.8 million in aggregate principal amount of its 10.00% Senior Secured First Lien Notes due 2024 (the “Notes”) to holders of Allowed First Lien Notes Claims (as defined in the Plan) pursuant to the Indenture (the “Indenture”) dated as of the Effective Date among Pyxus Holdings, the initial guarantors party thereto, and Wilmington Trust, National Association, as trustee, and collateral agent. The Notes bear interest at a rate of 10.00% per year, payable semi-annually in arrears in cash on February 15 and August 15 of each year. The Notes are initially guaranteed on a senior secured basis by the Company, all of the Company’s material domestic subsidiaries (other than Pyxus Holdings) and the Foreign Guarantors, on a subordinated basis to the guarantees securing the Term Loan Facility, and each of its future material domestic subsidiaries are required to guarantee the Notes on a senior secured basis (collectively, the "Notes Guarantors"). The obligations of Pyxus Holdings and the Notes Guarantors with respect to the Notes and the Indenture are secured by certain collateral owned by Pyxus Holdings and the Notes Guarantors. The Notes mature on August 24, 2024. At March 31, 2021, the aggregate principal amount of the Notes outstanding was approximately $280.8 million. At March 31, 2021, each of Pyxus Holdings and each guarantor of the Notes was in compliance with all covenants under the Indenture.
DDTL Facility
On April 23, 2021, Intabex Netherlands B.V. (“Intabex”), an indirect wholly owned subsidiary of the Company, entered into a Term Loan Credit Agreement (the “DDTL Facility Credit Agreement”), dated as of April 23, 2021 (the “Closing Date”), by and among (i) Intabex, as borrower, (ii) the Company, Pyxus Parent, Inc., Pyxus Holdings, Inc., Alliance One International, LLC, Alliance One International Holdings, Ltd, as guarantors (collectively, the “Parent Guarantors”), (iii) certain funds managed by Glendon Capital Management LP and Monarch Alternative Capital LP, as lenders (collectively and, together with any other lender that is or becomes a party thereto as a lender, the “DDTL Facility Lenders”), and (iv) Alter Domus (US) LLC, as administrative agent and collateral agent. The DDTL Facility Credit Agreement establishes a $120.0 million delayed-draw term loan credit facility (the “DDTL Facility”) permitting borrowings by Intabex in up to four draws on or prior to June 30, 2021 in a minimum amount of $30.0 million each (or, if less than $30.0 million remains available under the DDTL Facility, the remaining commitments under the DDTL Facility) (the “DDTL Loans”). The proceeds of the DDTL Loans are to be used to provide ongoing working capital and for other general corporate purposes of Intabex, the Guarantors (as defined below) and their subsidiaries.
Interest on the aggregate principal amount of outstanding DDTL Loans accrues at an annual rate of LIBOR plus 9.00%, subject to a LIBOR floor of 1.50%, for “LIBOR loans” or, for loans that are not LIBOR loans, at an annual rate of an alternative base rate (as specified in the DDTL Facility Credit Agreement) plus 8.00%. The obligations of Intabex under the DDTL Facility
Credit Agreement (and certain related obligations) are (a) guaranteed by the Parent Guarantors and Alliance One International Tabak B.V., an indirect subsidiary of the Company, and each of the Company’s domestic and foreign subsidiaries that is or becomes a guarantor of borrowings under the Term Loan Credit Agreement (which subsidiaries are referred to collectively, together with the Parent Guarantors, as the “Guarantors”).
The DDTL Facility and all DDTL Loans made thereunder mature on July 31, 2022. At June 29, 2021, the DDTL Facility was fully drawn and the aggregate principal amount outstanding was $120.0 million, and the Company and each of the Guarantors were in compliance with all covenants under the DDTL Credit Facility Agreement.
Related Party Transaction
Based on a Schedule 13D filed with the SEC on September 3, 2020 by Glendon Capital Management, L.P., Glendon Opportunities Fund, L.P. and Glendon Opportunities Fund II, L.P., Glendon Capital Management, L.P. reported beneficial ownership of 7,938,792 shares of the Company’s common stock, representing approximately 31.8% of the outstanding shares of the Company’s common stock. Based on a Schedule 13D filed with the SEC on September 3, 2020 by Monarch Alternative Capital LP, MDRA GP LP and Monarch GP LLC, Monarch Alternative Capital LP reported beneficial ownership of 6,033,340 shares of the Company’s common stock, representing approximately 24.1% of the outstanding shares of the Company’s common stock. Pursuant to a Shareholders Agreement dated as of August 24, 2020 (the “Shareholders Agreement”) among Pyxus and certain of its shareholders, including Glendon Capital Management L.P., on behalf of its managed funds and accounts, and Monarch Alternative Capital LP, as investment manager of Monarch Special Opportunities Master Fund Ltd, Monarch Debt Recovery Master Fund Ltd and Monarch Capital Master Partners IV LP, Holly Kim and Patrick Fallon were designated to serve as directors of Pyxus and each continues to serve as a director of Pyxus. Ms. Kim is a Partner at Glendon Capital Management L.P. and Mr. Fallon is a Managing Principal at Monarch Alternative Capital LP.
The DDTL Facility Credit Agreement, any and all borrowings thereunder and the guaranty transactions described above were approved, and determined to be on terms and conditions at least as favorable to the Company and its subsidiaries as could reasonably have been obtained in a comparable arm’s-length transaction with an unaffiliated party, by a majority of the disinterested members of the Board of Directors of Pyxus.
African Seasonal Lines of Credit
On August 13, 2020, certain then subsidiaries of Old Pyxus, which are now subsidiaries of the Company, Alliance One International Holdings, Ltd. (“AOI Holdings”) and the subsidiaries in Kenya, Malawi, Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia (collectively, the “African Subsidiaries”) entered into an Amendment and Restatement Agreement (the “Initial TDB Facility Agreement”) with Eastern and Southern African Trade and Development Bank (“TDB”). On August 24, 2020, AOI Holdings, the African Subsidiaries, the Company, Pyxus Parent, Inc., Pyxus Holdings and TDB entered into a Second Amendment and Restatement Agreement (the “TDB Facility Agreement”) to amend and restate the Initial TDB Facility Agreement to add the Company, Pyxus Parent, Inc. and Pyxus Holdings as guarantors thereunder and to otherwise amend provisions thereof to permit the consummation of the transactions contemplated by the Plan. The TDB Facility Agreement sets forth the terms that govern the foreign seasonal lines of credit of each of the African Subsidiaries with TDB and supersedes the prior terms in effect. These lines of credit provide borrowings to fund the purchase of leaf tobacco in the respective jurisdictions to be repaid upon the sale of that tobacco. The original aggregate maximum borrowing availability under these separate existing foreign seasonal lines of credit was $255.0 million, and the aggregate borrowings were $240.5 million as of August 13, 2020. Subject to certain conditions, the TDB Facility Agreement increased the maximum aggregate borrowing capacity to $285.0 million, less the amount of outstanding loans borrowed under the existing foreign seasonal lines of credit with TDB. Loans under the TDB Facility Agreement bear interest at LIBOR plus 6%. The TDB Facility Agreement initially provided that it terminated on June 30, 2021 and may be renewed at TDB’s discretion.
On June 24, 2021, the Company and certain of its subsidiaries, including the African Subsidiaries, entered into a letter agreement with TDB to amend the TDB Facility Agreement to, among other things, extend the term of the separate lines of credit of each of the Company’s subsidiaries in Malawi, Tanzania, and Zambia by 365 days, effective from and including July 1, 2021, and to cancel the separate lines of credit of the Companies’ subsidiaries in Kenya and Uganda, effective from and including June 24, 2021(with outstanding borrowings for Kenya and Uganda to be repaid by June 30, 2021). As a result of such amendment, the maximum aggregate borrowing pursuant to the lines of credit under the TDB Facility Agreement is $190.0 million, subject to an increase of an additional $15.0 million upon satisfaction of certain documentation requirements applicable to the line of credit of the Company’s subsidiary in Tanzania. Refer to "Note 30. Subsequent Events" to the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” for additional information.
Each of AOI Holdings, the Company, Pyxus Parent, Inc. and Pyxus Holdings guarantees the obligations of the African Subsidiaries under the TDB Facility Agreement. The obligations of each African Subsidiary under the TDB Facility Agreement are required to be secured by a first priority pledge of:
•tobacco purchased by that African Subsidiary that is financed by TDB;
•intercompany receivables arising from the sale of the tobacco financed by TDB;
•customer receivables arising from the sale of the tobacco financed by TDB; and
•such African Subsidiary’s local collection account receiving customer payments for purchases of tobacco financed by TDB.
The TDB Facility Agreement also requires Alliance One International, LLC, a subsidiary of the Company, to pledge customer receivables arising from the sale of the tobacco financed by TDB and pledge its collection accounts designated for receiving customer payments for purchases of tobacco financed by TDB.
The Company’s subsidiary in Tanzania failed to satisfy a loan-to-value ratio requirement under the TDB Facility Agreement during November and December of 2020 under the TDB Facility Agreement. As a result, TDB was permitted to declare an event of default with respect to the Tanzania subsidiary’s borrowings under its credit facility under the TDB Facility Agreement and demand repayment of that subsidiary’s borrowings, which were approximately $50.4 million at December 31, 2020. TDB entered into a First Amendment and Waiver Letter to the TDB Facility Agreement dated December 30, 2020 (the “TDB Waiver”) in which TDB waived the Tanzania subsidiary’s defaults and adjusted the required loan-to-value ratio for the Tanzania subsidiary for each month through June 2021. The existence of these defaults by the Tanzania subsidiary under the TDB Facility Agreement (the “Tanzania Default”) resulted in defaults and events of default arising under the ABL Credit Facility and the Term Loan Credit Facility, which would have permitted the respective lenders thereunder to demand repayment of the amounts outstanding under the respective facility. In December 2020, the required lenders under each of the ABL Credit Facility and the Term Loan Credit Facility entered into agreements with the Company waiving the defaults and events of default arising under the respective facility as a result of the Tanzania Default.
In April 2021, the Company discovered that, as a result of certain customer invoice coding errors, its subsidiary in Malawi failed to satisfy a loan-to-value ratio requirement under the TDB Facility Agreement at March 31, 2021 and prior periods. The subsidiary in Malawi repaid a portion of its borrowings under its credit facility under the TDB Facility Agreement within the time allotted to cure such failure for the March 31, 2021 loan-to-value ratio requirement under the TDB Facility Agreement and, within three business days after the Company’s discovery of the invoicing errors for the prior periods. TDB waived any default that arose therefrom including with respect to any failure of the subsidiary in Malawi to satisfy the loan-to-value ratio requirement.
Except for the failure by the Malawi subsidiary to satisfy a loan-to-value ratio requirement, which failure was waived as described above, at March 31, 2021, the Company and its subsidiaries party to the TDB Facility Agreement were in compliance with all covenants under the TDB Facility Agreement, as amended by the TDB Waivers, and $168.6 million was available for borrowing under the TDB Facility Agreement, after reducing availability by the aggregate borrowings under the TDB Facility Agreement of $116.4 million outstanding on that date.
Short-Term Borrowings
Excluding its long-term credit arrangements, the Company has typically financed its non-U.S. operations with uncommitted unsecured short-term seasonal lines of credit arrangements with a number of banks. These operating lines are generally seasonal in nature, typically extending for a term of 180 to 270 days corresponding to the tobacco crop cycle in that location. These facilities are typically uncommitted in that the lenders have the right to cease making loans and demand repayment of loans at any time. These loans are typically renewed at the outset of each tobacco season. At March 31, 2021, the aggregate outstanding
borrowings of the Company under these seasonal credit lines was approximately $372.2 million and approximately $345.0 million was available for borrowing under these seasonal credit lines, subject to limitations as provided for in the ABL Credit Agreement. The weighted average variable interest rate for these seasonal lines of credit for the year ended March 31, 2021 was 6.1%. Certain of the foreign seasonal lines of credit, with aggregate outstanding borrowings at March 31, 2021 of approximately $172.5 million, are secured by inventories as collateral of $167.8 million at March 31, 2021.
Additional Information
Additional Information with respect to the ABL Credit Facility, the Term Loan Credit Facility, the Notes and the Indenture, the DDTL Facility, the TDB Facility Agreement and the Company’s seasonal lines of credit, including descriptions of respective affirmative, negative and financial covenants, payment obligations, including certain prepayment obligations, collateral and intercreditor arrangements with respect thereto, provisions establishing events of default thereunder, fees, and other terms and conditions, is set forth in "Note 20. Debt Arrangements" to the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements,” and with respect to the DDTL Facility in "Note 30. Subsequent Events" to the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements,” which information is incorporated by reference herein.
Working Capital
The following summarizes our working capital:
Our working capital increased to $520.8 million at March 31, 2021 from $443.3 million at March 31, 2020. Our current ratio was 1.9 to 1 at March 31, 2021 and 1.6 to 1 at March 31, 2020. The increase in working capital is attributable to the decrease in short-term borrowings primarily due to lower balances on the African seasonal lines of credit resulting from cash payments and shorter crops resulting in decreased inventory purchases.
Sources and Uses of Cash
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash generated from operations, cash collections from our securitized receivables, short-term borrowings under our foreign seasonal lines of credit, and borrowings under the DDTL Facility. We have typically financed our non-U.S. tobacco operations with uncommitted short-term foreign seasonal lines of credit. These foreign lines of credit are generally seasonal in nature, normally extending for a term of 180 to 270 days, corresponding to the tobacco crop cycle in that market. These short-term foreign seasonal lines of credit are typically uncommitted and provide lenders the right to cease making loans and demand repayment of loans. These short-term foreign seasonal lines of credit are typically renewed at the outset of each tobacco season. We maintain various other financing arrangements to meet the cash requirements of our businesses. Refer to "Note 20. Debt Arrangements" to the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for additional information.
We utilize capital in excess of cash flow from operations to finance accounts receivable, inventory, and advances to tobacco suppliers in foreign countries. In addition, we may periodically elect to purchase, redeem, repay, retire, or cancel indebtedness prior to stated maturity under our various foreign credit lines and senior secured credit agreement or indentures, as permitted therein.
The following summarizes our sources and uses of our cash flows:
Net cash used by operating activities decreased on a combined basis for the seven months ended March 31, 2021 and the five months ended August 31, 2020 compared to the twelve months ended March 31, 2020 primarily due to (excluding non-cash activities) decreased inventory driven by smaller crop sizes in Africa and currency devaluation in Europe and South America.
Net cash provided by investing activities decreased on a combined basis for the seven months ended March 31, 2021 and the five months ended August 31, 2020 compared to the twelve months ended March 31, 2020 primarily due to lower collections on beneficial interests on securitized trade receivables driven by lower tobacco sales and lower qualifying receivables available for sale into securitization facilities.
Net cash provided by financing activities decreased on a combined basis for the seven months ended March 31, 2021 and the five months ended August 31, 2020 compared to the twelve months ended March 31, 2020 primarily due to lower net proceeds resulting from higher repayments of short term borrowings and the repayment of the ABL facility in place at the Petition Date, partially offset by proceeds from debtor-in-possession financing facility in place during the pendency of the Chapter 11 Cases and borrowings under ABL Credit Facility.
Fluctuation of the USD versus many of the currencies in which we have costs may have an impact on our working capital requirements. We monitor and hedge foreign currency costs, as needed.
Approximately $50.7 million of our outstanding cash balance at March 31, 2021 was held in foreign jurisdictions. If these funds in foreign jurisdictions were repatriated, the tax cost of repatriation would not have a material financial impact.
Debt Financing
Seasonal liquidity beyond cash flow from operations is provided by our foreign seasonal lines of credit, advances from customers, and sales of accounts receivable. For the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, our average short-term borrowings, aggregated peak short-term borrowings outstanding, and weighted-average interest rate on short-term borrowings were as follows:
Aggregated peak borrowings for fiscal 2021 occurred during the first quarter and were due to the timing of purchases of tobacco and repayments in Africa and South America. Peak borrowings for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 were repaid with cash provided by operating activities. For further information on our debt financing as of March 31, 2021, refer to "Note 20. Debt Arrangements" to the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for additional information.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have off-balance sheet arrangements within the meaning of Item 303(a)(4) of SEC Regulation S-K.
Aggregate Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following summarizes our contractual cash obligations and other commercial commitments as of March 31, 2021:
(1) Short-term debt obligations consist of the current portion of long-term debt and our seasonal foreign credit lines.
(2) Interest obligations includes interest for the ABL Facility and other long-term debt. The projected interest includes both fixed and variable rate debt. The variable rate used in the projections is the rate that was being charged on our variable rate debt as of March 31, 2021. Furthermore, we assume there will be no additional drawings after March 31, 2021 on the ABL Facility until the maturity on February 24, 2023 in these calculations. These calculations also assume there is no refinancing of debt.
Tobacco and Other Purchase Obligations
Tobacco purchase obligations result from contracts with suppliers, primarily in Africa, Europe, North America, and South America, to buy either specified quantities of tobacco or the supplier’s total tobacco production. Amounts shown as tobacco purchase obligations are estimates based on projected purchase prices of the future crop tobacco. Payment of these obligations is net of our advances to these suppliers. Our tobacco purchase obligations do not exceed our projected requirements over the related terms and are in the normal course of business. Other purchase obligations consist primarily of purchase commitments of agricultural material.
Amounts Guaranteed for Tobacco Suppliers
In Africa and South America, we provide guarantees to ensure financing is available to our tobacco suppliers. In the event these suppliers should default, we would be responsible for repayment of the funds provided to these suppliers. We also provide guarantees for the financing of certain unconsolidated subsidiaries in Asia and South America. Refer to "Note 22. Guarantees" to the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for additional information.
Planned Capital Expenditures
We are estimating $17.2 million in capital investments, primarily in leaf operations, for the 2022 fiscal year for routine replacement of equipment, as well as investments in assets that will add value to the customer or increase efficiency.
Beneficial Interest in Receivables Sold
We sell accounts receivable under two revolving trade accounts receivable securitization programs. Under the agreements, we receive either 80% or 90% of the face value of the receivable sold, less contractual dilutions which limit the amount that may be outstanding from any one particular customer and insurance reserves that also have the effect of limiting the risk attributable to any one customer. Our beneficial interest is subordinate to the purchaser of the receivables. Refer to "Note 21. Securitized Receivables” to the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for additional information.
Tax and Repatriation Matters
We are subject to income tax laws in each of the countries in which we do business through wholly owned subsidiaries and through affiliates. We make a comprehensive review of the income tax requirements of each of our operations, file appropriate returns, and make appropriate income tax planning analyses directed toward the minimization of our income tax obligations in these countries. Appropriate income tax provisions are determined on an individual subsidiary level and at the corporate level on both an interim and annual basis. These processes are followed using an appropriate combination of internal staff at both the subsidiary and corporate levels as well as independent outside advisors in review of the various tax laws and in compliance reporting for the various operations. We regularly review the status of the accumulated unremitted earnings of each of our foreign subsidiaries. We would provide deferred income taxes, net of creditable foreign taxes, if applicable, on any earnings that are determined to no longer be indefinitely invested. Refer to "Note 9. Income Taxes” to the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for additional information.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States ("U.S. GAAP") requires the use of estimates and assumptions that have an impact on the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Management considers an accounting estimate critical if it: (i) requires us to make judgments and estimates about matters that are inherently uncertain, (ii) it is important to an understanding of our financial condition or operating results, and (iii) has a material impact to the financial statements.
We base our estimates on currently available information, historical experience, and various other assumptions we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ materially from these estimates. Management has discussed the development, selection, and disclosure of our critical accounting estimates with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors.
Management believes the following accounting estimates are most critical to our business operations and to an understanding of our financial condition and results of operations and reflect the more significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Application of Fresh Start Reporting
We applied FASB ASC 852 in preparing the consolidated financial statements. For periods subsequent to the Chapter 11 filing and before emergence, ASC 852 requires distinguishing transactions associated with the reorganization separate from activities related to the ongoing operations of the business. Upon the effectiveness of the Plan and the emergence of the Debtors from the Chapter 11 Cases, the Company determined it qualified for fresh start reporting under ASC 852, which resulted in the Company becoming a new entity for financial reporting purposes on the Effective Date. We elected to apply fresh start reporting using a convenience date of August 31, 2020. We evaluated and concluded that the events between August 24, 2020 and August 31, 2020 were not material to our financial reporting on both a quantitative or qualitative basis.
In accordance with ASC 852 and the application of fresh start reporting, we allocated our reorganization value to our individual assets based on our estimated fair values in conformity with ASC 805, Business Combinations. Deferred income tax amounts were determined in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes ("ASC 740"). Reorganization value represents the fair value of the Successor Company's assets before considering liabilities. The excess reorganization value over the fair value of identified tangible and intangible assets is reported as goodwill.
The Effective Date fair values of the Successor assets and liabilities differ materially from their recorded values as reflected on the historical balance sheet of the Predecessor and required the use of a number of judgments, assumptions, and estimates. It is reasonably possible that changes in these judgments, assumptions, and estimates could have a material effect on our allocation of reorganization value to our individual assets. Among the most material judgments, assumptions, and estimates utilized was our determination of reorganization value. The reorganization value was derived from, and falls within the court approved range of, enterprise values associated with the Plan. The enterprise values were based on management projections and the valuation models as determined by the Plan of Reorganization.
We determined the enterprise and corresponding equity value of the Successor using various valuation approaches and methods, including: (i) the income approach using a calculation of the present value of future cash flows based on our financial projections, (ii) the market approach using selling prices of similar business/assets and (iii) the cost approach, using estimated costs to replace or rebuild our assets. We primarily utilized the discounted cash flow (“DCF”) method of the income approach, utilizing detailed revenue and expense projections that reflected the financial and operational facts and circumstances specific to the business. Our future cash flows were projected based on estimates of future revenues, gross margins, operating income, capital expenditures, and other cash flow factors, including income taxes and net working capital requirements. We utilized estimated revenue growth rates and cash flow projections. The discount rates utilized in the DCF method were based on a weighted-average cost of capital determined from relevant market comparisons and adjusted for specific risk premiums, country risk premiums, and capital structure. A terminal value estimated growth rate was applied to the final year of the projected period and reflected our estimate of perpetual growth. We then calculated a present value of the respective cash flows and adjusted for the value of other aspects not reflected in the projections, such as excess net working capital, the value of non-consolidated investments, and non-operating assets and liabilities to arrive at an estimate of fair value under the income approach. We then reconciled the estimated fair value to the court approved range of enterprise values associated with the Plan. Refer to “Note 4. Fresh Start Reporting” to the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for additional information.
Income Taxes
Our annual effective income tax rate is based on our jurisdictional mix of pretax income, statutory tax rates, exchange rates, and tax planning opportunities available to us in the various jurisdictions in which we operate. Tax laws are complex, subject to change, and subject to different interpretations by the taxpayer and respective governmental taxing authorities. Significant judgment is required in determining our tax expense and in evaluating our tax positions including evaluating uncertainties under ASC 740. We record unrecognized tax benefits in multiple jurisdictions and evaluate the future potential outcomes of tax
positions, based upon our interpretation of the country-specific tax law and the likelihood of future settlement. We review our tax positions quarterly and adjust the balances as new information becomes available.
Deferred income tax assets represent amounts available to reduce income taxes payable on taxable income in future years. Such assets arise because of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, as well as from net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. We evaluate the recoverability of these future tax deductions by assessing the impact from changes in or issuance of new tax law and the adequacy of future expected taxable income from all sources, including reversal of taxable temporary differences, forecasted operating earnings and available tax planning strategies. These sources of income inherently rely on estimates. To provide insight, we use our historical experience along with our short and long-range business forecasts. In addition, we make adjustments to historical data for objectively verifiable information when deemed appropriate.
We believe it is more likely than not that a portion of the deferred income tax assets may expire as unused and have established a valuation allowance against them. Although realization is not assured for the remaining deferred income tax assets, we believe it is more likely than not such remaining deferred tax assets will be fully recoverable within the applicable statutory expiration periods. However, deferred tax assets could be reduced in the near term if estimates of taxable income are significantly reduced or available tax planning strategies are no longer viable. Refer to "Note 9. Income Taxes” to the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for additional information.
Pensions and Postretirement Health Care and Life Insurance Benefits
The valuation of our pension and other postretirement health care and life insurance plans requires the use of assumptions and estimates that are used to develop actuarial valuations of expenses, assets and liabilities. These assumptions include discount rates, investment returns, projected salary increases and benefits and mortality rates. The significant assumptions used in the calculation of pension and postretirement obligations are:
•Discount rate: The discount rate is based on investment yields available at the measurement date on high-quality fixed income obligations, such as those included in the Moody’s Aa bond index.
•Salary increase assumption: The salary increase assumption reflects our expectations with respect to long-term salary increases of our workforce. Historical pay increases, expectations for the future, and anticipated inflation and promotion rates are considered in developing this assumption.
•Cash balance crediting rate: Interest is credited on cash balance accounts based on the yield on one-year Treasury Constant Maturities plus 1%. The assumed crediting rate thus considers the discount rate, current treasury rates, current inflation rates, and expectations for the future.
•Mortality rates: Mortality rates are based on gender-distinct group annuity mortality tables.
•Expected return on plan assets: The expected return reflects asset allocations, investment strategy, and our historical actual returns.
•Termination and retirement rates: Termination and retirement rates are based on standard tables reflecting past experience and anticipated future experience under the plan. No early retirement rates are used since benefits provided are actuarially equivalent and there are not early retirement subsidies in the plan.
•Inflation: The inflation assumption is based on an evaluation of external market indicators, including real gross domestic product growth and central bank inflation targets.
•Expected contributions: The expected amount and timing of contributions are based on an assessment of minimum requirements, cash availability, and other considerations (e.g., funded status, avoidance of regulatory premiums, and levies, and tax efficiency).
•Health care cost trends: The health care cost trend assumptions are developed based on historical cost data, the near-term outlook, and an assessment of likely long-term trends.
Assumptions are set at each year-end and are generally not changed during the year unless there is a major plan event such as a curtailment or settlement that would trigger a plan remeasurement.
Management periodically reviews actual demographic experience as it compares to the actuarial assumptions. Changes in assumptions are made if there are significant deviations or if future expectations change significantly. Based upon anticipated changes in assumptions, pension and postretirement expense is expected to decrease by $0.8 million in the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022 as compared to March 31, 2021. The cash contribution to our employee benefit plans in fiscal 2021 for the seven months ended March 31, 2021 and the five months ended August 31, 2020 were $3.8 million and $2.3 million respectively, and is expected to be $5.9 million in fiscal 2022.
The effect of actual results differing from our assumptions are accumulated and amortized over future periods. Changes in other assumptions and future investment returns could potentially have a material impact on our pension and postretirement expenses and related funding requirements. The effect of a change in certain assumptions is shown below:
Changes in assumptions for other postretirement benefits are no longer applicable as the benefit is capped and no longer subject to inflation. Refer to "Note 25. Pension and Other Postretirement Benefits" to the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for additional information.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted
Information with respect to recent accounting pronouncements not yet adopted is included in "Note 2. New Accounting Standards" to the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements," which information is incorporated by reference herein.