Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Introduction
Papa John’s International, Inc. (referred to as the “Company,” “Papa John’s” or in the first-person notations of “we,” “us” and “our”) began operations in 1984. At December 27, 2020, there were 5,400 Papa John’s restaurants in operation, consisting of 588 Company-owned and 4,812 franchised restaurants. Our revenues are derived from retail sales of pizza and other food and beverage products to the general public by Company-owned restaurants, franchise royalties, and sales of franchise and development rights. Additionally, approximately 46% to 48% of our North America revenues in each of the last two fiscal years were derived from sales to franchisees of various items including food and paper products from our domestic Quality Control Centers (“QC Centers”), printing and promotional items and information systems equipment, and software and related services. We also derive revenues from the operation of our international QC center in the United Kingdom and from contributions received by Papa John’s Marketing Fund (“PJMF”), our national marketing fund. We believe that in addition to supporting both Company and franchised profitability and growth, these activities contribute to product quality and consistency throughout the Papa John’s system.
We strive to obtain high-quality restaurant sites with good access and visibility and to enhance the appearance and quality of our restaurants. We believe these factors improve our image and brand awareness. Detailed below are progressions of our Domestic and International restaurants over the last two fiscal years:
Recent Business Matters
In 2020, the Company focused on executing the strategic priorities and building a foundation for long-term success, including the specific items described below.
Innovation. Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2019, the Company has embraced a new culture of innovation, delivering multiple new product innovations and marketing successes. In 2020, we launched Garlic Parmesan Crust Pizza, toasted handheld “Papadias” flatbread-style sandwiches, Jalapeno Popper Rolls, and the Shaq-a-Roni pizza. Of particular highlight, the Shaq-a-Roni pizza was launched as part of a fund-raiser for The Papa John’s Foundation, in collaboration with Shaquille O’Neal, our board member and restaurant owner. The Shaq-a-Roni pizza was a differentiated, high-value product, with a charitable component that supported meaningful causes aligned with our brand’s values. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we also tested Epic Stuffed Crust, which was officially launched in 2021. Epic Stuffed Crust was the Company’s biggest new product launch to date and builds upon our original fresh, never frozen, six-ingredient dough. Product innovation is not only an important part of our plan for 2021 to continue building sales but also represents another platform for our longer-term strategy and opportunity.
Novel Coronavirus (“COVID-19”). The COVID-19 outbreak began to result in disruption in certain of our international markets beginning in January 2020. Subsequently, the outbreak was characterized as a pandemic by the World Health Organization on March 11, 2020 and declared a national emergency in the United States during the same timeframe. The outbreak has presented evolving risks and developments domestically and internationally, as well as new opportunities for our business. Our delivery and carryout model has positioned us to continue to experience strong demand for our products. To ensure we can continue to meet the demand of our customers, we continue to monitor our supply chain and have not experienced material disruptions.
Our primary focus continues to be the safety of our team members, franchisees, and customers. The Company has taken steps to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic by implementing extra health and safety measures across our business, including No Contact Delivery and enhanced cleaning and sanitization measures, for the protection of both our customers and team members. We have expanded our employee benefits to include free virtual doctor visits and paid special bonuses to many of our front-line team members. This is in addition to existing employee benefits of no-cost mental health support, affordable health plan options and access to the Papa John’s Team Member Emergency Relief Fund, if and when needed. In addition, the Company hired thousands of new restaurant team members in 2020 to help meet demand and serve our customers.
Of the Company’s 2,111 international franchised stores, approximately 65 stores were temporarily closed as of December 27, 2020, principally in Latin America and Europe, in accordance with government policies. In North America, almost all traditional restaurants remain open and fully operational. A number of non-traditional restaurants located in universities and stadiums are temporarily closed; these non-traditional locations are not significant to our revenues and operating results.
We believe the pandemic has accelerated our previously announced efforts to innovate and bring new and former customers to the Papa John’s system. We believe that even after the pandemic-related restrictions are lifted we will benefit from the increase in customers we have experienced due to our menu innovation, customer loyalty programs and our offerings of high-quality pizza and other menu items. Due to the substantial uncertainty related to the effects of the pandemic and its duration, we are unable to predict the specific impact the pandemic and related restrictions will have on our results of operations, liquidity or long-term financial condition, including whether and to what extent the increased demand for our products will continue. For a discussion of the risks to our business presented by the COVID-19 pandemic, see Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Form 10-K.
Strategic Corporate Reorganization for Long-term Growth. In the third quarter of 2020, we announced plans to open an office in Atlanta, Georgia located in Three Ballpark Center at The Battery Atlanta in the summer of 2021. The Atlanta office is part of a broader strategic reorganization of corporate functions reflecting the Company’s ongoing transformation into a brand and culture that can effectively and efficiently deliver on the Company’s purpose, values and strategic business priorities. Affected employees who do not relocate to Atlanta have been offered a separation package. As a result, we expect to incur certain one-time corporate reorganization costs of approximately $15.0 to $20.0 million related to employee severance and transition, recruitment and relocation and other third-party costs through 2021. Of that amount, we incurred costs of approximately $6.0 million in 2020.
Presentation of Financial Results
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The results of operations are based on our Consolidated Financial Statements, which were prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). The preparation of Consolidated Financial Statements requires management to select accounting policies for critical accounting areas as well as estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the Consolidated Financial Statements. The Company’s significant accounting policies, including recently issued accounting pronouncements, are more fully described in “Note 2” of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.” Significant changes in assumptions and/or conditions in our critical accounting policies could materially impact the operating results. We have identified the following accounting policies and related judgments as critical to understanding the results of our operations:
Allowance for Credit Losses on Accounts and Franchisee Notes Receivable
As of December 27, 2020, accounts receivable was $93.8 million with an allowance for credit losses of $3.6 million and franchisee notes receivable was $51.1 million with an allowance for credit losses of $3.2 million. As of December 29, 2019, accounts receivable was $77.8 million with an allowance for credit losses of $7.3 million and franchisee notes receivable was $44.4 million with an allowance for credit losses of $3.6 million. Estimates of expected credit losses, even if remote, are based upon historical account write-off trends, facts about the current financial condition of the debtor, forecasts of future operating results based upon current trends of select operating metrics, and macroeconomic factors. The allowance for credit losses on franchisee note receivables is based on review of each franchisee’s economic performance and market conditions after consideration of the fair value of our underlying collateral rights (e.g., underlying franchisee business, property and equipment) and any guarantees. Credit quality is monitored through the timing of payments compared to the prescribed payment terms and known facts regarding the financial condition of the franchisee or customer. Account and note receivable balances are charged off against the allowance after recovery efforts have ceased.
Insurance Reserves
Our insurance programs for workers’ compensation, owned and non-owned automobiles, general liability, property, and health insurance coverage provided to our employees are funded by the Company up to certain retention levels under our retention programs. Retention limits generally range from $1,000 to $1.0 million.
As of December 27, 2020 and December 29, 2019, our insurance reserves were $82.0 million and $75.2 million, respectively. Losses are accrued based upon undiscounted estimates of the liability for claims incurred and for events that have occurred but have not been reported using certain third-party actuarial projections and our claims loss experience. The determination of the recorded insurance reserves is highly judgmental and complex due to the significant uncertainty in the potential value of reported claims and the number and potential value of incurred but not reported claims, the application of significant judgment in making those estimates and the use of various actuarial valuation methods. The estimated insurance claims losses could be significantly affected should the frequency or ultimate cost of claims differ significantly from historical trends used to estimate the insurance reserves recorded by the Company. The Company records estimated losses above retention within its reserve with a corresponding receivable for expected amounts due from insurance carriers.
Intangible Assets - Goodwill
We evaluate goodwill annually in the fourth quarter or whenever we identify certain triggering events or circumstances that would more-likely-than-not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount. Such tests are completed separately with respect to the goodwill of each of our reporting units. We may perform a qualitative assessment or move directly to the quantitative assessment for any reporting unit in any period if we believe that it is more efficient or if impairment indicators exist.
We elected to perform a qualitative assessment for our operations in the fourth quarter of 2020. As a result of our qualitative analyses, we determined that it was more-likely-than-not that the fair values of our reporting units were greater than their carrying amounts. Subsequent to completing our goodwill impairment tests, no indicators of impairment were identified. See “Note 12” of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” for additional information.
Income Tax Accounts and Tax Reserves
Papa John’s is subject to income taxes in the United States and several foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgment is required in determining Papa John’s provision for income taxes and the related assets and liabilities. The provision for income taxes includes income taxes paid, currently payable or receivable and those deferred.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on differences between financial reporting and tax basis of assets and liabilities and are measured using enacted tax rates and laws that are expected to be in effect when the differences reverse. Deferred tax assets are also recognized for the estimated future effects of tax attribute carryforwards (e.g., net operating losses, capital losses, and foreign tax credits). The effect on deferred taxes of changes in tax rates is recognized in the period in which the new tax rate is enacted. Valuation allowances are established when necessary on a jurisdictional basis to reduce deferred tax assets to the amounts we expect to realize.
Tax authorities periodically audit the Company. We record reserves and related interest and penalties for identified exposures as income tax expense. We evaluate these issues and adjust for events, such as statute of limitations expirations, court rulings or audit settlements, which may impact our ultimate payment for such exposures. We recognized a decrease in income tax expense of $500,000 and $400,000 in 2020 and 2019, respectively, associated with the finalization of certain income tax matters. See “Note 18” of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” for additional information.
Fiscal Year
Our fiscal year ends on the last Sunday in December of each year. All fiscal years presented in the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements consist of 52 weeks.
Results of Operations
2020 Compared to 2019
This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses fiscal 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between fiscal 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between fiscal 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 29, 2019.
Discussion of Revenues. Consolidated revenues increased $194.0 million, or 12.0%, to $1.81 billion in 2020, compared to $1.62 billion in 2019. Revenues are summarized in the following table (dollars in thousands).
Domestic Company-owned restaurant sales increased $48.7 million, or 7.5%, in 2020. Excluding the impact of refranchising 46 restaurants in 2019 primarily located in South Florida and Georgia, Domestic Company-owned restaurant sales increased $79.2 million, or 12.7%. The increase was primarily due to positive comparable sales of 14.2%, partially offset by the 2019 favorable impact from the expiration of customer rewards associated with our Papa Rewards loyalty program of $6.0 million. “Comparable sales” represents the change in year-over-year sales for the same base of restaurants for the same fiscal periods.
North America franchise royalties and fees increased $24.9 million, or 34.7%, in 2020. Excluding the impact of refranchising, North America franchise royalties and fees increased $22.9 million, or 31.9%. The increase was primarily due to positive comparable sales of 18.6%. Franchise royalties and fees in 2020 also reflect a higher effective royalty rate due to lower temporary royalty relief which was part of our franchise assistance program (see “Temporary Franchise Support”).
North America franchise restaurant sales increased 18.6% to $2.49 billion for 2020 compared to prior year. North America franchise restaurant sales are not included in Company revenues; however, our North America franchise royalties are derived from these sales.
North America commissary revenues increased $68.1 million, or 11.1%, primarily due to higher volumes and pricing associated with higher commodities costs, primarily cheese.
International revenues increased $21.0 million, or 20.4%, in 2020 primarily due to higher PJUK commissary revenues and higher royalties from higher comparable sales of 12.6%.
International franchise restaurant sales increased 15.5% to $1.0 billion in 2020, excluding the impact of foreign currency, primarily due to increases in comparable sales. International franchise restaurant sales are not included in Company revenues; however, our international royalty revenue is derived from these sales.
Other revenues, which primarily includes our North America marketing funds, online and mobile ordering business and our wholly-owned print and promotions subsidiary, increased $31.2 million, or 17.4% in 2020 primarily due to higher marketing fund revenues from an increase in franchise sales and an increase in the national marketing fund contribution rate in 2020 and higher online revenues from increased restaurant sales.
Discussion of Operating Results
Operating income is summarized in the following table on a reporting segment basis. Operating income increased approximately $65.7 million for the year ended December 27, 2020 as compared to the prior year. Alongside the GAAP operating income data, we have included “adjusted” operating income to exclude Special items. Special items for 2020 include strategic corporate reorganization costs associated with our new office in Atlanta, Georgia projected to open in the summer of 2021. The reconciliation of GAAP to non-GAAP financial results, as well as the Special items, are included in “Items Impacting Comparability; Non-GAAP Measures.” We believe these non-GAAP measures are important for comparability purposes.
The increase in operating income of $65.7 million, and increase in adjusted operating income of $62.2 million in 2020, excluding Special items, was primarily due to the following:
● Domestic Company-owned Restaurants Segment. Domestic Company-owned restaurants operating income increased $7.8 million for 2020 as compared to the prior year comparable period. The increase was primarily due to higher profits from positive comparable sales of 14.2%, partially offset by labor initiatives and bonus expenses, including a special end-of-year bonus for front-line team members, and higher commodities costs. Additionally, 2019 benefited from the expiration of customer rewards associated with our Papa Rewards loyalty program of $6.0 million.
● North America Franchising Segment. North America franchising operating income increased $25.4 million for 2020, primarily due to higher comparable sales of 18.6%. The fiscal year 2020 also benefited from a higher effective royalty rate compared to 2019 primarily due to lower royalty relief in 2020 as discussed in “Temporary Franchise Support.”
● North America Commissaries Segment. North America commissaries operating income increased $2.5 million in 2020, primarily due to higher profits from higher volumes, partially offset by the bonus for front-line team members.
● International Segment. International operating income increased $5.3 million for 2020 compared to the prior year primarily due to higher royalty revenue, PJUK commissary income attributable to increased units and higher comparable sales and lower travel costs due to COVID-19. These increases were partially offset by lower revenues received from certain franchisees as a result of royalty support, higher bonuses and the unfavorable impact of foreign exchange rates.
● All Others. All Others operating income increased $9.0 million primarily due to higher online revenues, partially offset by timing of marketing spend in the prior year.
● Unallocated Corporate Expenses. Unallocated corporate expenses decreased approximately $12.0 million in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to lower marketing fund investments of $12.5 million as discussed in “Temporary Franchise Support”.
Review of Consolidated Results
Revenues. For the reasons discussed above, consolidated revenues increased $194.0 million, or 12.0%, to $1.81 billion in 2020, compared to $1.62 billion in 2019.
Costs and expenses. Total costs and expenses were approximately $1.7 billion, or 95.0% of total revenues in 2020 compared to $1.6 billion, or 98.8%, in 2019. The decrease in total costs and expenses, as a percentage of revenues, was primarily due to the following:
Domestic Company-owned restaurants expenses were $563.8 million in 2020, or 80.5% of related revenues, as compared to the prior year expenses of $526.2 million, or 80.7% of related revenues, in 2019. The 0.2% decrease, as a percentage of revenues, was primarily due to lower food costs, including the favorable impact of current year promotions which more than offset higher commodities costs and lower operating expenses on higher sales. These decreases were partially offset by higher bonus expense and the 2019 favorable impact of the expiration of customer rewards with our Papa Rewards loyalty program.
North America commissary expenses were $630.9 million in 2020, or 92.7% of related revenues compared to $569.2 million in 2019, or 92.9% of related revenues in 2019. The 0.2% decrease in expenses, as a percentage of related revenues, was primarily due to lower operating costs on higher volumes and lower delivery costs.
International expenses were $74.0 million in 2020, or 59.7% of related revenues, compared to prior year expenses of $57.7 million, or 56.1% of related revenues in 2019. The increase of 3.6% in expenses, as a percentage of related revenues, was primarily due to the higher mix of United Kingdom commissary revenues which have a lower overall margin and lower revenues resulting from increased royalty support provided to certain franchisees.
Other expenses were $200.3 million in 2020, or 94.9% of related revenues, compared to prior year expenses of $175.6 million, or 97.7% of related revenues in 2019. The 2.8% decrease in expenses, as a percentage of related revenues, was primarily due to higher margins from our online and mobile ordering business, partially offset by lower revenues at our printing subsidiary.
General and administrative (“G&A”) expenses were $204.2 million, or 11.3% of revenues for 2020 compared to $223.5 million, or 13.8% of revenues for 2019. G&A expenses consisted of the following (dollars in thousands):
(a) The increase in administrative expenses of $6.1 million for the year ended December 27, 2020 compared to prior year was primarily due to higher management incentive costs, partially offset by reduced travel costs due to COVID-19 restrictions and lower professional and consulting fees.
(b) Represents $6.0 million in strategic reorganization costs for the year ended December 27, 2020 associated with our new office in Atlanta, Georgia projected to open in the summer of 2021. See “Note 17” of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” for additional information.
(c) The Special items for the year ended December 29, 2019 include the following:
(1) $5.9 million of legal and advisory fees primarily associated with the review of a wide range of strategic opportunities that culminated in a strategic investment in the Company by funds affiliated with, or managed by, Starboard Value LP (“Starboard”);
(2) $5.6 million related to a one-time mark-to-market adjustment from the increase in value of the Starboard option to purchase shares of the Company’s Series B Convertible Preferred Stock (“Series B Preferred Stock”) that culminated in the purchase of $50.0 million of Series B Preferred Stock in late March. See “Note 7” of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” for additional information; and
(3) $2.4 million that includes severance costs for the Company’s former CEO as well as costs related to the termination of a license agreement for intellectual property no longer being utilized.
(d) The decrease in other general expenses of $17.4 million was primarily due to lower discretionary marketing fund investments and lower provisions for uncollectible accounts and notes receivable.
See “Items Impacting Comparability; Non-GAAP Measures” for additional information regarding the Special items.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization expense was $49.7 million, or 2.7% of revenues in 2020, as compared to $47.3 million, or 2.9% of revenues for 2019.
Refranchising gains. Refranchising gains of $4.7 million in 2019 were primarily associated with the refranchising of 19 Company-owned restaurants in Georgia and 24 Company-owned restaurants in South Florida. See “Note 11” of “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” for additional information.
Interest expense. Interest expense decreased approximately $3.6 million for the year ended December 27, 2020 primarily due to a decrease in the average outstanding debt balance and lower interest rates. Total debt outstanding was $350.0 million as of December 27, 2020. Outstanding debt at December 27, 2020 decreased $20.0 million from December 29, 2019 primarily due to repayments on our secured term loan facility.
Income before income taxes. Income before income taxes was $75.4 million in 2020, compared to $5.0 million in 2019, or an increase of $70.4 million due to the reasons discussed above.
Income tax expense (benefit). The effective income tax rate was 19.6% for 2020, compared to (12.1%) for 2019. The effective rate was higher in 2020 due to the impact of similar tax credit amounts on higher income before income taxes. The 2019 income tax rate included a non-deductible $5.9 million expense associated with the one-time mark-to-market increase in the fair value of the Starboard option to purchase Series B Preferred Stock, as previously mentioned. The following compares income tax expense (benefit) for 2020 and 2019:
See “Items Impacting Comparability; Non-GAAP Measures” and “Note 7” and “Note 18” of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements,” for additional information.
Diluted earnings (loss) per share. Diluted earnings per common share was $1.28 for 2020, compared to diluted loss per common share of $0.24 in 2019, representing an increase of $1.52. Excluding Special items, adjusted diluted earnings per common share was $1.40, compared to $0.03 in 2019, representing an increase of $1.37. Diluted earnings per common share was reduced by approximately $0.07 per share in 2020 ($0.09 impact when excluding Special items) due to income attributable to participating securities, including Series B Preferred Stockholders, based on undistributed earnings for 2020. See “Note 8” of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” for additional information.
Items Impacting Comparability; Non-GAAP Measures
The table below reconciles our GAAP financial results to our adjusted financial results, which are non-GAAP measures (collectively defined as “Special items”). The non-GAAP adjusted results shown below and within this Form 10-K, which exclude the Special items, should not be construed as a substitute for or a better indicator of the Company’s performance than the Company’s GAAP results. Management believes presenting certain financial information excluding the Special items is important for purposes of comparison to prior year results. In addition, management uses these metrics to evaluate the Company’s underlying operating performance and to analyze trends. See “Results of Operations” for further analysis regarding the impact of the Special items, and “Note 8”, “Note 11”, and “Note 18” of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements,” respectively, for additional information about the Special items.
Note: Effective as of the first quarter of 2020, the Company modified its presentation of adjusted (non-GAAP) financial results to no longer present certain financial assistance provided to the North America system in the form of royalty relief and discretionary marketing fund investments as Special charges. This financial assistance, which began in the third quarter of 2018 in response to declining sales in North America, concluded in the third quarter of 2020, as announced in a formal plan in July 2019. The adjusted financial results for the Company’s fiscal year ended December 29, 2019 have been revised to remove these items. See “Temporary Franchise Support” below for additional information regarding this change in presentation.
(1) Represents strategic corporate reorganization costs associated with our new office in Atlanta, Georgia projected to open in the summer of 2021.
(2) Represents advisory and legal costs incurred in 2019 primarily associated with the review of a wide range of strategic opportunities that culminated in the strategic investment in the Company by affiliates of Starboard Value LP (“Starboard”) as well as certain litigation costs associated with legal proceedings initiated by our founder.
(3) Represents a one-time mark-to-market adjustment of $5.9 million primarily related to the increase in the fair value of the Starboard option to purchase Series B Preferred Stock that culminated in the purchase of additional preferred stock in late March 2019.
(4) Includes severance costs for our former CEO and costs related to the termination of a license agreement for intellectual property no longer being utilized.
(5) The tax effect for strategic corporate reorganization costs was calculated by applying the 2020 full year marginal tax rate of 22.5%.
(6) The tax effect for Legal and advisory fees, Other costs, and Refranchising gains was calculated by applying the 2019 full year marginal rate of 22.4%. The mark-to-market adjustment on option valuation was non-deductible for tax purposes.
(7) Represents an adjustment to the allocation of undistributed earnings to participating securities for the strategic corporate reorganization costs.
The non-GAAP adjusted results shown above and within this document, which exclude the Special items, should not be construed as a substitute for or a better indicator of the Company’s performance than the Company’s GAAP results. Management believes presenting certain financial information excluding the Special items is important for purposes of comparability. In addition, management uses these metrics to evaluate the Company’s underlying operating performance and to analyze trends. See “Results of Operations” for further analysis regarding the impact of the Special items.
Temporary Franchise Support. Beginning in the third quarter of 2018, the Company began providing various forms of support and financial assistance to the North America franchise system in response to declining North America sales. In July 2019, the Company announced a formal relief program to provide our North America franchisees with certainty regarding the availability and schedule of the temporary relief which concluded in the third quarter of 2020. The Company provided royalty relief and discretionary marketing fund investments to franchisees in North America, included herein as “Temporary Franchise Support” of $29.3 million (or approximately $0.69 per diluted share) for 2020, compared to $46.6 million (or approximately $1.14 per diluted share) for 2019, as follows (in thousands):
(a) Represents financial assistance provided to the North America system in the form of temporary royalty reductions that are above and beyond the level of franchise assistance the Company would incur in the ordinary course of its business. These royalty reductions are not an expense, but rather consist of the amount of waived royalties that the Company would otherwise have been entitled to absent the waiver. The waived royalties are not included in North America franchise royalties and fees revenues.
(b) Represents incremental discretionary marketing fund investments in excess of contractual Company-owned restaurant-level contributions, which were made as part of the temporary financial support package to our franchisees. The marketing fund investments are included in Unallocated corporate expenses.
In addition, we present free cash flow in this report, which is a non-GAAP measure. We define free cash flow as net cash provided by operating activities (from the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows) less the purchases of property and equipment and dividends paid to preferred stockholders. We view free cash flow as an important measure because it is one factor that management uses in determining the amount of cash available for discretionary investment. Free cash flow is not a term defined by GAAP, and as a result, our measure of free cash flow might not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies. Free cash flow should not be construed as a substitute for or a better indicator of our performance than the Company’s GAAP measures. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources” for a reconciliation of free cash flow to the most directly comparable GAAP measure.
The presentation of the non-GAAP measures in this report is made alongside the most directly comparable GAAP measures.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Debt
The Company has a secured revolving credit facility with available borrowings of $400.0 million (the “Revolving Facility”), of which $10.0 million was outstanding as of December 27, 2020, and a secured term loan facility with an outstanding balance of $340.0 million (the “Term Loan Facility”) and together with the Revolving Facility, the “PJI Facilities”. Including outstanding letters of credit, the Company’s remaining availability under the PJI Facilities at December 27, 2020 was approximately $344.2 million.
We use interest rate swaps to hedge against the effects of potential interest rate increases on borrowings under our PJI Facilities. As of December 27, 2020, we have the following interest rate swap agreements with a total notional value of $350.0 million:
The weighted average interest rates on our PJI Facilities, including the impact of the interest rate swap agreements, were 3.8% and 4.1% in fiscal 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Our PJI Credit Agreement contains affirmative and negative covenants, including the following financial covenants, as defined by the PJI Credit Agreement:
Our leverage ratio is defined as outstanding debt divided by consolidated earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”) for the most recent four fiscal quarters. Our interest coverage ratio is defined as the sum of consolidated EBITDA and consolidated rental expense for the most recent four fiscal quarters divided by the sum of consolidated interest expense and consolidated rental expense for the most recent four fiscal quarters. We were in compliance with all financial covenants as of December 27, 2020.
Papa John’s Marketing Fund, Inc. (“PJMF”) our national marketing fund, has a $20.0 million revolving line of credit (the “PJMF Revolving Facility”) pursuant to a Revolving Loan Agreement, dated September 30, 2015 (as amended, the “PJMF Loan Agreement”) with U.S. Bank National Association, as lender. There was no balance outstanding under the PJMF Revolving Facility as of December 27, 2020 and December 29, 2019. The PJMF operating results and the related debt outstanding do not impact the financial covenants under the PJI Credit Agreement.
See “Note 13” of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” for additional information.
Cash Flows
Cash flow provided by operating activities was $186.4 million for 2020 as compared to $61.7 million in 2019. The increase of approximately $124.7 million was primarily due to higher net income and favorable working capital changes including timing of payments.
Cash flow used in investing activities was $41.1 million in 2020 as compared to $32.6 million for the same period in 2019. The increase in cash flow used in investing activities was primarily due to proceeds from the refranchising of restaurants in 2019. This was somewhat offset by higher note repayments from franchisees in 2020.
Cash flow used in financing activities was $43.5 million in 2020 as compared to $34.6 million for the same period in 2019. The increase in cash flow used in financing activities was primarily due to the timing of repayments on our Term Loan Facility, repurchases of common stock and higher dividends paid to preferred stockholders, offset by higher cash proceeds received from the exercise of stock options. In 2019, we also received $252.5 million in proceeds from the issuance of Series B Preferred Stock, which was primarily used for net repayments on our Revolving Facility of $240.0 million.
The Company recorded dividends of approximately $43.1 million for the year ended December 27, 2020 consisting of the following:
● $29.4 million paid to common stockholders ($0.90 per share);
● $4.6 million in common stock “pass-through” dividends paid to Series B Preferred Stockholders on an as-converted basis ($0.90 per share); and
● $9.1 million in preferred dividends on the Series B Preferred Stock (3.6% of the investment per annum).
The Company paid common stock dividends of $28.6 million, common stock “pass-through” dividends to Series B Preferred Stockholders of $4.3 million, and $5.7 million in preferred dividends on the Series B Preferred Stock in 2019.
On January 25, 2021, our Board of Directors declared a first quarter dividend of $0.225 per share of common stock (approximately $7.4 million was paid to common stockholders and $1.1 million was paid as “pass through” dividends to holders of Series B Preferred Stock on an as-converted basis). The first quarter dividend on outstanding shares of Series B Preferred Stock was also declared on January 25, 2021. The common stock dividend was paid on February 19, 2021 to stockholders of record as of the close of business on February 8, 2021. The first quarter preferred dividend of $2.3 million will be paid to holders of Series B Preferred Stock on April 1, 2021.
We also use free cash flow, a non-GAAP measure, defined as net cash provided by operating activities (from the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows) less the purchases of property and equipment and dividends paid to preferred stockholders. We view free cash flow as an important measure because it is one factor that management uses in determining the amount of cash available for discretionary investment. Free cash flow is not a term defined by GAAP, and as a result, our measure of free cash flow might not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies. Free cash flow should not be construed as a substitute for or a better indicator of the Company’s performance than the Company’s GAAP measures. See “Items Impacting Comparability; Non-GAAP Measures” for a discussion of free cash flow. The Company’s free cash flow for the last two years was as follows (in thousands):
Contractual Obligations
Contractual obligations and payments as of December 27, 2020 due by year are as follows (in thousands):
(1) We utilize interest rate swaps to hedge our variable rate debt. At December 27, 2020, we had an interest rate swap liability of $13.5 million recorded in Accrued expenses and other current liabilities and Other long-term liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
(2) Interest payments assume an outstanding debt balance of $350.0 million. Interest payments are calculated based on LIBOR plus the applicable margin in effect at December 27, 2020, and includes the impact of interest rate swap agreements in effect. The actual interest rates on our variable rate debt and the amount of our indebtedness could vary from those used to compute the above interest payments. See “Note 13” of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” for additional information concerning our debt and credit arrangements.
(3) See “Note 3” of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” for additional information. The above amounts exclude future expected sub-lease income in the United Kingdom.
The above table does not include the following:
● Unrecognized tax benefits of $1.0 million since we are not able to make reasonable estimates of the period of cash settlement with respect to the taxing authority.
● Redeemable noncontrolling interests of $6.5 million as we are not able to predict the timing of the redemptions.
● Expected minimum lease payments of approximately $33.0 million associated with our new office in Atlanta, Georgia which is expected to commence in fiscal 2021.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We guarantee leases for certain Papa John’s North American franchisees who have purchased restaurants that were previously Company-owned. We are contingently liable on these leases. These leases have varying terms, the latest of which expires in 2036. As of December 27, 2020, the estimated maximum amount of undiscounted payments the Company could be required to make in the event of nonpayment by the primary lessees was approximately $14.3 million.
We have certain other commercial commitments where payment is contingent upon the occurrence of certain events. With our insurance programs, we are party to standby letters of credit with off-balance sheet risk as follows by year (in thousands):
See “Note 13” and “Note 20” of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” for additional information related to contractual and other commitments.
Forward-Looking Statements
Certain matters discussed in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and other Company communications that are not statements of historical fact constitute forward-looking statements within the meaning of the federal securities laws. Generally, the use of words such as “expect,” “intend,” “estimate,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “will,” “forecast,” “plan,” “project,” or similar words identify forward-looking statements that we intend to be included within the safe harbor protections provided by the federal securities laws. Such forward-looking statements include or may relate to projections or guidance concerning business performance, revenue, earnings, cash flow, earnings per share, share repurchases, the financial impact of the temporary business opportunities, disruptions and temporary changes in demand we are experiencing related to the current outbreak of the novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19), including our cash on hand and access to our credit facilities, commodity costs, currency fluctuations, profit margins, unit growth, unit level performance, capital expenditures, restaurant and franchise development, the duration of changes in consumer behavior caused by the pandemic, the duration and number of temporary store closures, our plans to open an office in Atlanta, the associated reorganization costs and the related organizational, employment and real estate changes that are expected, royalty relief, the effectiveness of menu innovations and other business initiatives, marketing efforts, liquidity, compliance with debt covenants, strategic decisions and actions, dividends, effective tax rates, regulatory changes and impacts, adoption of new accounting standards, and other financial and operational measures. Such statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve certain risks, uncertainties and assumptions, which are difficult to predict and many of which are beyond our control. Therefore, actual outcomes and results may differ materially from those matters expressed or implied in such forward-looking statements. The risks, uncertainties and assumptions that are involved in our forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to:
● the ability of the Company to manage difficulties and opportunities associated with or related to the COVID-19 pandemic, including risks related to: the impact of governmental restrictions on freedom of movement and business operations including quarantines, social distancing requirements and mandatory business closures; the virus’s impact on the availability of our workforce; the potential disruption of our supply chain; changes in consumer demand or behavior; impact of delayed new store openings, both domestically and internationally; the overall contraction in global economic activity, including increased unemployment; our liquidity position; our ability to navigate changing governmental programs and regulations relating to the pandemic; and the increased risk of phishing and other cyber-attacks;
● the assumption that the store closures in international markets and non-traditional restaurants in North America are not expected to be permanent; the assumption that our delivery restaurants will continue to stay open and be deemed essential businesses by national, state and local authorities in most of the jurisdictions in which we operate;
● the uncertainty of whether and to what extent the increase in demand for our products that we are currently experiencing during the COVID-19 pandemic will continue following a cessation of the effects of the virus in the future;
● our ability to successfully implement or fully realize the anticipated benefits of our corporate reorganization and new office in Atlanta, Georgia and corporate reorganization in the timeframes we desire or within the expected range of expenses, or at all. In addition, turnover in our support teams due to our relocation to Georgia could distract our employees, decrease employee morale, harm our reputation, and negatively impact the overall performance of our corporate support teams;
● increased costs for branding initiatives and launching new advertising and marketing campaigns and promotions to improve consumer sentiment and sales trends, and the risk that such initiatives will not be effective;
● risks related to social media, including publicity adversely and rapidly impacting our brand and reputation;
● aggressive changes in pricing or other marketing or promotional strategies by competitors, which may adversely affect sales and profitability; and new product and concept developments by food industry competitors;
● changes in consumer preferences or consumer buying habits, including the growing popularity of delivery aggregators, as well as changes in general economic conditions or other factors that may affect consumer confidence and discretionary spending, including higher unemployment;
● the adverse impact on the Company or our results caused by global health concerns, product recalls, food quality or safety issues, incidences of foodborne illness, food contamination and other general public health concerns about our Company-owned or franchised restaurants or others in the restaurant industry;
● the effectiveness of our technology investments and changes in unit-level operations;
● the ability of the Company and its franchisees to meet planned growth targets and operate new and existing restaurants profitably, including difficulties finding qualified franchisees, store level employees or suitable sites;
● increases in labor costs, food costs or sustained higher other operating costs. This could include increased employee compensation, including as a result of changes in minimum wage, benefits, insurance, tax rates, new regulatory requirements or increasing compliance costs;
● increases in insurance claims and related costs for programs funded by the Company up to certain retention limits, including medical, owned and non-owned vehicles, workers’ compensation, general liability and property;
● disruption of our supply chain or commissary operations which could be caused by our sole source of supply of mozzarella cheese, desserts, garlic cups or limited source of suppliers for other key ingredients or more generally due to weather, natural disasters including drought, disease, or geopolitical or other disruptions beyond our control, including COVID-19;
● increased risks associated with our international operations, including economic and political conditions and risks associated with the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union, instability or uncertainty in our international markets, especially emerging markets, fluctuations in currency exchange rates, difficulty in meeting planned sales targets and new store growth;
● the impact of current or future claims and litigation and our ability to comply with current, proposed or future legislation that could impact our business including compliance with the European Union General Data Protection Regulation;
● the Company's ability to continue to pay dividends to stockholders based upon profitability, cash flows and capital adequacy if restaurant sales and operating results decline;
● disruption of critical business or information technology systems, or those of our suppliers, and risks associated with systems failures and data privacy and security breaches, including theft of confidential Company, employee and customer information, including payment cards; and
● changes in Federal or state income, general and other tax laws, rules and regulations and changes in generally accepted accounting principles.
These and other risk factors are discussed in detail in “Part I. Item 1A. - Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We undertake no obligation to update publicly any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of future events, new information or otherwise, except as required by law.