ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report. This discussion contains certain forward-looking statements that involve risk and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those set forth under the Section entitled “Risk Factors”, and other documents we file with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Historical results are not necessarily indicative of future results.
Overview
Q BioMed Inc. (or “the Company”) was incorporated in the State of Nevada on November 22, 2013 and is a commercial stage biomedical acceleration and development company focused on licensing, acquiring and providing strategic resources to life sciences and healthcare companies. We intend to mitigate risk by acquiring multiple assets over time and across a broad spectrum of healthcare related products, companies and sectors. We intend to develop these assets to provide returns via organic growth, revenue production, out-licensing, sale or spin out.
Since our inception in 2013, we have been building value ranging from blockbuster potential drugs to our revenue producing product. Our mission is to solve problems by accelerating the development of important therapies and availability of those therapies to patients.
Strontium-89 - FDA Approved Drug Launched
The COVID-19 pandemic slowed the diagnosis and treatment of cancer in many patients throughout spring and into summer, and severely limited the industry’s access to physicians due to restrictions on access and availability.
We are aware of free-standing clinics in at least eight states that are undergoing the required operational steps to become a ‘Strontium-89 practice’, including having it on their radioactive materials license, with some clinics already up and running with patients being treated. In January 2021, we announced that treatment with Strontium-89 in the hospital out-patient setting will be fully reimbursed by Medicare. As a result, we intend to launch a hospital-focused marketing initiative and would expect to see hospitals more actively treat patients with Strontium-89 as well. We also anticipate being approved as a federal supplier in March 2021 which will allow us to sell into federal hospital systems, notably the U.S. Department of Veteran Affairs and the U.S. Department of Defense.
We have been deploying a multi-channel marketing campaign, driving awareness among our target audiences, both on the physician and the patient side. We plan to exhibit Strontium-89 at several conferences including ASTRO (American Society of Therapeutic Radiation Oncology) and ONS (Oncology Nursing Society) and begin speaker programs in the first half of 2021. Virtual and live sales calls have been ongoing since June 2020 within the confines of COVID-19 access, and we intend to expand our field force efforts in early 2021 with the addition of a contract sales organization once funding is in place.
In September 2020, we launched our international ‘Named Patient’ program that enables physicians worldwide to order Strontium-89 for their patients in need. In mid-2020, we began the regulatory registration process for full commercial access in the European Union, with pan-EU approval expected by mid- 2021. In parallel, we are midway through the registration process in many other countries, with approvals expected to be obtained by April 2021 and to continue throughout 2021.
We anticipate revenues from Strontium-89 to continue to ramp up in our 2021 fiscal year as we build capacity and demand worldwide. We are assessing several potential clinical trial programs that may expand the indication beyond palliation into a therapeutic use that may increase utilization in years to come.
Launching Strontium-89 distinguishes us from publicly traded biotech companies that have yet to launch a regulatory approved commercial product and generate revenues.
Mannin Technology Collaboration - COVID-19, Glaucoma and Others
Our technology partner Mannin Research Inc. (Mannin) was granted up to $7.7 million in Europe, which will fund 65 percent of every dollar incurred to advance a portfolio of therapeutic assets for vascular diseases currently in development at Mannin, including: glaucoma, cardiovascular diseases, acute kidney disease, and infectious diseases such as influenza and COVID-19, among others.
Given the urgent need for therapeutics to treat COVID-19, Mannin is rapidly accelerating the time to the first clinical milestone for MAN-19. An Investigational New Drug (IND) application (or similar clinical trial proposal) to regulators is planned in the first half of 2021 with trials commencing immediately thereafter.
Even as vaccines for COVID-19 are being rolled out, the infection numbers are soaring around the world. Together with Mannin Research Inc., our technology partner, we are pursuing a treatment for Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome, the condition that causes the most severe symptoms in COVID-19 patients usually resulting in hospitalizations and worse. Given the urgent need for therapeutics to treat COVID-19, we are rapidly accelerating the time to the first clinical milestone for MAN-19. It is important to note that we believe the MAN-19 therapeutic is virus-agnostic, which makes it relevant to other viral diseases today like influenza and future viral pandemic outbreaks. Therefore, a successful infectious disease application in COVID-19 could position MAN-19 as a potential government stockpile drug for possible future pandemics. Furthermore, a successful proof-of-concept clinical trial with MAN-19 in COVID-19 patients would provide the clinical dataset to support the development of therapeutics for other vascular diseases such as sepsis, acute kidney injury and glaucoma. All of these are large markets with significant potential.
We continue to support the development of Mannin’s MAN-01 and MAN-11 therapeutics, a novel small-molecule, and novel biologic therapeutic for glaucoma, respectively. There are over 60 million patients worldwide with primary open-angle glaucoma. The MAN-01 program is developing topical drops designed to reduce pressure build-up in the eye by assisting with, and correcting, drainage problems in tiny vessels in the eye. We have advanced this asset from ‘concept to compound’, and the preliminary data that we have reviewed has convinced us to continue pursuing these product candidates.
Our next steps for the MAN-01 and MAN-11 programs are to initiate toxicology studies in 2021, with the goal of initiating a Phase 1 proof of concept trial in late 2021.
GDF 15 Diagnostic for Glaucoma - In Clinical Trial and Product Development and FDA approval anticipated early 2022
In early 2019, we licensed a diagnostic biomarker known as GDF-15 for determining the severity of glaucoma from Washington University in St. Louis. GDF-15 is a perfect companion diagnostic for the MAN-01 and MAN-11 drugs, as well as a novel tool for practicing ophthalmologists and drug developers, because it is designed to assess the efficacy of the treatment or disease progression in their practice. This product represents a unique opportunity, and we believe that current clinical trials are yielding promising results. In partnership with Mannin Research Inc. and McMaster University, we are nearing the completion of development of an in-vitro-diagnostic (IVD) with both point-of-care (detection in a doctor’s office) as well as an external laboratory-based detection (i.e. for use in existing CLIA laboratories using existing diagnostic equipment). We anticipate completion of the IVD device by the end of June 2021 with submission to the FDA (510K) for in vitro diagnostic approval in late 2021.
Uttroside-B - Liver Cancer Chemotherapeutic
We are developing an innovative treatment for liver cancer, a disease indication that currently has a high unmet need. Currently, there are only two approved first-line therapies. We licensed and have advanced Uttroside-B, a new molecule that showed ten times the potency of the current standard of care in early pre-clinical investigation. Uttroside-B was discovered in the leaf of the Black Nightshade plant in India. As it is not feasible to use the plant as the source for a drug, we successfully synthesized the molecule thereby creating an exact replica of the naturally occurring chemical compound. We are now preparing to advance this into a pre-clinical program leading to an orphan drug application and IND application with the FDA and a proof-of-concept clinical program. Initiation of scale up and GMP material has begun.
QBM-001 - Early Stage Treatment for young minimally verbal children on the Autism Spectrum
While our immediate focus is on the above-mentioned assets, we are also developing a new drug candidate to treat young children with pediatric minimally verbal autism. The advancement of this program will depend on the availability of funds and resources as we prioritize our clinical development milestones. There is no effective treatment available to help an estimated 250,000 children born with the condition worldwide each year, 20,000 of them in the United States. We are working on a discovery and development program to address this highly unmet need.
Corporate Strategic Goals
Our mission is to solve problems by accelerating the development of important therapies and availability of those therapies to patients. We believe we are creating value for our shareholders as we approach some milestones and catalysts. To that end, we completed a debt restructuring and financing in April 2020 resulting in the conversion of approximately $4 million in debt to equity and a new cash investment of $4 million. We have raised an additional $1.1 million since December 1, 2020 and our expected funding in conjunction with a 1H 2021 uplist to a national securities exchange will result in an enhanced valuation as a larger group of investors and institutions can participate in our equity.
Financial Overview
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our audited consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of the consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported revenue generated and expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions and any such differences may be material. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Intangible Assets
Intangible assets subject to amortization include acquired intellectual property for a marketable product acquired in November 2018.
The intellectual property is being amortized over the estimated life remaining at the time of acquisition, which is 10 years.
Intangible assets are monitored for potential impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable and are also reviewed annually to determine whether any impairment is necessary. Management has assessed the economic life of the our Metastron asset to be at least equal to its remaining use life of eight years. As such, management modelled the recoverability test using seven years of estimated future cash flows. Based on this projection, the $400,000 net carrying value of the our Metastron asset is fully recoverable and therefore there was no impairment loss as of November 30, 2020.
Derivative Financial Instruments
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives. For derivative financial instruments that are accounted for as liabilities, the derivative instrument is initially recorded at its fair value and is then re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the Statement of Operations. Depending on the features of the derivative financial instrument, we use either the Black-Scholes option-pricing model or a binomial model to value the derivative instruments at inception and subsequent valuation dates. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period.
The Company evaluates embedded conversion features within convertible debt under ASC 815 Derivatives and Hedging to determine whether the embedded conversion feature(s) should be bifurcated from the host instrument and accounted for as a derivative at fair value with changes in fair value recorded in earnings. If the conversion feature does not require derivative treatment under ASC 815, the instrument is evaluated under ASC 470-20 Debt with Conversion and Other Options for consideration of any beneficial conversion features.
Stock Based Compensation
Effective December 1, 2018, the Company adopted ASU 2018-07, by which the accounting for share-based payments to non-employees and employees is substantially aligned. Non-employee share-based payment awards are measured at grant-date fair value of the equity instruments that the Company is obligated to issue when the good has been delivered or the service has been rendered and any other conditions necessary to earn the right to benefit from the instruments have been satisfied. There was no cumulative effect of the adoption of this standard.
Share-based compensation cost is recorded for all option grants and awards of non-vested stock based on the grant date fair value of the award and is recognized over the service period required for the award.
Stock-based compensation expense is recognized in the consolidated financial statements based on the fair value of the awards granted. Stock-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized as expense over the requisite service period, which generally represents the vesting period. We calculate the fair value of stock options using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model at grant date.
Research and Development
We expense the cost of research and development as incurred. Research and development expenses comprise costs incurred in funding research and development activities, license fees, and other external costs. Nonrefundable advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities are expensed when the activity is performed or when the goods have been received, rather than when payment is made, in accordance with ASC 730, Research and Development.
Recent accounting pronouncements
For a summary of recent accounting pronouncements applicable to our consolidated financial statements, see Note 3, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in Part II, Item 8, Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Results of Operation for the years ended November 30, 2020 and 2019
Net Sales
During the year ended November 30, 2020, we recognized $30,000 revenue from the sale of Strontium89. We had no sales in our year ended November 30, 2019.
Cost of Sales
During the year ended November 30, 2020, we recognized approximately $0.3 million in cost of sales. These costs were related to raw materials cost, manufacturing cost, distribution cost and write-offs of expired doses. As we had no cost of sales in our 2019 fiscal year, we had no costs of sales either.
Operating expenses
We incur various costs and expenses in the execution of our business. The increase in general and administrative expenses was due to an increased charge in stock-based compensation, consulting & professional expense and investor relations and marketing expenses compared to the same period in the prior year.
We incurred additional $4.1 million stock-based compensation during the years ended November 30, 2020 compared to last year. We incurred additional $1.8 million related to consulting and professional fees, investor relations, and licenses and permit. The decrease in research and development to $1.9 million in our 2020 fiscal year from $3.5 million in our 2019 fiscal year was mainly due to reductions in fees incurred in connection with the license agreements with Mannin.
Interest expenses
The following table summarizes interest expenses incurred during the year ended November 30, 2020 and 2019, respectively:
The decrease in interest expenses in 2020 compared to 2019 was mainly due to our outstanding debt were mostly converted in the beginning of 2020.
Change in fair value of embedded derivatives
We recognized a loss of approximately $19,000 and $0.2 million resulting from the change in fair value of embedded contingent put options in convertible notes during the years ended November 30, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The fluctuation is mainly due to the change of our stock price during the reporting periods and conversion of existing debt, reducing the penalty payments due.
Loss on conversion of debt
During the year ended November 30, 2019, we recognized a loss of approximately $0.6 million resulting from the partial conversion of then outstanding debentures. There was no corresponding loss in our 2020 fiscal year.
Loss on debt extinguishment
We recognized a loss of approximately $31,000 due to the exchange of outstanding debentures for shares of common stock and preferred shares during the year ended November 30, 2020. There was no corresponding loss in our 2019 fiscal year.
Net loss
In the years ended November 30, 2020 and 2019, we incurred net losses of approximately $13.5 million and $10.3 million, respectively. Our management expects to continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future due to our need to continue to establish a broader pipeline of assets, our expenditure on R&D and the implementation of other aspects of our business plan.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We prepared the accompanying consolidated financial statements assuming that we will continue as a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and liquidation of liabilities in the normal course of business.
We have not yet established a significant ongoing source of revenues and must cover our operating through debt and equity financings to allow us to continue as a going concern. We had approximately $0.2 million in cash as of November 30, 2020. Our ability to continue as a going concern depends on our ability to obtain adequate capital to fund operating losses until we generate adequate cash flows from operations to fund our operating costs and obligations. If we are unable to obtain adequate capital, we could be forced to cease operations.
We depend upon our ability, and will continue to attempt, to secure equity and/or debt financing. We cannot be certain that additional funding will be available on acceptable terms, or at all. Our management determined that there was substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the consolidated financial statements were issued, and management’s concerns about our ability to continue as a going concern within the year following this report persist.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts or amounts and classification of liabilities that might result from this uncertainty.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the significant sources and uses of cash for the periods addressed in this report:
Net cash used in operating activities was approximately $6.2 million for the year ended November 30, 2020 as compared to approximately $4.1 million for the year ended November 30, 2019. The net cash used in operating activities results from net loss of approximately $13.5 million for the year ended November 30, 2020, partially offset by $6.6 million of share-based compensation, change in fair value of embedded conversion options of $19,000, and non-cash interest expense resulting from accretion of debt discounts of $0.1 million and changes in our operating assets and liabilities of approximately $0.6 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities was approximately $6.2 million for the year ended November 30, 2020 as compared to approximately $1.6 million for the year ended November 30, 2019. The net in cash provided by financing activities in the 2020 period relates to proceeds received from the issuance of preferred shares, shares of common stock and warrants. The net cash provided in the 2019 period relates to proceeds received from the issuance of debentures, shares of common stock and warrants.
Obligations and Commitments
Legal
Periodically, we review the status of significant matters, if any exist, and assesses its potential financial exposure. If the potential loss from any claim or legal claim is considered probable and the amount can be estimated, we accrue a liability for the estimated loss. Legal proceedings are subject to uncertainties, and the outcomes are difficult to predict. Because of such uncertainties, accruals are based on the best information available at the time. As additional information becomes available, we reassess the potential liability related to pending claims and litigation.
Advisory Agreements
We entered into customary consulting arrangements with various counterparties to provide consulting services, business development and investor relations services, pursuant to which we agreed to issue shares of common stock as services are received.
Lease Agreement
In December 2016, we entered into a lease agreement for office space located in Cayman Islands for $30,000 per annum. The initial term of the agreement ended in December 2019 and has been further renewed for another three years. This agreement does not identify a specific asset and does not convey the use of substantially all of the shared office capacity. As such, this agreement does not contain a lease under ASC 842. We recognize monthly license payments as incurred over the term of the arrangement.
Rent expense is classified within general and administrative expenses on a straight-line basis and included in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Operations as follows:
License Agreements
Mannin
On October 29, 2015, we entered into a Patent and Technology License and Purchase Option Agreement (“Exclusive License”) with a vendor whereby we were granted a worldwide, exclusive, license on, and option to, acquire certain intellectual property (“Mannin IP”) which initially focused on developing a first-in-class eye drop treatment for glaucoma within the four-year term of the Exclusive License. Pursuant to the exclusive license from Mannin, we may purchase the Mannin IP within six years of entry into the agreement. During the years ended November 30, 2020 and 2019, we respectively incurred approximately $1.0 million and $2.1 million of research and development expenses under our license with Mannin. The purchase price for the Mannin IP is $30.0 million less the amount of cash paid by us for development and the value of the Common Stock issued to the vendor. We can make this all or part of this payment in stock, provided that such stock does not represent 15% or more of our issued and outstanding Common Stock.
On March 26, 2019, we entered into an amendment to the Patent and Technology License and Purchase Option Agreement that it initially entered into with Mannin Research Inc. on October 29, 2015 (the “Mannin Agreement”). Under such amendment, the term of the option granted under the Mannin Agreement was extended to October 29, 2021 in exchange for our issuing 100,000 shares to Mannin Research Inc. on April 9, 2019.
On September 1, 2020, we further amended the license agreement allowing Mannin to grant an exclusive license to Mannin GmbH (its wholly owned German subsidiary) in order fully take advantage of the German government grant to Mannin. The agreement also confirms our ongoing investment into the Tie2 platform to create, and therefore maintain economic value for us and our shareholders. We have agreed to contribute funds in Mannin GmbH. We shall pay Mannin $1.5 million in cash payable in three instalments, thereof $0.7 million of which has been paid, $0.4 million of which was due on December 31, 2020 and $0.4 million to be paid by June 30, 2021. In addition, we paid to Mannin $0.75 million in shares of our common stock valued as of June 15, 2020, in full satisfaction of R&D payables, contracted by Mannin in development of the Tie2 platform. We continue to have the right to 100% of the revenues derived from the Mannin Tie2 technology platform, until such time that Mannin and its subsidiaries have independently raised at least $2 million in funds, at which time the parties have agreed to a profit share structure reducing our future capital commitments to Mannin R&D.
During the years ended November 30, 2020 and 2019, we incurred approximately $1.0 million and $2.1 million, respectively, in research and development expenses to fund the costs of development of the eye drop treatment for glaucoma pursuant to the Exclusive License.
Washington University
On March 9, 2019, we entered into an Exclusive License Agreement with Washington University for license of a diagnostic marker for determining the severity of glaucoma using the expression levels of Growth Differentiation Factor 15. The agreement calls for us to pay an initial fee of approximately $88,000, pay annual maintenance fees ranging from $15,000 to $75,000, make additional payments upon the following milestones:
• The first commercial sale of a companion diagnostic product;
• Initiation of a clinical trial for a diagnostic product to support FDA PMA or 510(k) regulatory approval or the foreign equivalent;
• PMA or 510(k) regulatory approval by the FDA or the foreign equivalent; and
• The first commercial sale of a diagnostic product.
In additional to the above payments, royalty payments based upon sales of a companion diagnostic product or diagnostic product are required.
Related Party Transactions
We entered into consulting agreements with certain management personnel and stockholders for consulting and legal services. Consulting and legal expenses resulting from such agreements were included within general and administrative expenses in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Operations as follows:
During the year ended November 30, 2020, we issued 225,000 warrants at fair value of $0.4 million to Mr. Rosenstadt, our Chief Legal Officer and director, for his services performed in connection with preferred stock offering and S-1 registration filling.
On November 30, 2020, we modified an aggregate of 525,000 warrants that were originally granted to certain officers. The term of the warrants was extended for 3 years from the original expiration date. We immediately recognized approximately $0.4 million of incremental stock-based compensation for the modifications on November 30, 2020.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.