Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This section generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and annual comparison between our fiscal 2020 performance compared to our fiscal 2019 performance. A detailed review of our fiscal 2019 performance compared to our fiscal 2018 performance can be found in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, under the caption “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.” This discussion should be read in conjunction with Part II, Item 6 hereof, “Selected Financial Data” and our Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying notes thereto included or incorporated by reference elsewhere in this document.
Additionally, a comprehensive list of the acronyms and abbreviations used throughout this discussion is included in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
GENERAL
The Company was formed in February 1993 for the purpose of organizing QCBT. Over the past twenty-seven years, the Company has grown to include four banking subsidiaries and a number of nonbanking subsidiaries. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had $5.7 billion in consolidated assets, including $4.3 billion in total loans/leases, and $4.6 billion in deposits. The financial results of acquired/merged entities for the periods since their acquisition/merger are included in this report. Further information related to acquired/merged entities has been presented in the Annual Reports previously filed with the SEC corresponding to the year of each acquisition/merger.
IMPACT OF COVID-19
The progression of the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States has had an adverse impact on the Company’s financial condition and results of operations as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020, and could continue to have a complex and significant adverse impact on the economy, the banking industry and the Company in future fiscal periods, all subject to a high degree of uncertainty.
Effects on the Company’s Market Areas
The Company offers commercial and consumer banking products and services primarily in Iowa, Missouri and Illinois. Each of these three states has recently taken different steps to reopen since COVID-19 thrust the country into lockdown starting in March 2020. The continuation and scope of re-openings in each jurisdiction are subject to change, delay and setbacks based on ongoing regional monitoring of the pandemic. Currently all of the subsidiary banks’ branches are limiting lobby access to appointment only.
Each state experienced rapidly increasing unemployment levels as a result of the curtailment of business activities, rising from an average of 4.6% in Illinois in March 2020 to an average of 7.5% in December 2020, according to the Illinois Department of Employment Security. The unemployment rate in Illinois has improved from its highest point this year in May 2020 of an average of 15.2%. Unemployment rose from an average of 4.5% in Missouri in March 2020 to 5.8% in December 2020, according to the Missouri Department of Labor and Industrial Relations. The unemployment rate in Missouri has improved from its highest point this year in May 2020 of an average of 10.1%. In Iowa, the unemployment rate dropped to pre-pandemic levels from an average of 3.7% in March 2020 to 3.1% in December 2020, according to the Iowa Workforce Development. The unemployment rate in Iowa improved from its highest point this year in May 2020 of an average of 10.0%.
Policy and Regulatory Developments
Federal, state and local governments and regulatory authorities have enacted and issued a range of policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic, including the following:
● The Federal Reserve decreased the range for the Federal Funds Target Rate by 0.50% on March 3, 2020, and by another 1.0% on March 16, 2020, reaching a current range of 0.0 - 0.25%.
● On March 27, 2020, former President Trump signed the CARES Act, which established a $2.0 trillion economic stimulus package, which provided for cash payments to individuals, supplemental unemployment
insurance benefits and a $349 billion loan program administered through the SBA, referred to as the PPP. On April 24, 2020, President Trump signed the Paycheck Protection Program and Health Care Enhancement Act, which authorized an additional $310 billion of PPP loans. Under the PPP, small businesses, sole proprietorships, independent contractors and self-employed individuals may apply for loans from existing SBA lenders and other approved regulated lenders that enroll in the program, subject to limitations and eligibility criteria. In December 2020, former President Trump signed into law a $900 billion pandemic relief bill to extend several aid programs in the CARES Act that were set to expire on December 31, 2020. The SBA reopened the PPP in January 2021 to allow certain eligible borrowers that previously received a PPP loan to apply for a second draw PPP loan. At least $25 billion has been set aside from second draw PPP loans. The subsidiary banks are participating as lenders in the PPP.
● In addition, the CARES Act provides financial institutions the option to temporarily suspend certain requirements under GAAP related to TDRs for a limited period of time to account for the effects of COVID-19. To be eligible, the modification must be related to COVID-19, existing loan could not be more than 30 days past due as of December 31, 2019 and modification executed between March 1, 2020 and earlier of 60 days after the termination of the National Emergency or December 31, 2020. On December 27, 2020, former President Trump signed the Consolidated Appropriations Act, which extended this relief to the earlier of the first day of the Company’s fiscal year after the date of the national emergency terminates or January 1, 2022. If a modification does not meet the criteria of the CARES act, a deferral can still be excluded from TDR treatment as long as the modifications meet the regulatory criteria discussed in Note 4 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
● On April 7, 2020, federal banking regulators issued a revised Interagency Statement on Loan Modifications and Reporting for Financial Institutions, which, among other things, encouraged financial institutions to work prudently with borrowers who are or may be unable to meet their contractual payment obligations because of the effects of COVID-19, and stated that institutions generally do not need to categorize COVID-19-related modifications as TDRs, and the agencies will not direct supervised institutions to automatically categorize all COVID-19 related loan modifications as TDRs. The regulators have clarified that this guidance may continue to be applied in 2021.
● On April 9, 2020, the Federal Reserve announced additional measures aimed at supporting small and midsized business, as well as state and local governments impacted by COVID-19. The Federal Reserve announced the Main Street Business Lending Program, which establishes two new loan facilities intended to facilitate lending to small and midsized businesses: the MSNLF and the MSELF. The combined size of the program will be up to $600 billion. In addition, the Federal Reserve created a Municipal Liquidity Facility to support state and local governments with up to $500 billion in lending, with the Treasury Department backing $35 billion for the facility using funds appropriated by the CARES Act. Finally, the Federal Reserve announced that its Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility will be scaled up in scope to include the triple A-rated tranche of commercial mortgage-backed securities and newly issued collateralized loan obligations. The size of the facility is $100 billion. As of December 31, 2020, the Company is only participating in the PPP and not the Main Street Business Lending Program.
Effects on the Company’s Business
The Company currently expects that the COVID-19 pandemic and the specific developments referred to above could have a significant impact on its business. In particular, the Company anticipates that a significant portion of the subsidiary banks’ borrowers in the hotel, restaurant, arts/entertainment/recreation and retail industries could continue to endure significant economic distress, and could adversely affect their ability to repay existing indebtedness, and could adversely impact the value of collateral pledged to the banks. These developments, together with economic conditions generally, may impact the Company’s commercial real estate portfolio, particularly with respect to real estate with exposure to these industries, the Company’s equipment leasing business and loan portfolio, the Company’s consumer loan business and loan portfolio, and the value of certain collateral securing the Company’s loans. In addition, the Company’s loan and lease growth could slow exclusive of the PPP loans, while deposit growth could accelerate as businesses and consumers navigate the impact. As a result, the Company anticipates that its asset quality and results of operations could be adversely affected, as described in further detail below.
The Company’s Response
The Company has taken numerous steps in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including the following:
● The Company implemented its LRP offering to extend qualifying customers’ payments for 90 days. As of December 31, 2020 there were 126 Bank modifications of loans to commercial and consumer clients totaling $21 million and 71 m2 modifications of loans and leases totaling $7 million for a combined 197 modifications totaling $28 million, representing 0.66% of the total loan and lease portfolio that were currently on deferral.
● As the Company moved to protect the health and safety of its employees and clients, digital collaboration and digital banking applications have become business critical. The Company is using virtual meetings to stay connected with its clients and customers are leveraging the Company’s mobile banking capabilities. The Company’s digital communications tool is a modern enterprise video application, with an easy, reliable and secure cloud platform for video and audio conferencing, chat and web conferencing across mobile, desktop and room systems. It has enabled the Company to continue to collaborate in real-time across the enterprise and to meet face-to-face with our clients while working remotely to adhere to the Center for Disease Control’s physical distancing guidelines. Clients are using the Company’s existing mobile banking and mobile payment capabilities including: on-line banking, remote deposit, on-line retail loan applications and person-to-person payment applications that are available across multiple form factors. These applications have enabled customers to engage with the Company virtually to meet their community banking needs. The Company proactively reached out to customers to make sure that they knew how to use these tools and increased their mobile deposit limits to enable expanded use of remote deposit features. The Company also worked with primary digital banking solution providers to make adjustments to their hosting capabilities to accommodate the unprecedented levels of volume through this digital channel.
● The Company implemented its Public Emergency Preparedness Plan (“PEP”). The PEP was created to coordinate resources in an organized manner to respond to any public emergency that may significantly affect staffing. One of the situations specifically called out in the plan is a health-related event such as a specific threat of influenza, or other disease, creating pandemic conditions. The goals were to maximize the continuity of the essential services to our customers, protect the health and safety of employees and customers, and minimize adverse financial impact to our institutions. The following strategies were executed:
o Emergency Preparedness Response Team critical members were identified to direct the Company’s planning, preparedness, training and response to lead the recovery effort with the COVID-19 pandemic;
o increased cash reserves at all charters were established and the charters began monitoring cash outflows;
o IT testing began to ensure the Company’s systems were capable of handling traffic generated by employees working from home;
o reviewed cross training lists for each department in case of staff shortages;
o split specific departments into shifts so not all employees were working together at the same time; and
o communication sites were activated in case emergency information needed to be communicated to employees.
● The Company has processed 1,698 loans for a total of $357.5 million as of December 31, 2020 under the PPP. The Company is continuing to take PPP applications and is currently processing new loans under newly approved additional funding. PPP loans are included in the C&I category of loans in Note 3 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
● The Company has implemented a number of actions to support a healthy workforce, including:
o adopting alternative work practices such as working in shifts, social distancing in our facilities and adding remote work options for approximately half of our workforce;
o discontinued business travel, large events and meetings; and
o utilizing online meeting platforms.
● On February 28, 2020, the Company’s Board of Directors authorized a share repurchase program, permitting the repurchase of up to 800,000 shares of the Company’s outstanding common stock, or approximately 5% of the outstanding shares as of December 31, 2019. As disclosed in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company will not be permitted to make capital distributions (including for dividends and repurchases of stock) or pay discretionary bonuses to executive officers without restriction if the Company does not maintain 2.5% in Common Equity Tier 1 Capital attributable to a capital conservation buffer. The Company suspended the repurchase of shares on March 16, 2020 due to the uncertainties related to the COVID-19 pandemic and it is uncertain whether or when the Company will resume the repurchase of shares as part of this program in the future.
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
The Company reported net income of $60.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and diluted EPS of $3.80. For the same period in 2019 the Company reported net income of $57.4 million and diluted EPS of $3.60.
The year ended December 31, 2020 was highlighted by several significant items:
● Record net income of $60.6 million, or $3.80 per diluted share
● Adjusted net income (non-GAAP) of $63.2 million, or $3.96 per diluted share;
● Adjusted NIM (TEY)(non-GAAP) at 3.38%;
● Noninterest income of $113.8 million for the year;
● Core deposit growth of 22.3% for the year;
● Core loan and lease growth of 7.8% for the year, excluding PPP loans;
● Provision expense of $55.7 million for the year, increasing ALLL to total loans and leases, excluding PPP loans (non-GAAP) by 114 basis points to 2.12%; and
● Nonperforming assets to total assets improved to 0.26% at December 31, 2020.
Following is a table that represents the various net income measurements for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The Company reported adjusted net income (non-GAAP) of $63.2 million, with adjusted diluted EPS of $3.96. See section titled “GAAP to Non-GAAP Reconciliations” for additional information. Adjusted net income for the year excludes a number of non-recurring items, after-tax, most significantly:
● $3.1 million of liability extinguishment losses;
● $2.0 million of securities gains;
● $545 thousand of disposition costs; and
● $500 thousand of goodwill impairment expense.
Following is a table that represents the major income and expense categories.
The following are some noteworthy developments in the Company’s financial results:
● Net interest income grew $11.4 million, or 7.3%, in 2020 compared to the prior year. The increase in 2020 was primarily due to loan growth led by the Company’s specialty finance group and new relationships from PPP loan customers.
● Provision expense increased $48.6 million when comparing 2020 to 2019. The increase in 2020 was primarily attributable to increased qualitative allocations in response to deteriorating economic conditions as related to the effects of COVID-19. See the “Provision for Loan/Lease Losses” section of this report for additional details.
● Noninterest income increased $35.0 million, or 44%, when compared to the prior year. The increase in 2020 was primarily attributable to higher swap fee income.
● Noninterest expense decreased $3.5 million, or 2.2%, in 2020 compared to the prior year, primarily due to a decrease in post-acquisition compensation, transition and integration costs as well as disposition costs, goodwill impairment expense and net cost and gains/losses on operations of other real estate.
STRATEGIC FINANCIAL METRICS
The Company has established strategic financial metrics by which it manages its business and measures its performance. The goals are periodically updated to reflect business developments. While the Company is determined to work prudently to achieve these goals, there is no assurance that they will be met. Moreover, the Company’s ability to achieve these goals will be affected by the factors discussed under “Forward Looking Statements” as well as the factors detailed in the “Risk Factors” section included under Item 1A. of Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The Company’s strategic financial metrics are as follows:
● Organic loan and lease growth of 9% per year, funded by core deposits;
● Grow fee-based income by at least 6% per year; and
● Limit our annual operating expense growth to 5% per year.
The following table shows the evaluation of the Company’s strategic financial metrics:
* The calculations provided exclude non-core noninterest income and noninterest expense.
** Loans and leases growth excludes PPP loans.
STRATEGIC DEVELOPMENTS
The Company took the following actions in 2020 to support our corporate strategy and further the strategic financial metrics shown above:
● The Company grew loans and leases organically in 2020 by 7.8%, excluding PPP loans (non-GAAP), reflecting healthy demand across all markets.
● Correspondent banking continues to be a core line of business for the Company. The Company is competitively positioned with experienced staff, software systems and processes to continue growing in the four states it currently serves - Iowa, Wisconsin, Missouri and Illinois. The Company acts as the correspondent bank for 192 downstream banks with total average noninterest bearing deposits of $280.4 million and total average interest bearing deposits of $547.6 million for 2020. This line of business provides a strong source of noninterest bearing and interest bearing deposits, fee income, high-quality loan participations and bank stock loans.
● As a result of the relatively low interest rate environment including a flat yield curve, the Company is focused on executing interest rate swaps on select commercial loans. The interest rate swaps allow the commercial borrowers to pay a fixed interest rate while the Company receives a variable interest rate as well as an upfront fee dependent on the pricing. Management believes that these swaps help position the Company more favorably for rising rate environments. The Company will continue to review opportunities to execute these swaps at all of its subsidiary banks, as the circumstances are appropriate for the borrower and the Company.
● Noninterest expense in 2020 totaled $151.8 million as compared to $155.2 million in 2019. Post-acquisition compensation, transition and integration costs were $3.4 million higher in 2019 from the acquisition of SFCB. Disposition expenses from the sale of RB&T were $3.3 million in 2019 as compared to disposition costs in 2020 of $690 thousand from the sale of the Bates Companies. Goodwill impairment expense decreased $2.5 million in 2020 as compared to 2019 for goodwill impairment related to the Bates Companies. Net cost of (income from) and gains/losses on operations of other real estate decreased $4.1 million in 2020 as compared to 2019 from a write-down of OREO property in 2019.
GAAP TO NON-GAAP RECONCILIATIONS
The following table presents certain non-GAAP financial measures related to the “TCE/TA ratio”, “TCE/TA ratios excluding PPP loans”, “adjusted net income”, “adjusted EPS”, “adjusted ROAA”, “pre-provision/pre-tax adjusted income”, “pre-provision/pre-tax adjusted ROAA”, “NIM (TEY)”, “adjusted NIM”, “efficiency ratio”, “ALLL to total loans and leases excluding PPP loans” and “loan growth annualized excluding PPP loans”. In compliance with applicable rules of the SEC, all non-GAAP measures are reconciled to the most directly comparable GAAP measure, as follows:
● TCE/TA ratio (non-GAAP) is reconciled to stockholders’ equity and total assets;
● TCE/TA ratio excluding PPP loans (non-GAAP) is reconciled to stockholders’ equity and total assets;
● Adjusted net income, adjusted EPS and adjusted ROAA (all non-GAAP measures) are reconciled to net income;
● Pre-provision/pre-tax adjusted income and pre-provision/pre-tax adjusted ROAA (all non-GAAP measures) are reconciled to net income;
● NIM (TEY) (non-GAAP) and adjusted NIM (non-GAAP) are reconciled to NIM;
● Efficiency ratio (non-GAAP) is reconciled to noninterest expense, net interest income and noninterest income; and
● ALLL to total loans and leases excluding PPP loans and loan growth annualized excluding PPP loans (all non-GAAP measures) are reconciled to ALLL and total loans and leases.
The TCE/TA non-GAAP ratio has been a focus for our investors and management believes that this ratio may assist investors in analyzing the Company’s capital position without regard to the effects of intangible assets. The TCE/TA ratio excluding PPP loans non-GAAP ratio is provided as the Company’s management believes this financial measure is important to investors as total assets for the year 2020 were materially higher due to the addition of PPP loans. By excluding the PPP loans, management believes the investor is provided a better comparison to prior periods for analysis.
The following tables also include several “adjusted” non-GAAP measurements of financial performance. The Company’s management believes that these measures are important to investors as they exclude non-recurring income and expense items; therefore, they provide a better comparison for analysis and may provide a better indicator of future performance.
The pre-provision/pre-tax adjusted income and pre-provision/pre-tax adjusted ROAA are measurements of the Company’s financial performance excluding provision and income taxes as well as non-recurring income and expense items. The Company’s management believes this financial measure is important to investors as the provision for the year ended December 31, 2020 was materially higher due to the impact of COVID-19. By excluding the provision and income taxes as well as non-recurring income and expense items, the investor is provided a better comparison to prior periods for analysis.
NIM (TEY) is a financial measure that the Company’s management utilizes to take into account the tax benefit associated with certain loans and securities. It is standard industry practice to measure net interest margin using tax-equivalent measures. In addition, the Company calculates NIM without the impact of acquisition accounting net accretion (adjusted NIM), as accretion amounts can fluctuate a great deal, making comparisons difficult.
The efficiency ratio is a ratio that management utilizes to compare the Company to peers. It is standard in the banking industry and widely utilized by investors.
ALLL to total loans and leases, excluding PPP loans, and loan growth annualized, excluding PPP loans, are ratios that management utilizes to compare the Company to its peers. The Company’s management believes these financial measures are important to investors as total loans and leases for the year ended December 31, 2020 were materially higher due to the addition of PPP loans which are guaranteed by the government and therefore do not necessitate an increase in ALLL. By excluding the PPP loans, the investor is provided a better comparison to prior years for analysis.
Non-GAAP financial measures have inherent limitations, are not required to be uniformly applied, and are not audited. Although these non-GAAP financial measures are frequently used by investors to evaluate a company, they have limitations as analytical tools and should not be considered in isolation, or as a substitute for analyses of results as reported under GAAP.
* Nonrecurring items (after-tax) are calculated using an estimated effective tax rate of 21% with the exception of goodwill impairment which is not deductible for tax and gain on sale of subsidiary which has an estimated effective tax rate of 30.5%.
NET INTEREST INCOME AND MARGIN (TAX EQUIVALENT BASIS) (Non-GAAP)
Net interest income, on a tax equivalent basis, increased 8% to $175.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the prior year. Excluding the tax equivalent adjustments, net interest income increased 7% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. Net interest income improved due to several factors:
● Continued organic loan and deposit growth;
● Significant growth in PPP loans in 2020;
● Reduction in higher cost wholesale funds with strong core deposit growth including noninterest bearing deposits; and
● Significant reduction in cost of funds.
A comparison of yields, spread and margin on a tax equivalent and GAAP basis is as follows:
Acquisition accounting net accretion can fluctuate mostly depending on the payoff activity of the acquired loans. In evaluating net interest income and NIM, it's important to understand the impact of acquisition accounting net accretion when comparing periods. The above table reports NIM with and without the acquisition accounting net accretion to allow for more appropriate comparisons. A comparison of acquisition accounting net accretion included in NIM is as follows:
NIM on a tax equivalent basis was down one basis point on a linked-year basis. Excluding acquisition accounting net accretion, NIM was up two basis points on a linked-year basis.
The Company's management closely monitors and manages NIM. From a profitability standpoint, an important challenge for the Company's subsidiary banks and leasing company is focusing on quality growth in conjunction with the improvement of their NIMs. Management continually addresses this issue with pricing and other balance sheet management strategies which included better loan pricing, reducing reliance on very rate-sensitive funding, closely managing deposit rate increases and finding additional ways to manage cost of funds through derivatives.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Federal Reserve decreased interest rates by a total of 150 basis points in March 2020. These decreases impact the comparability of net interest income between 2020 and 2019.
The Company’s average balances, interest income/expense, and rates earned/paid on major balance sheet categories are presented in the following table:
(1) Interest earned and yields on nontaxable investment securities and loans are determined on a tax equivalent basis using a 21% tax rate.
(2) Loan/lease fees are not material and are included in interest income from loans/leases receivable in accordance with accounting and regulatory guidance.
(3) Non-accrual loans/leases are included in the average balance for gross loans/leases receivable in accordance with accounting and regulatory guidance.
The Company’s components of change in net interest income are presented in the following table:
(1) The column "Inc/(Dec) from Prior Year" is segmented into the changes attributable to variations in volume and the changes attributable to changes in interest rates. The variations attributable to simultaneous volume and rate changes have been proportionately allocated to rate and volume.
(2) Interest earned and yields on nontaxable investment securities and loans are determined on a tax equivalent basis using a 21% tax rate.
(3) Loan/lease fees are not material and are included in interest income from loans/leases receivable in accordance with accounting and regulatory guidance.
The Company’s operating results are also impacted by various sources of noninterest income, including trust department fees, investment advisory and management fees, deposit service fees, swap fee income, gains from the sales of residential real estate loans and government guaranteed loans, earnings on BOLI and other income. Offsetting these items, the Company incurs noninterest expenses, which include salaries and employee benefits, occupancy and equipment expense, professional and data processing fees, FDIC and other insurance expense, loan/lease expense and other administrative expenses.
The Company’s operating results are also affected by economic and competitive conditions, particularly changes in interest rates, income tax rates, government policies and actions of regulatory authorities.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The Company’s financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. The financial information contained within these statements is, to a significant extent, financial information that is based on approximate measures of the financial effects of transactions and events that have already occurred.
Based on its consideration of accounting policies that involve the most complex and subjective decisions and assessments, management has identified the following as critical accounting policies:
GOODWILL
The Company records all assets and liabilities purchased in an acquisition, including intangibles, at fair value. Goodwill is not amortized but is subject, at a minimum, to annual tests for impairment. In certain situations, interim impairment tests may be required if events occur or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount.
The initial recognition of goodwill and subsequent impairment analysis requires us to make subjective judgments concerning estimates of how the acquired assets will perform in the future using valuation methods, which may include using the current market price of stock or discounted cash flow analyses. Additionally, estimated cash flows may extend
beyond five years and, by their nature, are difficult to determine over an extended timeframe. Events and factors that may significantly affect the estimates include, among others, competitive forces, customer behaviors, changes in revenue growth trends, cost structures, technology, changes in discount rates and market conditions. In determining the reasonableness of cash flow estimates, the Company reviews historical performance of the underlying assets or similar assets in an effort to assess and validate assumptions utilized in its estimates.
In assessing the fair value of reporting units, we may consider the stage of the current business cycle and potential changes in market conditions. We may also utilize other information to validate the reasonableness of our valuations, including public market comparables and multiples of recent mergers and acquisitions of similar businesses. Valuation multiples may be based on tangible capital ratios of comparable companies and business segments. These multiples may be adjusted to consider competitive differences, including size, operating leverage and other factors. The carrying amount of a reporting unit is determined based on the capital required to support the reporting unit’s activities, including its tangible and intangible assets. The determination of a reporting unit’s capital allocation requires judgment and considers many factors, including the regulatory capital regulations and capital characteristics of comparably situated companies in relevant industry sectors. In certain circumstances, the Company will engage a third-party to independently validate our assessment of the fair value of our reporting units.
The Company assesses the impairment of goodwill whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable. Factors considered important, which could trigger an impairment review, include the following:
● Significant under-performance relative to expected historical or projected future operating results;
● Significant changes in the manner of use of the acquired assets or the strategy for the overall business;
● Significant negative industry or economic trends;
● Significant decline in the market price for our common stock over a sustained period; or
● Market capitalization relative to net book value.
Due to the economic impact of COVID-19 during the first quarter of 2020, management concluded that factors such as the decline in macroeconomic conditions led to the occurrence of a triggering event and therefore an interim impairment test over goodwill was performed as of March 31, 2020. Based upon the results of the interim goodwill assessment during the first quarter of 2020, the Company concluded that an impairment did not exist on the bank reporting units as of the time of the assessment. There was no occurrence of a triggering event in the second or third quarter of 2020, therefore no impairment test of goodwill was performed as of June 30, 2020 or September 30, 2020. When such an assessment is performed, should the Company conclude that all or a portion of goodwill is impaired, a non-cash charge for the amount of such impairment would be recorded to earnings. Such a charge would have no impact on tangible capital or regulatory capital.
During the first quarter of 2020, the Company incurred goodwill impairment expense of $500 thousand related to the Bates Companies. This was the result of the announcement of the sale of the Bates Companies as discussed in the Company’s financial statements and the accompanying notes presented elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
As of November 30, 2020 the Company’s management performed an annual assessment at the reporting unit level and determined no goodwill impairment existedfo.
ALLOWANCE FOR LOAN AND LEASE LOSSES
The Company’s allowance methodology incorporates a variety of risk considerations, both quantitative and qualitative, in establishing an allowance that management believes is appropriate at each reporting date. Quantitative factors include the Company’s historical loss experience, delinquency and charge-off trends, collateral values, governmental guarantees, payment status, changes in nonperforming loans/leases, and other factors. Quantitative factors also incorporate known information about individual loans/leases, including borrowers’ sensitivity to interest rate movements.
Qualitative factors include the general economic environment in the Company’s markets, including economic conditions both locally and nationally, and in particular the economic health of certain industries. Size and complexity of individual credits in relation to loan/lease structure, existing loan/lease policies and pace of portfolio growth are other qualitative factors that are considered in the methodology. As the Company adds new products and increases the complexity of its loan/lease portfolio, it enhances its methodology accordingly.
Management may report a materially different amount for the provision in the statement of operations to change the allowance if its assessment of the above factors were different. The discussion regarding the Company’s allowance should be read in conjunction with the Company’s financial statements and the accompanying notes presented elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as well as the portion of this MD&A section entitled “Financial Condition - Allowance for Estimated Losses on Loans/Leases.”
The Company believes that as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic losses have been incurred that are not yet known and this could have an adverse effect in the future. Disruption to the Company’s customers could result in increased loan delinquencies and defaults resulting in an increase in quantitative allocations. Management believes impaired loans may increase in the future as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, having a direct impact on the specific component of the allowance for loan and lease losses.
Although management believes the level of the allowance as of December 31, 2020 was adequate to absorb losses inherent in the loan/lease portfolio, a decline in local economic conditions, or other factors, could result in increasing losses that cannot be reasonably predicted at this time.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS FOR THE YEARS ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020 and 2019
INTEREST INCOME
For 2020, interest income decreased $17.7 million, or 8% primarily due to a decline in the yield of average loans/leases of 59 basis points. In total, the Company’s average interest-earning assets increased $382.4 million, or 8%, year-over-year. Average loans/leases grew 5%, while average securities increased 13%.
In 2020, the Company continued to grow its securities portfolio with increases in its portfolio of tax exempt municipal securities. The large majority of these securities are privately placed debt issuances by municipalities located in the Midwest and require a thorough underwriting process before investment. Execution of this strategy has led to increased interest income on a tax equivalent basis over the past several years. Management understands that this strategy has extended the duration of its securities portfolio and continually evaluates the combined benefit of increased interest income and reduced effective income tax rate and the impact on interest rate risk.
The Company intends to continue to grow quality loans and leases as well as diversify the securities portfolio to maximize yield while minimizing credit and interest rate risk.
INTEREST EXPENSE
Comparing 2020 to 2019, interest expense decreased $29.1 million, or 48%, year-over-year. Average interest-bearing liabilities increased 2% in 2020. The Company has grown organically at a significant pace over the past several years. Loan growth has been funded by core deposits and has also allowed the Company to prepay brokered deposits and FHLB advances. In the second half of 2019 and the full year of 2020, the Company’s cost of funds declined in conjunction with the now declining rate environment. The Company’s cost of funds was 0.85% at December 31, 2020, which was down from 1.66% at December 31, 2019.
Cost of funds decreased 81 basis points when comparing cost of funds in 2020 to cost of funds in 2019.
The Company’s management intends to continue to shift the mix of funding from wholesale funds to core deposits, including noninterest-bearing deposits. Continuing this trend is expected to strengthen the Company’s franchise value, reduce funding costs and increase fee income opportunities through deposit service charges.
PROVISION FOR LOAN/LEASE LOSSES
The Company’s provision totaled $55.7 million for 2020, an increase of $48.6 million from 2019. The increase in 2020 was primarily attributable to increased qualitative allocations in response to deteriorating economic conditions as related to the effects of COVID-19 and new qualitative allocations on acquired loans that previously had no allowance. The Company anticipates the provision could remain elevated in future periods due to the broad reach of COVID-19 across many impacted individuals and industries. The dramatic slowdown in economic activity will likely continue to negatively impact the credit quality of the Company’s loan portfolio with increased levels of loan defaults. The CARES Act provides
significant resources for individuals and industries that could lessen the impact of COVID-19, in addition to the Company’s own loan relief programs.
The allowance for loan/lease losses is established based on a number of factors, including the Company’s historical loss experience, delinquencies and charge-off trends, the local and national economy and the risk associated with the loans/leases in the portfolio as described in more detail in the “Critical Accounting Policies” section.
The Company had an allowance of 1.98% of total gross loans/leases at December 31, 2020, compared to 0.98% of total gross loans/leases at December 31, 2019. Management evaluates the allowance needed on the acquired loans factoring in the remaining discount, which was $3.1 million and $7.0 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The Company’s allowance to total NPLs was 574.61% at December 31, 2020, which was up from 403.87% at December 31, 2019.
The fluctuations in these ratios were the result of the increase in ALLL related to the effects of COVID-19.
The Company estimates an increase in the allowance for estimated losses on loans/leases in the range of $1 million to $3 million upon adoption of CECL at January 1, 2021. The after-tax charge will result in an adjustment to the stockholders' equity effective January 1, 2021. See Note 1 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the notes to consolidated financial statements for additional information on the Company’s impact of adoption.
NONINTEREST INCOME
The following tables set forth the various categories of noninterest income for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
In recent years, the Company has been successful in expanding its wealth management customer base. Trust department fees continue to be a significant contributor to noninterest income. Trust department fees decreased 4% in 2020 as compared to 2019 due to the sale of RB&T. Income is generated primarily from fees charged based on assets under administration for corporate and personal trusts and for custodial services. The majority of the trust department fees are determined based on the value of the investments within the fully managed trusts. The Company added $300.8 million of new trust assets in 2020.
Investment advisory and management fees decreased 24% in 2020 as compared to 2019. Similar to trust department fees, fees from these services are largely determined based on the value of the investments managed. As a result, fee income from this line of business fluctuates with market valuations. The levels of assets under management were negatively impacted by the decline in the market as a result of COVID-19 as well as the sale of the Bates Companies in August 2020.
Deposit service fees decreased 11% in 2020 as compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily due to the sale of RB&T, as well as lower transactional volume due to current economic conditions. The Company continues to emphasize shifting
the mix of deposits from brokered and retail time deposits to non-maturity demand deposits across all its markets. With this continuing shift in mix, the Company has increased the number of demand deposit accounts, which tend to be lower in interest cost and higher in service fees. The Company plans to continue this shift in mix and to further focus on growing deposit service fees.
Gains on sales of residential real estate loans, net, increased 82% in 2020 as compared to 2019. The increase was largely due to SFCB which recognized gains on sales of residential real estate of $3.5 million and $1.7 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Also, residential real estate loan rates reached historical lows during 2020 driving an increase in refinance activity.
The Company’s gains on the sale of government-guaranteed portions of loans for 2020 decreased 70% as compared to 2019. Over the past few years, competitors have been offering SBA and USDA loan candidates traditional financing without such a guarantee and the Company is not willing to relax its structure for those lending opportunities.
As a result of the relatively low interest rate environment, the Company was able to execute numerous interest rate swaps on select commercial loans, including tax credit project loans. The interest rate swaps allow the commercial borrowers to pay a fixed interest rate while the Company receives a variable interest rate as well as an upfront fee dependent upon the pricing. Management will continue to review opportunities to execute these swaps at all of its subsidiary banks, as the circumstances are appropriate for the borrower and the Company. An optimal interest rate swap candidate must be of a certain size and sophistication which can lead to volatility in activity from year to year. Swap fee income totaled $74.8 million in 2020 as compared to $28.3 million in 2019. The increase in swap fee income was due to both the volume and the size of the transactions executed as the Company focused on creating a sustainable revenue source. Future levels of swap fee income can be dependent upon prevailing interest rates and other market activity.
Securities gains, net of losses totaled $2.5 million in 2020 as compared to $30 thousand in securities losses, net of gains for 2019. Manaement sold select overvalued securities and utilized the gains to offset the cost of prepaying certain high cost wholesale funds.
Earnings on BOLI decreased 4% in 2020 primarily due to liquidation of BOLI policies after the sale of RB&T. There were no purchases of BOLI in 2020. Yields on BOLI (based on a simple average and excluding the impact of the federal income tax exemption) were 2.87% for 2020 and 2.10% for 2019. Notably, a small portion of the Company’s BOLI is variable rate whereby the returns are determined by the performance of the equity market. Management intends to continue to review its BOLI investments to be consistent with policy and regulatory limits in conjunction with the rest of its earning assets in an effort to maximize returns while minimizing risk.
Debit card fees are the interchange fees paid on certain debit card customer transactions. Debit card fees increased 1% in 2020. These fees can vary based on customer debit card usage, so fluctuations from period to period may occur. As an opportunity to maximize fees, the Company offers a deposit product with a higher interest rate that incentivizes debit card activity.
Correspondent banking fees increased 17% in 2020. The fees are generally included in the earnings credit rates which incent the correspondent bank to maintain higher levels of noninterest bearing deposits to offset the correspondent banking fees. Management will continue to evaluate earnings credit rates and the resulting impact on deposit balances and fees while balancing the ability to grow market share. Correspondent banking continues to be a core strategy for the Company, as this line of business provides a high level of noninterest bearing deposits that can be used to fund loan growth as well as a steady source of fee income. The Company now serves 192 banks in Iowa, Illinois, Missouri and Wisconsin.
There were no gains on sale of assets and liabilities of subsidiary in 2020. Gain on sale of assets and liabilities of subsidiary totaled $12.3 million in 2019 due to the sale of the assets and liabilities of RB&T on November 30, 2019. See Note 2 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for further detail.
Other noninterest income decreased 11% in 2020. The decrease due to the sale of RB&T.
NONINTEREST EXPENSES
The following tables set forth the various categories of noninterest expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Management places strong emphasis on overall cost containment and is committed to improving the Company’s general efficiency. One-time charges relating to acquisitions, dispositions and goodwill impairment impacted expense in 2020 and 2019. In 2019, there was a $4.0 million write-down of a single OREO property.
Salaries and employee benefits, which is the largest component of noninterest expense, increased 5% in 2020 as compared to 2019. This increase was primarily related to increased incentive compensation driven by record financial results.
Occupancy and equipment expense increased 9% in 2020 as compared to 2019. This increase was due to higher investments in information technology, increases in repairs and maintenance costs and renovations to existing buildings.
Professional and data processing fees increased 9% in 2020 as compared to 2019. This increased expense was mostly due to legal costs associated with the sale of the Bates Companies. Generally, professional and data processing fees can fluctuate depending on certain one-time project costs. Management will continue to focus on minimizing such one-time costs and driving recurring costs down through contract negotiation or managed reduction in activity where costs are determined on a usage basis.
Post-acquisition compensation, transition and integration costs totaled $214 thousand and $3.6 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively. These costs were comprised primarily of personnel costs, IT integration, and conversion costs related to the acquisitions as described in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. The increased costs in 2019 related to conversion of data processing software at SFCB.
Disposition costs totaled $690 thousand for 2020 as compared to $3.3 million for 2019. The costs were comprised primarily of legal, accounting, disposal of fixed assets and prepaids, personnel costs and IT deconversion costs related to the sale of the Bates Companies in 2020 and the sale of RB&T in 2019. See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.
FDIC insurance, other insurance and regulatory fee expense increased 41% in 2020. The increase in expense was due to an increase in the asset size of the Company in 2020 as well as a credit to FDIC insurance assessments received in 2019.
Loan/lease expense increased 31% in 2020 as compared to 2019. Generally, loan/lease expense has a direct relationship with the level of NPLs; however, it may deviate depending upon the individual NPLs.
Net cost and gains/losses on operations of other real estate includes gains/losses on the sale of OREO, write-downs of OREO and all income/expenses associated with OREO. Net income from operations totaled $307 thousand for 2020 as
compared to net cost of operations of $3.8 million for 2019. The higher amount in 2019 is due primarily to $3.4 million of subsequent write-down of one OREO property.
Advertising and marketing expense decreased 28% in 2020 as compared to 2019. The decrease in expense was primarily due to the sale of RB&T and the change in general environment due to COVID.
Bank service charges, a large portion of which includes indirect costs incurred to provide services to QCBT’s correspondent banking customer portfolio, remained flat in 2020 as compared to 2019.
Losses on liability extinguishment were $3.9 million in 2020 as compared to $436 thousand in 2019. These losses relate to the prepayment of certain brokered certificates of deposit and FHLB advances as well as terminations and changes in designation on certain derivatives.
Correspondent banking expense remained flat in 2020. These are direct costs incurred to provide services to QCBT’s correspondent banking customer portfolio, including safekeeping and cash management services.
Intangible amortization expense decreased 5% in 2020 as compared to 2019. Included in 2019 was a $109 thousand adjustment to intangible amortization expense related to the finalization of purchase accounting related to the acquisition of the Bates Companies.
Goodwill impairment expense totaled $500 thousand in 2020 and $3.0 million in 2019 related to the Bates Companies. See Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.
Loss on sale of subsidiary totaled $158 thousand in 2020 due to the sale of Bates Companies. See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion. There was no loss on sale of a subsidiary in 2019.
Other noninterest expense decreased 22% in 2020 as compared to 2019. This was primarily due to the sale of RB&T. Included in other noninterest expense are items such as subscriptions, sales and use tax and expenses related to wealth management.
INCOME TAX EXPENSE
The provision for income taxes was $12.7 million for 2020, or an effective tax rate of 17.3%, compared to $14.6 million for 2019, or an effective tax rate of 20.3%. Refer to the reconciliation of the expected income tax rate to the effective tax rate that is included in Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details.
FINANCIAL CONDITION AS OF DECEMBER 31, 2020 AND 2019
OVERVIEW
Following is a table that represents the major categories of the Company’s balance sheet. On November 30, 2019, the Company sold substantially all of the assets and transferred substantially all of the deposits and certain other liabilities of the Company’s wholly owned subsidiary, RB&T. As a result, those assets and liabilities of RB&T are not included in the Company’s results of its financial condition as of December 31, 2019, the removal of which impacts balance sheet comparisons to the prior period.
In 2020, total assets increased $773.7 million, or 16%. The Company’s securities portfolio increased $226.8 million, or 37%, during 2020. The Company’s loan/lease portfolio increased $512.5 million, or 14%, during 2020. The increase in the loan/lease portfolio was partially related to the addition of PPP loans (further described in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements). Excluding the PPP loans (non-GAAP), the Company’s loan/lease portfolio grew organically $287.8 million, or 7.8%, during 2020, which was funded by deposit growth. Deposits grew $688.1 million, or 18% during 2020. Borrowings decreased $101.8 million, or 37%, during 2020.
As of December 31, 2019, there were $12.0 million of assets held for sale, primarily comprised of bank-owned life insurance that was retained from the RB&T sale. There were $5.0 million of liabilities held for sale, primarily comprised of deferred compensation obligations to former RB&T employees as part of the sale transaction. These assets and liabilities were liquidated in 2020.
INVESTMENT SECURITIES
The composition of the Company’s securities portfolio is managed to meet liquidity needs while prioritizing the impact on interest rate risk and maximizing return, while minimizing credit risk. Over the recent years, the Company has continued to change the mix of the portfolio by decreasing U.S government sponsored agency securities, while increasing residential mortgage-backed and related securities and tax-exempt municipal securities. Of the latter, the large majority are privately placed tax-exempt debt issuances by municipalities located in the Midwest (with some in or near the Company’s existing markets) that require a thorough underwriting process before investment.
Following is a breakdown of the Company’s securities portfolio by type, the percentage of net unrealized gains (losses) to carrying value on the total portfolio, and the portfolio duration as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Management monitors the level of unrealized gains/losses including performing quarterly reviews of individual securities for evidence of OTTI. Management identified no OTTI in 2020 or 2019.
The Company has not invested in non-agency commercial or residential mortgage-backed securities or pooled trust preferred securities.
See Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding the Company’s investment securities.
LOANS/LEASES
Total loans/leases, excluding PPP loans (non-GAAP), grew 7.8% in 2020 over 2019. The mix of loan/lease types within the Company’s loan/lease portfolio is presented in the following table.
*Includes PPP loans totaling $273.1 million at December 31, 2020.
Historically, the Company structures most residential real estate loans to conform to the underwriting requirements of Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae to allow the subsidiary banks to resell the loans on the secondary market to avoid the interest rate risk associated with longer term fixed rate loans and recognizing noninterest income from the gain on sale. Loans originated for this purpose were classified as held for sale and are included in the residential real estate loans in the table above. Historically, the subsidiary banks structure most loans that will not conform to those underwriting requirements as adjustable rate mortgages that mature or adjust in one to five years, and then retain these loans in their portfolios. The Company holds a limited amount of 15-year fixed rate residential real estate loans originated in prior years that met certain credit guidelines. In addition, the Company has not originated any subprime, Alt-A, no documentation, or stated income residential real estate loans throughout its history.
The following tables set forth the remaining maturities by loan/lease type as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. Maturities are based on contractual dates.
As CRE loans have historically been one of the Company’s larger portfolio segments, management places a strong emphasis on monitoring the composition of the Company’s CRE loan portfolio. For example, management tracks the level of owner-occupied CRE loans relative to non owner-occupied loans because owner-occupied loans are generally considered to have less risk. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, approximately 24% and 26% of the CRE loan portfolio was owner-occupied.
See Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on the Company’s loan/lease portfolio.
ALLOWANCE FOR ESTIMATED LOSSES ON LOANS/LEASES
The allowance totaled $84.4 million at December 31, 2020, which was an increase of $48.4 million, or 134%, from $36.0 million at December 31, 2019. Provision totaled $55.7 million for 2020 and outpaced net charge-offs of $7.3 million (or 18 basis points of average loans/leases outstanding).
The following table summarizes the activity in the allowance.
The adequacy of the allowance was determined by management based on factors that included the overall composition of the loan/lease portfolio, types of loans/leases, historical loss experience, loan/lease delinquencies, potential substandard and doubtful credits, economic conditions, collateral positions, government guarantees and other factors that, in management’s judgment, deserved evaluation. To ensure that an adequate allowance was maintained, provisions were made based on the increase/decrease in loans/leases and a detailed analysis of the loan/lease portfolio. The loan/lease portfolio was reviewed and analyzed quarterly with specific detailed reviews completed on all credits risk-rated less than “fair quality” and carrying aggregate exposure in excess of $250 thousand. The adequacy of the allowance was monitored by the credit administration staff and reported to management and the board of directors.
The following is a table that reports the criticized and classified loan totals as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
* Amounts above exclude the government guaranteed portion, if any. The Company assigns internal risk ratings of Pass (Rating 2) for the government
guaranteed portion.
** Criticized loans are defined as C&I and CRE loans with internally assigned risk ratings of 6, 7, or 8, regardless of performance.
*** Classified loans are defined as C&I and CRE loans with internally assigned risk ratings of 7 or 8, regardless of performance.
Criticized loans increased 157% and classified loans increased 96% in 2020 as compared to 2019. The changes were primarily due to the downgrading of $105.4 million of loans from pass to criticized during the year.
NPLs (consisting of nonaccrual loans/leases, accruing loans/leases past due 90 days or more, and accruing TDRs) increased $5.8 million, or 65%, during 2020. See the table in the following section for further detail on NPLs and NPAs.
In accordance with GAAP for acquisition accounting, acquired loans were recorded at fair value; therefore, there was no allowance associated with these loans at acquisition. Management continues to evaluate the allowance needed on the acquired loans factoring in the net remaining discount ($3.1 million and $7.0 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively).
The following table summarizes the trend in allowance as a percentage of gross loans/leases and as a percentage of NPLs as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The following table presents the allowance by type and the percentage of loan/lease type to total loans/leases.
% Represents the percentage of the certain type of loan/lease to total loans/leases
Although management believes that the allowance at December 31, 2020 is at a level adequate to absorb probable losses on existing loans/leases, there can be no assurance that such losses will not exceed the estimated amounts or that the Company will not be required to make additional provisions for loan/lease losses in the future. Unpredictable future events could adversely affect cash flows for both commercial and individual borrowers, which could cause the Company to experience increases in problem assets, delinquencies and losses on loans/leases, and require additional increases in the provision. Asset quality is a priority for the Company and its subsidiaries. The ability to grow profitably is in part dependent upon the ability to maintain that quality. The Company continually focuses efforts at its subsidiary banks and its leasing company with the intention to improve the overall quality of the Company’s loan/lease portfolio.
See Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on the Company’s allowance.
NONPERFORMING ASSETS
The table below presents the amounts of NPAs.
(1) Includes government guaranteed portions of loans, if applicable.
(2) Includes TDRs of $984 thousand at December 31, 2020 and $747 thousand at December 31, 2019.
Generally, the large majority of the Company’s NPAs consists of nonaccrual loans/leases, accruing TDRs and OREO. For nonaccrual loans/leases, management thoroughly reviewed these loans/leases and provided specific allowances as appropriate. OREO is carried at the lower of carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell.
The policy of the Company is to place a loan/lease on nonaccrual status if: (a) payment in full of interest or principal is not expected; or (b) principal or interest has been in default for a period of 90 days or more unless the obligation is both in the process of collection and well secured. A loan/lease is well secured if it is secured by collateral with sufficient market value to repay principal and all accrued interest. A debt is in the process of collection if collection of the debt is proceeding in due course either through legal action, including judgment enforcement procedures, or in appropriate circumstances, through collection efforts not involving legal action which are reasonably expected to result in repayment of the debt or in its restoration to current status.
In 2020, the Company’s NPAs increased $1.8 million, or 13% as compared to $13.1 million in 2019. The increase in NPAs in 2020 was primarily due to several isolated relationships that experienced degradation. OREO decreased $4.1 million as we effectively sold all of our OREO in 2020.
The Company’s lending/leasing practices remain unchanged and asset quality remains a top priority for management.
Due to the economic impacts of COVID-19, the Company established its LRP for its clients. The LRP allows borrowers to request the deferral of principal and interest payments for an agreed upon term. Those deferred payments will be added to the end of the original term of the loan through a three-month extension of the maturity date. The CARES Act includes provisions that allow financial institutions to elect to not apply GAAP requirements to loan modifications related to COVID-19 that would otherwise be categorized as a TDR, including arrangements that defer or delay payments of principal or interest for up to 90 days. The relief from TDR guidance applies to modifications of loans that were not more than 30 days past due as of December 31, 2019, and that occur beginning on March 1, 2020 until the earlier of sixty days after the date on which the national emergency related to COVID-19 is terminated or December 31, 2020. On December 27, 2020, former President Trump signed the Consolidated Appropriations Act, which extended this relief to the earlier of the first day of the Company’s fiscal year after the date of the national emergency terminates or January 1, 2022. The Company expects that the majority of LRP participants will not be categorized as a TDR by meeting the CARES Act provisions. The Company implemented its LRP offerings to extend qualifying customers’ payments for 90 days. As of December 31, 2020 there were 126 Bank modifications of loans to commercial and consumer clients totaling $21 million and 71 m2 modifications of loans and leases totaling $7 million for a combined 197 modifications totaling $28 million and representing 0.66% of the total loan and lease portfolio currently on deferral. The Company intends to allow qualifying commercial and consumer clients to defer payments under the new guidance.
On March 22, 2020, federal banking regulators issued an interagency statement that included guidance on their approach for the accounting of loan modifications in light of the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The guidance interprets current accounting standards and indicates that a lender can conclude that a borrower is not experiencing financial difficulty if short-term modifications are made in response to COVID-19, such as payment deferrals, fee waivers, extensions of repayment terms or other delays in payment that are insignificant related to the loans in which the borrower is less than 30 days past due on its contractual payments at the time a modification program is implemented. The agencies confirmed in working with the staff of the FASB that short-term modifications made on a good faith basis in response to COVID-19 to borrowers who were current prior to any relief are not TDRs. The regulators have clarified that this guidance may continue to be applied in 2021.
DEPOSITS
Deposits grew $688.1 million, or 17.6%, during 2020, primarily due to an increase in both non-interest bearing and interest bearing commercial clients and correspondent deposits, net of prepayment of large brokered certificates of deposits. The table below presents the composition of the Company’s deposit portfolio.
The Company has been successful in growing its noninterest-bearing deposit portfolio over the past several years, growing average balances 29% in 2020. Year-end balances can fluctuate a great deal due to large customer and correspondent bank activity. During the year, the Company had significant core deposit growth mostly from its correspondent banking clients. The outsized deposit growth exceeded the strong loan growth and led to the Company carrying excess liquidity during the year. As a result of strong core deposit growth, the Company reduced its reliance on higher cost CDs and brokered deposits.
Management will continue to focus on growing its core deposit portfolio, including its correspondent banking business at QCBT, as well as shifting the mix from brokered and other higher cost deposits to lower cost core deposits. With the significant success achieved by QCBT in growing its correspondent banking business, QCBT has developed procedures to proactively monitor this industry concentration of deposits and loans. Other deposit-related industry concentrations and large accounts are monitored by the internal asset liability management committee. See discussion regarding policy limits on bank stock loans in the Lending/Leasing section under Item 1 - Business in Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
SHORT-TERM BORROWINGS
The subsidiary banks purchase federal funds for short-term funding needs from the FRB or from their correspondent banks. The table below presents the composition of the Company’s short-term borrowings.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company is no longer offering overnight repurchase agreements with customers.
The Company’s federal funds purchased fluctuates based on the short-term funding needs of the Company’s subsidiary banks. See Note 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on the Company’s short-term borrowings.
FHLB ADVANCES AND OTHER BORROWINGS
As a result of their membership in the FHLB of Des Moines, the subsidiary banks have the ability to borrow funds for short-term or long-term purposes under a variety of programs. The subsidiary banks can utilize FHLB advances for loan matching as a hedge against the possibility of rising interest rates or when these advances provide a less costly source of funds than customer deposits. For 2020, FHLB advances decreased $144.3 million, or 91%, primarily due to core deposit growth that allowed for overnight and term FHLB advances to be prepaid or mature without renewal.
During 2019, the Company prepaid $25 million of wholesale structured repurchase agreements and the other $10 million matured without replacement. For the term notes and revolving line of credit, these were paid off with the proceeds from the issuance of subordinated notes in the first quarter of 2019. See Notes 10 and 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding FHLB advances, and other borrowings.
It is management’s intention to continue to reduce its reliance on wholesale funding, including FHLB advances, wholesale structured repurchase agreements, and brokered deposits. Replacement of this funding with core deposits helps to reduce interest expense as the wholesale funding tends to be higher cost. However, the Company may choose to utilize wholesale funding sources to supplement funding needs, as this is a way for the Company to effectively and efficiently manage interest rate risk.
SUBORDINATED NOTES
On September 14, 2020, the Company completed a private offering of $50.0 million in aggregate principal amount of fixed-to-floating subordinated notes that mature on September 15, 2030. The subordinated notes, which qualify as Tier 2 capital for the Company, are at a fixed rate of 5.125% per year, from and including September 14, 2020 to, but excluding, September 15, 2025 or earlier redemption date. From and including September 15, 2025 to, but excluding, the maturity date or earlier redemption date, the interest rate will reset quarterly at a variable rate, which is expected to be the then current three-month Term SOFR plus 500 basis points. Interest on the subordinated notes is payable quarterly, commencing on December 15, 2020. The subordinated notes are redeemable by the Company at its option, in whole or in part, on any interest payment date on or after September 15, 2025. The subordinated notes are redeemable by the Company in whole but not in part, under certain limited circumstances set forth in the subordinated notes. Any redemption by the Compay would be at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the notes to be redeemed, together with an accrued and unpaid interest on the subordinated notes being redeemed to, but excluding, the date of redemption. The subordinated notes are subordinate in the right of payment to the Company’s senior indebtedness and the indebtedness and other liabilities of the subsidiary banks.
During 2019, the Company issued subordinated notes of $65.0 million. Net proceeds, after deducting the underwriting discount and estimated expenses, were $63.4 million. The Company used a portion of the net proceeds from the offering to prepay term notes totaling $21.3 million and the outstanding balance of $9.0 million on its revolving line of credit. The term notes and revolving line of credit had been used to fund the acquisition of Springfield Bancshares, as described in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
See Note 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding subordinated notes.
STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
The table below presents the composition of the Company’s stockholders’ equity.
* TCE/TA ratio is a non-GAAP measure. Refer to the GAAP to Non-GAAP Reconciliations section of this report for more information.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, no preferred stock was outstanding.
The following table presents the rollforward of stockholders’ equity for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
* Includes primarily common stock issued for options exercised and the employee stock purchase plans, as well as stock-based compensation.
On February 13, 2020, the Board of Directors of the Company approved a share repurchase program under which the Company is authorized to repurchase, from time to time as the Company deems appropriate, up to 800,000 shares of its outstanding common stock, or approximately 5% of the outstanding shares as of December 31, 2019. The Company suspended the repurchase of shares on March 16, 2020 due to the uncertainties related to the COVID-19 pandemic. It is undecided whether or when the Company will resume the repurchase of shares under this program in the future. All shares repurchased under the share repurchase program were retired.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Liquidity measures the ability of the Company to meet maturing obligations and its existing commitments, to withstand fluctuations in deposit levels, to fund its operations, and to provide for customers’ credit needs. The Company monitors liquidity risk through contingency planning stress testing on a regular basis. The Company seeks to avoid over concentration of funding sources and to establish and maintain contingent funding facilities that can be drawn upon if normal funding sources become unavailable. One source of liquidity is cash and short-term assets, such as interest-bearing deposits in other banks, cash and due from banks and federal funds sold, which averaged $398.2 million and $270.2 million during 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Company’s on balance sheet liquidity position can fluctuate based on short-term activity in deposits and loans.
The Federal Reserve Bank has provided a lending facility that will allow the Company, if desired, to obtain funding specifically for loans that the Company makes under the PPP, which will allow the Company to retain existing sources of
liquidity for traditional operations. The Company has been able to access other available funding sources to address liquidity needs during the COVID-19 pandemic.
The subsidiary banks have a variety of sources of short-term liquidity available to them, including federal funds purchased from correspondent banks, FHLB advances, wholesale structured repurchase agreements, brokered deposits, lines of credit, borrowing at the Federal Reserve Discount Window, sales of securities AFS, and loan/lease participations or sales. The Company also generates liquidity from the regular principal payments and prepayments made on its loan/lease portfolio, and on the regular monthly payments on its securities portfolio.
At December 31, 2020, the subsidiary banks had 28 lines of credit totaling $743.1 million, of which $287.1 million was secured and $456.0 million was unsecured. At December 31, 2020, all of the $743.1 million was available.
At December 31, 2019, the subsidiary banks had 27 lines of credit totaling $380.6 million, of which $45.3 million was secured and $335.3 million was unsecured. At December 31, 2019, all of the $380.6 million was available.
The Company maintains a $25.0 million secured revolving credit note with a variable interest rate and a maturity of June 30, 2021. At December 31, 2020, the full $25.0 million was available. See Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Investing activities used cash of $704.5 million during 2020 compared to $308.7 million during 2019. Proceeds from calls, maturities, pay downs, and sales of securities were $138.9 million for 2020 compared to $106.1 million for 2019. Purchases of securities used cash of $356.1 million for 2020 compared to $72.0 million for 2019. The net increase in loans/leases used cash of $564.7 million for 2020 compared to $320.4 million for 2019. The Company received net cash of $42.6 million related to the sale of RB&T assets and liabilities for 2019. Purchases of derivatives used cash of $4.3 million for 2019. There were no purchases of derivatives in 2020.
Financing activities provided cash of $577.4 million for 2020 compared to $222.9 million for 2019. Net increases in deposits totaled $658.6 million for 2020 as compared to $355.6 million for 2019. Net short-term borrowings decreased $8.0 million for 2020 and decreased $14.2 million for 2019. In 2020 the Company used $55.3 million to prepay select FHLB advances and $29.2 million to prepay brokered and public time deposits. In 2019 the Company used $30.3 million to prepay select FHLB advances and $46.3 million to prepay other borrowings. Short-term FHLB advances decreased $94.3 million in 2020 and decreased $52.5 million in 2019.
Total cash provided by operating activities was $112.2 million for 2020 compared to $76.5 million for 2019.
Throughout its history, the Company has secured additional capital through various resources, including common and preferred stock and the issuance of trust preferred securities and subordinated notes.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the subsidiary banks remained “well-capitalized” in accordance with regulatory capital requirements administered by the federal banking authorities. See Note 17 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for detail of the capital amounts and ratios for the Company and its subsidiary banks.
COMMITMENTS, CONTINGENCIES, CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS, AND OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
In the normal course of business, the subsidiary banks make various commitments and incur certain contingent liabilities that are not presented in the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements. The commitments and contingent liabilities include various guarantees, commitments to extend credit, and standby letters of credit.
Commitments to extend credit are agreements to lend to a customer as long as there is no violation of any condition established in the contract. Commitments generally have fixed expiration dates or other termination clauses and may require payment of a fee. Since many of the commitments are expected to expire without being drawn upon, the total commitment amounts do not necessarily represent future cash requirements. The subsidiary banks evaluate each customer’s creditworthiness on a case-by-case basis. The amount of collateral obtained, if deemed necessary by the banks upon extension of credit, is based upon management’s credit evaluation of the counterparty. Collateral held varies but may include accounts receivable, marketable securities, inventory, property, plant and equipment, and income-producing commercial properties.
Standby letters of credit are conditional commitments issued by the subsidiary banks to guarantee the performance of a customer to a third party. Those guarantees are primarily issued to support public and private borrowing arrangements and, generally, have terms of one year or less. The credit risk involved in issuing letters of credit is essentially the same as that involved in extending loan facilities to customers. The banks hold collateral, as described above, supporting those commitments if deemed necessary. In the event the customer does not perform in accordance with the terms of the agreement with the third party, the banks would be required to fund the commitments. The maximum potential amount of future payments the banks could be required to make is represented by the contractual amount. If the commitment is funded, the banks would be entitled to seek recovery from the customer. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, no amounts had been recorded as liabilities for the banks’ potential obligations under these guarantees.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, commitments to extend credit aggregated $1.7 billion and $1.2 billion, respectively. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, standby letters of credit aggregated $24.8 million and $23.8 million, respectively. Management does not expect that all of these commitments will be funded.
Additional information regarding commitments, contingencies, and off-balance sheet arrangements is described in Note 19 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The Company has various financial obligations, including contractual obligations and commitments, which may require future cash payments. The following table presents, as of December 31, 2020, significant fixed and determinable contractual obligations to third parties by payment date. Further discussion of the nature of each obligation is included in the referenced note to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The Company’s operating contract obligations represent short and long-term contractual payments for data processing equipment and services, software, and other equipment and professional services.
IMPACT OF INFLATION AND CHANGING PRICES
The Consolidated Financial Statements of the Company and the accompanying notes have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP, which requires the measurement of financial position and operating results in terms of historical dollar amounts without considering the changes in the relative purchasing power of money over time due to inflation. The impact of inflation is reflected in the increased cost of the Company’s operations. Unlike industrial companies, nearly all of the assets and liabilities of the Company are monetary in nature. As a result, interest rates have a greater impact on the Company’s performance than do the effects of general levels of inflation. Interest rates do not necessarily move in the same direction or to the same extent as the price of goods and services.
FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS
This document (including information incorporated by reference) contains, and future oral and written statements of the Company and its management may contain, forward-looking statements, within the meaning of such term in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, with respect to the financial condition, results of operations, plans, objectives, future performance and business of the Company. Forward-looking statements, which may be based upon beliefs, expectations and assumptions of the Company’s management and on information currently available to management, are generally identifiable by the use of words such as “believe,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “bode,” “predict,” “suggest,” “project,” “appear,” “plan,” “intend,” “estimate,” “may,” “will,” “would,” “could,” “should,” “likely,” or other similar
expressions. Additionally, all statements in this document, including forward-looking statements, speak only as of the date they are made, and the Company undertakes no obligation to update any statement in light of new information or future events.
The Company’s ability to predict results or the actual effect of future plans or strategies is inherently uncertain. The factors that could have a material adverse effect on the operations and future prospects of the Company and its subsidiaries are detailed in the “Risk Factors” section included under Item 1A. of Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to the risk factors described in that section, there are other factors that could have a material adverse effect on the operations and future prospects of the Company and its subsidiaries. These additional factors include, but are not limited to, the following:
● The strength of the local, state, national and international economies (including the impact of the new presidential administration).
● The economic impact of past and any future terrorist attacks, widespread disease or pandemics (including the COVID-19 pandemic), acts of war or threats thereof and other adverse events that could cause economic deterioration or instability in credit markets, and the response of the local, state and national governments to any such adverse events.
● Changes in accounting policies and practices, as may be adopted by state and federal regulatory agencies, the FASB, the SEC or the PCAOB, including FASB’s CECL impairment standards.
● Changes in state and federal laws, regulations and governmental policies concerning the Company’s general business.
● Changes in the interest rates and prepayment rates of the Company’s assets (including the impact of LIBOR phase-out).
● Increased competition in the financial services sector and the inability to attract new customers.
● Changes in technology and the ability to develop and maintain secure and reliable electronic systems.
● Unexpected results of acquisitions which may include failure to realize the anticipated benefits of the acquisition.
● The loss of key executives and employees.
● The costs, effects and outcomes of existing or future litigation.
● The economic impact of exceptional weather occurrences such as tornadoes, floods and blizzards.
● The ability of the Company to manage the risks associated with the foregoing as well as anticipated.
These risks and uncertainties should be considered in evaluating forward-looking statements and undue reliance should not be placed on such statements.