ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The statements in the discussion and analysis regarding industry outlook, our expectations regarding the performance of our business and the forward-looking statements are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, the risks and uncertainties described in “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Our actual results may differ materially from those contained in or implied by any forward-looking statements. You should read the following discussion together with the sections entitled “Risk Factors”,” “Business” and the audited consolidated financial statements, including the related notes, appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. All references to years, unless otherwise noted, refer to our fiscal years, which end on December 31.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on October 1, 2020, for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our business combination using cash from the proceeds of the initial public offering and the sale of the private warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any operating revenues to date. Our only activities from inception through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for the initial public offering, described below. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the initial public offering. we expect that we will incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with searching for, and completing, a business combination.
For the period from October 1, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $5,420, which consisted of formation and operating expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $21,868. Until the consummation of the initial public offering, our only source of liquidity was an initial purchase of common stock by one of our co-sponsors and loans from one of our co-sponsors.
On February 9, 2021, we consummated the initial public offering of 17,500,000 Units, at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $175,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we consummated the sale of 5,562,500 private warrants to our co-sponsors at a price of $1.00 per private warrant generating gross proceeds of $5,562,500.
On February 12, 2021, the underwriters fully exercised their over-allotment option, resulting in an additional 2,625,000 units issued for an aggregate amount of $26,250,000. In connection with the underwriters’ full exercise of their over-allotment option, we also consummated the sale of an additional 590,625 private warrants at $1.00 per private warrant, generating total proceeds of $590,625.
Following the initial public offering, the full exercise of the over-allotment option, and the sale of the private warrants, a total of $201,250,000 was placed in the trust account. We incurred $5,017,526 in transaction costs, including $4,528,125 of underwriting fees and $489,401 of other offering costs.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less income taxes payable), to complete our business combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our co-sponsors or an affiliate of our co-sponsors or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a business combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be converted upon completion of a business combination into warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant, at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the private warrants.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. As of the IPO date at February 9, 2021, the Company held $869,750 in cash outside of the trust. We believe that the amount of cash held outside the trust at February 9, 2021 is sufficient to support operations of the Company from one year from the issuance of these financial statements. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our business combination. If we are unable to complete our business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account. In addition, following our business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities other than an agreement to pay Quantum Ventures a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial support services. We began incurring these fees on February 4, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the business combination and our liquidation.
We engaged the underwriters as advisors in connection with a business combination to assist us in holding meetings with our stockholders to discuss the potential business combination and the target business’s attributes, introduce us to potential investors that are interested in purchasing our securities in connection with the potential business combination, assist us in obtaining stockholder approval for the business combination and assist us with our press releases and public filings in connection with the business combination. We will pay the underwriters a fee for such services upon the consummation of a business combination in an amount equal to, 7,043,750, or 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the initial public offering, including the proceeds from the full exercise of the over-allotment option.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have not identified any critical accounting policies.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.