ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Overview
We are a developer of financial software and a distributor of market data and research information to online brokerages, clearing firms, banks, media properties, public companies and financial service corporations worldwide. Through the aggregation of information from many direct data, news, and research sources; we offer a comprehensive range of solutions for all market-related information provisioning requirements.
We have three general product lines: Interactive Content and Data Applications, Data Feed Services, and Portfolio Management Systems. For financial reporting purposes, our product categories share similar economic characteristics and share costs; therefore, they are combined into one reporting segment.
Our Interactive Content and Data Applications consist of a suite of software applications that provide publicly traded company and market information to corporate clients via the Internet. Products include stock market quotes, fundamentals, historical and interactive charts, company news, filings, option chains, insider transactions, corporate financials, corporate profiles, screeners, market research information, investor relations provisions, level II, watch lists, and real-time quotes. All of our content solutions are completely customizable and embed directly into client Web pages for seamless integration with existing content. We are continuing to develop and launch new modules of QModTM, our new proprietary Web delivery system. QMod was created for secure market data provisioning as well as ease of integration and unlimited customization. Additionally, QMod delivers search engine optimized (SEO) ready responsive content designed to adapt on the fly when rendered on mobile devices or standard Web pages - automatically resizing and reformatting to fit the device on which it is displayed.
Our Data Feed Services consist of raw streaming real-time market data delivered over the Internet or via dedicated telecommunication lines, and supplemental fundamental, historical, and analytical data, keyed to the same symbology, which provides a complete market data solution offered to our customers. Currently, QuoteMedia’s Data Feed services include complete coverage of North American exchanges and over 70 exchanges worldwide. For financial reporting purposes, Data Feed Services revenue is included in the Interactive Content and Data Applications revenue totals.
Our Portfolio Management Systems consist of QuotestreamTM, Quotestream Mobile, Quotestream Professional, and our Web Portfolio Management systems. Quotestream Desktop is an Internet-based streaming online portfolio management system that delivers real-time and delayed market data to both consumer and corporate markets. Quotestream has been designed for syndication and private branding by brokerage, banking, and Web portal companies. Quotestream’s enhanced features and functionality - most notably tick-by-tick true streaming data, significantly enhanced charting features, and a broad range of additional research and analytical content and functionality - offer a professional-level experience to nonprofessional users.
Quotestream Professional is specifically designed for use by financial services professionals, offering exceptional coverage and functionality at extremely aggressive pricing. Quotestream Professional features broad market coverage, reliability, complete flexibility, ultra-low-latency tick-by-tick data, as well as completely customizable screens, advanced charting, comprehensive technical analysis, news and research data.
Quotestream Mobile is a true companion product to the Quotestream desktop products (Quotestream and Quotestream Professional) - any changes made to portfolios in either the desktop or mobile application are automatically reflected in the other.
A key feature of QuoteMedia’s business model is that all of our product lines generate recurring monthly licensing revenue from each client. Contracts to license Quotestream to our corporate clients, for example, typically have a term of one to three years and are automatically renewed unless notice is given at least 90 days prior to the expiration of the current license term. We also generate Quotestream revenue through individual end-user licenses on a monthly or annual subscription fee basis. Interactive Content and Data Applications and Market Data Feeds are licensed for a monthly, quarterly, annual, or semi-annual subscription fee. Contracts to license our Financial Data Products and Data Feeds typically have a term of one to three years and are automatically renewed unless notice is given 90 days prior to the expiration of the contract term.
Business Environment and Trends
The global financial markets have experienced extreme volatility and disruption in recent months. The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting response by governments and individuals around the world has caused contraction in global economies. We are closely monitoring the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on all aspects of our business, including how it will impact team members, customers, suppliers, and global markets.
Our operations also have been affected by a range of external factors related to the COVID-19 pandemic that are not within our control. For example, many jurisdictions imposed a wide range of restrictions on the physical movement of our employees and vendors to limit the spread of COVID-19. We have taken numerous steps, and will continue to take further actions, in our approach to addressing the COVID-19 pandemic. To protect the health and safety of our team members, we successfully transitioned our workforce to remote work environments. We are also working closely with our clients to support them as they implement their own contingency plans, helping them access our products and services remotely.
While our licensed-based revenue is generally more recurring in nature, the uncertainty caused by the COVID-19 pandemic has led some clients to delay purchasing decisions, product and service implementations or cancel or reduce spending with us. We are focused on maintaining a strong balance sheet and liquidity position and have been actively evaluating the potential impact of COVID-19. We have implemented certain cost control efforts to help us mitigate the impact that COVID-19 has had on our financial position and operating results. As much uncertainty still exists, and we will continue to adjust our COVID-19 response going forward as circumstances dictate.
On April 24, 2020, the Company received an $8,000 grant as part of the Economic Injury Disaster Loan (“EIDL”) program through the Small Business Administration (“SBA”). The SBA grant was recorded as other income on our consolidated statements of operations in 2020. On May 4, 2020, the Company received a $133,257 loan under the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”). On February 19, 2021, the Company received forgiveness from the SBA for its PPP loan in its entirety. The Company will recognize the forgiveness of the loan as other income on our consolidated statements of operations in 2021. See Financial Statement Note 12 - Paycheck Protection Program and Note 14 - Subsequent Events.
The Canadian dollar depreciated 1% when comparing average exchange rates for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The exchange rate fluctuation decreased both Canadian dollar revenues and expenses once translated into U.S. dollars for the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the same period in 2019 but had a minimal impact on our net income. In recent months, the Canadian dollar has appreciated versus the U.S. dollar, which will have a minimal impact on our net income but could have a negative impact on cashflow.
Our revenue grew 5% when comparing the year ended December 31, 2020 to the comparative 2019 period. Based on clients currently under contract, and new contracts signed subsequent to 2020, we expect accelerated revenue growth for 2021 despite current market conditions related to COVID-19.
Plan of Operation
For 2021 we plan to continue to expand our product lines and improve our infrastructure. We plan to continue to add more features and data to our existing products and release newer versions with improved performance and flexibility for client integration.
We will maintain our focus on marketing Quotestream for deployments by brokerage firms to their retail clients and continue our expansion into the investment professional market with Quotestream Professional. We also plan to continue the growth of our Data Feed Services client base, particularly through the addition of major new international data feed coverage, as well as new data delivery products.
QuoteMedia will continue to focus on increasing the sales of its Interactive Content and Data Applications, particularly in the context of large-scale enterprise deployments encompassing solutions ranging across several product lines. QMod is a major component of this strategy, given the broad demand for mobile-ready, SEO-friendly Web content.
Important development projects for 2021 include broad expansion of data and news coverage, including the addition of a wide array of international exchange data and news and video feeds, expansion of fixed-income coverage, and the introduction of several new and upgraded market information products.
New deployments of our trade integration capabilities, which allow our Quotestream applications to interact with our brokerage clients’ back-end trade execution and reporting platforms (enabling on-the-fly trade execution and tracking of holdings) are underway and will continue to be a priority in the coming year.
We are also creating new proprietary data sets, analytics, and scoring mechanisms. We are now aggregating data direct from the sources to produce data sets that are proprietary to QuoteMedia. This allows us to offer our clients new data products and lower our product costs structure as we replace some of our existing data providers with our own lower cost data.
Opportunistically, efforts will be made to evaluate and pursue the development of additional new products that may eventually be commercialized by our company. Although not currently anticipated, we may require additional capital to execute our proposed plan of operation. There can be no assurance that such additional capital will be available to our company on commercially reasonable terms or at all.
Our future performance will be subject to a number of business factors, including those beyond our control; such as a continuation of market uncertainty and evolving industry needs and preferences, as well as the level of competition and our ability to continue to successfully market our products and technology. There can be no assurance that we will be able to successfully implement our marketing strategy, continue our revenue growth, or achieve profitable operations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s Discussion and Analysis discusses our financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the balance sheet date and reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. On an ongoing basis we evaluate our estimates and judgments. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors that are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe the following critical accounting policies affect our more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Revenue recognition
In accordance with Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606), we recognize revenue when promised goods or services are transferred to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which an entity expects to be entitled for those goods or services by applying the following steps: (1) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (5) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation.
We exercise judgment in assessing the creditworthiness of our customers and therefore in our determination of whether collectability is reasonably assured. Should changes in conditions cause us to determine that these criteria are not met for future transactions, revenue recognized in future reporting periods could be adversely affected.
Capitalized Application Software
Capitalized software costs include costs incurred in connection with the internal development of software. These costs relate to software used by subscribers to access, manage and analyze information in the Company’s databases. Capitalized costs associated with internally developed software are amortized over three years which is their estimated economic life. We exercise significant judgment in determining that capitalized application software costs meet the criteria established in Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) ASC 350-40, Internal-Use Software.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company capitalized $1,673,689 and $1,351,922 of costs, respectively, related to upgrades and enhancements made to existing software applications. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, amortization expenses associated with the internally developed application software was $1,125,918 and $918,902, respectively. At December 31, 2020, the remaining book value of the capitalized application software was $2,262,893
Accounting Pronouncements
Recently Adopted
In January 2017, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2017-04, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (Topic 350): Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment. This ASU simplifies the accounting for goodwill by eliminating step 2 from the goodwill impairment test. Under the new ASU, if the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss will be recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds its fair value. The Company adopted the new standard on January 1, 2020. There was no impact upon adoption to our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-13, Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820), which removes, modifies and adds various disclosure requirements around the topic in order to clarify and improve the cost-benefit nature of disclosures. For example, disclosures around transfers between fair value hierarchy Levels will be removed and further detail around changes in unrealized gains and losses for the period and unobservable inputs determining Level 3 fair value measurements will be added. The Company adopted the new standard on January 1, 2020. There was no impact upon adoption to our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-15, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other - Internal-Use Software (Subtopic 350-40): Customer's Accounting for Implementation Costs Incurred in a Cloud Computing Arrangement That is a Service Contract, which requires a customer in a cloud computing arrangement that is a service contract to follow the internal-use software guidance in Topic 350, "Intangibles - Goodwill and Other" to determine which implementation costs to capitalize as assets or expense as incurred. The Company adopted the new standard on January 1, 2020. There was no impact upon adoption to our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13: Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326), which changes the impairment model for most financial assets, including accounts receivable, and replaces the existing incurred loss impairment model with an expected loss methodology, which will result in more timely recognition of credit losses. The guidance is effective for the Company for interim and annual periods beginning after December 15, 2022. Early adoption is permitted. The Company is currently assessing the timing and impact of adopting ASU 2016-13 on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Not Yet Adopted
Other accounting standards that have been issued by the FASB or other standards-setting bodies that do not require adoption until a future date are not expected to have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements upon adoption.
Results of Operations
Revenue
Total licensing revenue increased 5% when comparing the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The increase is a result of a 13% increase in revenue from licensing our Portfolio Management Systems partially offset by a 2% decrease in revenue from our Interactive Content and Data Applications.
Total Portfolio Management System revenue increased by 13% when comparing the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, due to increases in both Corporate Quotestream and Individual Quotestream revenue. The increases are attributable in part to improvements and upgrades made to our Portfolio Management products. We have also been able to take advantage of new opportunities arising from the economic downturn related to COVID-19 as financial sector firms are looking for more efficient and cost-effective solutions to their data and technology needs. We also believe there has been an increase in the need for our services for customers working remotely during the pandemic, a trend we expect to be permanent.
Corporate Quotestream revenue increased 18% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from the comparative period in 2019 due to new contracts signed since the comparative period and an increase in the number of subscribers for existing clients.
Individual Quotestream revenue increased 2% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from the comparative period in 2019. The increase is due to an increase in users.
Interactive Content and Data Application revenue decreased 2% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from the comparative period in 2019 due to an increase in cancellations and temporary suspensions driven by the economic hardship on some of our smaller customers related to COVID-19.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Profit Summary
Our cost of revenue consists of fixed and variable stock exchange fees and data feed provisioning costs. Cost of revenue also includes amortization of capitalized internal-use software costs. We capitalize the costs associated with developing new products during the application development stage.
We launched a major growth initiative in 2020, investing in infrastructure, new product development, data collection, and the expansion of our global market coverage. As a result, our cost of revenue increased 16% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from the comparative period in 2019. We incurred increased stock exchange fees related to increased usage and new market data added in 2020, and a $207,016 increase in amortization expense associated with internally developed application software.
Overall, the cost of revenue increased as a percentage of sales, as evidenced by our gross margin percentage that decreased to 46% in 2020 from 51% in 2019. Our gross margins have also been impacted by our revenue mix, as our Portfolio Management System revenue has been growing at a higher rate than our Interactive Content revenue which typically has higher gross margins.
Operating Expenses Summary
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of sales and customer service salaries, investor relations, travel and advertising expenses. Sales and marketing expenses increased 18% when comparing the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 mainly due to an increase in salaries from personnel added during the period.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries expense, office rent, insurance premiums, and professional fees. General and administrative increased 9% when comparing the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. Increase was due to increases in salary and health benefits as we added new personnel in 2020, and an increase in bad debts primarily due to the impacts of COVID-19.
Software Development
Software development expenses consist primarily of costs associated with the design, programming, and testing of our software applications during the preliminary project stage. Software development expenses also include costs incurred to maintain our software applications.
Software development expenses increased 32% for the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to fiscal 2019. This increase was mainly due to hiring additional development personnel required to expand our product lines and improve our infrastructure.
We capitalized $1,673,688 of development costs for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $1,351,922 in 2019. These costs relate to the development of application software used by subscribers to access, manage, and analyze information in our databases. Capitalized costs associated with application software are amortized over their estimated economic life of three years.
Other Income and (Expense) Summary
Foreign Exchange Gain (Loss)
Foreign exchange gains and losses arise from the re-measurement of Canadian dollar monetary assets and liabilities into U.S. dollars. We have a net Canadian dollar liability; therefore, we incur a foreign exchange gain when the Canadian dollar depreciates from the period beginning date, and a loss when the Canadian dollar appreciates. Gains and losses arising from exchange rate fluctuations between transaction and settlement dates for foreign currency denominated transactions are also included in foreign exchange gains and losses.
We incurred a foreign exchange loss of $3,791 for the year ended December 31, 2020 mainly attributable to the re-measurement of Canadian dollar monetary assets and liabilities into U.S. dollars, as the Canadian dollar appreciated 2% versus the U.S. dollar when comparing the foreign exchange rates at December 31, 2020 to the rate at December 31, 2019.
Interest Expense
Interest expense relates primarily to the interest expense associated with our finance leases and was relatively unchanged from the comparative periods. Interest expense of $4,582 was incurred for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $6,259 incurred for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Provision for Income Taxes
In 2020, the Company recorded Canadian income tax expense of $2,237, compared to a Canadian income tax expense of $3,014 in 2019.
Net Income (loss) for the Period
As a result of the foregoing, net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $646,324 compared to net income of $558,997 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The loss in 2020 was a result of the increased spending due to our expansion initiatives and the impact of COVID-19 which slowed our revenue growth. Basic earnings (loss) per share was $(0.01) and $0.01 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Diluted earnings per share was $(0.01) and $0.00 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our cash totaled $417,910 at December 31, 2020, as compared with $815,487 at December 31, 2019, a decrease of $397,577. Net cash of $1,327,979 was provided by operations for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to the net loss during the period adjusted for non-cash charges and an increase in accounts payable. Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1,825,009 resulting primarily from capitalized application software costs. Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $99,453 due to the Paycheck Protection Program loan.
Our current liabilities include $544,902 in deferred revenue. The expected costs necessary to realize the deferred revenue in 2021 are minimal. Our long-term liabilities include our $133,257 Paycheck Protection Program loan which was forgiven on February 19, 2021. Also, if circumstances dictate, we have the flexibility to reduce development spending to maintain a strong liquidity position.
Based on the factors discussed above, we believe that our cash on hand and cash generated from operations will be sufficient to fund our current operations for at least the next 12 months. However, to implement our business plan may require additional financing. Additional financings may come from future equity or debt offerings that could result in dilution to our stockholders. Further, current adverse capital and credit market conditions could limit our access to capital. We may be unable to raise capital or bear an unattractive cost of capital that could reduce our financial flexibility.
Our long-term liquidity requirements will depend on many factors, including the rate at which we expand our business and whether we do so internally or through acquisitions. To the extent that the funds generated from operations are insufficient to fund our activities in the long term, we may be required to raise additional funds through public or private financing. No assurance can be given that additional financing will be available or that, if it is available, it will be on terms acceptable to us.