Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report of Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risk and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations, and intentions, that are based on the beliefs of our management. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K
This discussion and analysis generally covers our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020, including year-over-year comparisons versus the year ended December 31, 2019. Our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 includes a discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2018 in Item 7 of Part II, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.”
Overview
We are a clinical stage biopharmaceutical company pioneering a novel disease-modifying therapeutic approach to treat what we believe to be a key underlying cause of Alzheimer’s and other degenerative diseases. Our approach is based on the seminal discovery of the presence of Porphyromonas gingivalis, or P. gingivalis, and its secreted toxic virulence factor proteases, called gingipains, in the brains of greater than 90% of more than 100 Alzheimer’s patients observed across multiple studies to date. Additionally, we have observed that P. gingivalis infection causes Alzheimer’s pathology in animal models, and these effects have been successfully treated with a gingipain inhibitor in preclinical studies. Our proprietary lead drug candidate, atuzaginstat (COR388), is an orally administered, brain-penetrating small molecule gingipain inhibitor. Atuzaginstat was well-tolerated with no concerning safety signals in our Phase 1a and Phase 1b clinical trials conducted to date, which enrolled a total of 67 subjects, including nine patients with mild to moderate Alzheimer’s disease. We initiated a global Phase 2/3 clinical trial of atuzaginstat, called the GAIN trial, in mild to moderate Alzheimer’s patients in April 2019 in the United States and in September 2019 in Europe and expect top-line results by the end of 2021.
Partial Clinical Hold
On February 12, 2021 the Company received a letter from the FDA stating that a partial clinical hold has been placed on atuzaginstat (COR388) impacting the open-label extension (OLE) phase of the company’s ongoing Phase 2/3 study, the GAIN Trial. Under the hold, no new participants will be enrolled in the OLE and currently enrolled OLE participants will be discontinued. Participants in the fully enrolled (N=643) double-blind, placebo-controlled randomized phase of the GAIN Trial will continue to receive study drug at their assigned dose. The partial clinical hold was initiated following the review of hepatic adverse events in the atuzaginstat trial by the FDA. These events have been reversible and without any known long-term adverse effects for the participants. Cortexyme will continue to collaborate with the FDA on the overall development program for atuzaginstat.
For additional information on the various risks posed by the partial clinical hold, please read Item 1A. Risk Factors included in this report.
Business Update Regarding COVID-19
The current COVID-19 pandemic has presented a substantial public health and economic challenge around the world and is affecting our employees, patients, communities and business operations, as well as the U.S. economy and financial markets. The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, including new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19, the actions taken to contain it or treat its impact and the economic impact on local, regional, national and international markets.
To date, our employees, vendors and clinical trial sites have been able to advance our GAIN clinical trial, complete enrollment and continue the Open Label Extension for eligible patients completing the GAIN trial. At this time the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic has not resulted in changes to our previously stated analysis timelines for the GAIN trial. We are continuing to assess the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and operations, including our expenses, preclinical operations and clinical trials. Our office-based employees have been working primarily from home since mid-March 2020, while ensuring essential staffing levels in our operations remain in place, including maintaining key personnel in our lab facility. We have developed plans to enable all employees to voluntarily return to work in our offices and lab facility which include safety protocols, such as face coverings, social distancing, frequent cleaning, and COVID-19 testing. We continue to assess the risks which take into account
applicable public health authority and local government guidelines and are designed to ensure community and employee safety. However, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic continue to rapidly evolve and even if our employees more broadly return to work in our offices and lab facility, we may have to resume a more restrictive remote work model, whether as a result of spikes or surges in COVID-19 infection or hospitalization rates or public authority mandates. We are not currently experiencing any significant supply chain disruptions and have drug supply for the full GAIN Trial on hand. We have diversified our vendor relationships geographically for both starting materials and manufacturing. However, in the future, the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, may result in the inability of some of our suppliers to deliver drug supplies on a timely basis. We have taken and continues to take proactive measures to maintain the integrity of its ongoing clinical trial. To potentially mitigate some of the risks of COVID-19 and based on interest and the ability to maintain milestone timelines, we enrolled approximately an additional 70 subjects in the GAIN trial. Despite these efforts, the COVID-19 pandemic could impact timelines, subject follow up visits and study completion. We will continue to monitor the COVID-19 situation and its impact on the ability to continue the development of, and seek regulatory approvals for, our product candidates.
For additional information on the various risks posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, please read Item 1A. Risk Factors included in this report.
Financial Overview
Since commencing material operations in 2014, we have devoted substantially all of our efforts and financial resources to building our research and development capabilities, establishing our corporate infrastructure and most recently, executing our Phase 1a, Phase 1b and Phase 2/3 clinical trials of atuzaginstat.
To date, we have not generated any revenue and we have never been profitable. We have incurred net losses since the commencement of our operations. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $146.7 million. We incurred a net loss of $76.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. We do not expect to generate product revenue unless and until we obtain marketing approval for and commercialize a drug candidate, and we cannot assure you that we will ever generate significant revenue or profits.
To date, we have financed our operations primarily through the issuance and sale of convertible promissory notes and redeemable convertible preferred stock and common stock. From inception through December 31, 2020, we received net proceeds of approximately $294.9 million from the issuance of redeemable convertible preferred stock, convertible promissory notes and common stock. This includes net proceeds of approximately $117.6 million from the issuance and sale of common stock in a private placement to certain accredited investors received in February 2020.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments of $133.8 million and $99.9 million, respectively. The balances exclude long-term investments of $50.5 million and $16.8 million as of those same periods.
Our cash equivalents, short-term and long-term investments are held in money market funds, certificate of deposits, repurchase agreements, investments in corporate debt securities, municipal debt obligations and government agency obligations.
We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments will be sufficient to fund our planned operations through 2023, including through the completion and the announcement of the top-line results of our Phase 2/3 GAIN trial. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we expect.
We expect to incur substantial expenditures in the foreseeable future as we expand our pipeline and advance our drug candidates through clinical development, the regulatory approval process and, if approved, commercial launch activities. Specifically, in the near term we expect to incur substantial expenses relating to our ongoing and planned clinical trials, the development and validation of our manufacturing processes, and other development activities.
We will need substantial additional funding to support our continuing operations and pursue our development strategy. Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from sales of an approved drug, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through the sale of equity, debt financings or other capital sources. Adequate funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. If we fail to raise capital or enter into such agreements as, and when, needed, we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development and commercialization of our drug candidates or delay our efforts to expand our product pipeline.
Components of Operating Results
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses consist of expenses incurred in connection with the research and development of our research programs. These expenses include payroll and personnel expenses, including stock-based compensation, for our research and product development employees, laboratory supplies, product licenses, consulting costs, contract research, preclinical and clinical expenses, allocated rent, facilities costs and depreciation. We expense both internal and external research and development costs as they are incurred. Non-refundable advance payments and deposits for services that will be used or rendered for future research and development activities are recorded as prepaid expenses and recognized as an expense as the related services are performed.
To date, substantially all of our research and development expenses have supported the advancement of atuzaginstat and our other drug candidates are in early-stage preclinical development. As a result, we do not allocate our costs to individual drug candidates. We expect that at least for the foreseeable future, a substantial majority of our research and development expense will support the clinical and regulatory development of atuzaginstat.
We expect our research and development expenses to increase substantially during the next few years as we seek to complete existing and initiate additional clinical trials, pursue regulatory approval of atuzaginstat and advance other drug candidates into preclinical and clinical development. Over the next few years, we expect our preclinical, clinical and contract manufacturing expenses to increase significantly relative to what we have incurred to date. Predicting the timing or the final cost to complete our clinical program or validation of our manufacturing and supply processes is difficult and delays may occur because of many factors.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist principally of personnel-related costs, including payroll and stock-based compensation, for personnel in executive, finance, human resources, business and corporate development, and other administrative functions, professional fees for legal, consulting, insurance and accounting services, allocated rent and other facilities costs, depreciation, and other general operating expenses not otherwise classified as research and development expenses.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase as the size of our business operations grows to support additional research and development activities.
Interest Income
Interest and other income, net consists primarily of interest earned on our short-term and long-term investments portfolio,
Change in fair value of derivative liability
The change in the fair value of the derivative liability is the change in valuation of the bifurcated redemption premium related to the convertible promissory notes which fully settled upon completion of Series B financing.
Critical Accounting Policies, Significant Judgments and Use of Estimates
Our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenue and expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are described in the notes to our financial statements, we believe that the following critical accounting policies are most important to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Research and development expenses consist primarily of clinical trial and contract manufacturing expenses related to development of atuzaginstat. Also included are personnel costs for our research and product development employees, non-personnel costs such as professional fees payable to third parties for preclinical studies and research services, laboratory supplies and equipment maintenance, product licenses, and other consulting costs.
We estimate preclinical and clinical study and research expenses based on the services performed, pursuant to arrangements with contract research organizations, or CROs that conduct and manage preclinical and clinical studies and research services on our behalf. We estimate these expenses based on regular reviews with internal management personnel and external service providers as to the progress or stage of completion of services and the contracted fees to be paid for such services. Based upon the combined inputs of internal and external resources, if the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the original estimates, we will adjust the accrual accordingly. Payments associated with licensing agreements to acquire exclusive licenses to develop, use, manufacture and commercialize products that have not reached technological feasibility and do not have alternate commercial use are expensed as incurred. Payments made to third parties under these arrangements in advance of the performance of the related services by the third parties are recorded as prepaid expenses until the services are rendered.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
We measure and record compensation expense using the applicable accounting guidance for share-based payments related to stock options and performance-based awards granted to our directors and employees. The fair value of stock options is determined by using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The fair value of performance stock option awards is estimated at the date of grant, using the Monte Carlo Simulation model. The Black-Scholes and Monte Carlo Simulation valuation models incorporate assumptions as to stock price volatility, the expected life of options or awards, a risk-free interest rate and dividend yield. In valuing our stock options and market-based stock awards, significant judgment is required in determining the expected volatility of our common stock and the expected life that individuals will hold their stock options prior to exercising. Expected volatility for stock options is based on the historical volatility of our own stock and the stock of companies within our defined peer group. Further, our expected volatility may change in the future, which could substantially change the grant-date fair value of future awards and, ultimately, the expense we record.
We expense stock-based compensation for stock options and performance awards over the requisite service period. For awards with only a service condition, we expense stock-based compensation using the straight-line method over the requisite service period for the entire award. For awards with a market condition, we expense over the vesting period regardless of the value that the award recipients ultimately receive.
We estimate the fair value of stock-based compensation utilizing the Black-Scholes and Monte Carlo Simulation option-pricing models, which are impacted by the following variables:
Expected Term-We have opted to use the “simplified method” for estimating the expected term of options, whereby the expected term equals the arithmetic average of the vesting term and the original contractual term of the option (generally 10 years).
Expected Volatility-Due to our limited operating history and a lack of company specific historical and implied volatility data, we have based our estimate of expected volatility on the historical volatility of our own stock and the stock of companies within our defined peer group. The historical volatility data was computed using the daily closing prices for the selected companies’ shares during the equivalent period of the calculated expected term of the stock-based awards.
Risk-Free Interest Rate-The risk-free rate assumption is based on the U.S. Treasury instruments with maturities similar to the expected term of our stock options.
Expected Dividend-We have not issued any dividends in our history and do not expect to issue dividends over the life of the options and therefore have estimated the dividend yield to be zero.
Common Stock Valuations
The estimated fair value of the common stock underlying our stock options was determined at each grant date by our board of directors, with input from management. All options to purchase shares of our common stock are intended to be exercisable at a price per share not less than the per-share fair value of our common stock underlying those options on the date of grant.
Prior to our IPO in May 2019, on each grant date, our board of directors made a reasonable determination of the fair value of our common stock based on the information known to us on the date of grant, upon a review of any recent events and their potential impact on the estimated fair value per share of the common stock, and timely valuations from an independent third-party valuation in accordance with guidance provided by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation (the Practice Aid). The methodology to determine the fair value of our common stock included estimating the fair value of the enterprise using a market approach, which estimates the fair value of the company by including an estimation of the value of the business based on guideline public companies under a number of different scenarios. In determining the fair value of our common stock on each grant date, our board of directors considered numerous objective and subjective factors, including the results of independent third party valuations, external market conditions affecting the pharmaceutical and biotechnology industry and trends within the industry; our stage of development; the rights, preferences and privileges of our redeemable convertible preferred stock relative to those of our common stock; the prices at which we sold shares of our redeemable convertible preferred stock; our financial condition and operating results, including our levels of available capital resources; the progress of our research and development efforts, our stage of development and business strategy; equity market conditions affecting comparable public companies; general U.S. market conditions and the lack of marketability of our common stock.
Following our IPO in May 2019, our board of directors determined the fair value of our common stock based on the closing price of our common stock on the date of grant.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method. Current income tax expense or benefit represents the amount of income taxes expected to be payable or refundable for the current year. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are determined based on differences between the financial statement reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities and net operating loss and credit carryforwards and are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when such items are expected to reverse. Deferred income tax assets are reduced, as necessary, by a valuation allowance when management determines it is more likely than not that some or all of the tax benefits will not be realized.
We account for uncertain tax positions in accordance with ASC 740-10, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes. We assess all material positions taken in any income tax return, including all significant uncertain positions, in all tax years that are still subject to assessment or challenge by relevant taxing authorities. Assessing an uncertain tax position begins with the initial determination of the position’s sustainability and is measured at the largest amount of benefit that is greater than fifty percent likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. As of each balance sheet date, unresolved uncertain tax positions must be reassessed, and we will determine whether (i) the factors underlying the sustainability assertion have changed and (ii) the amount of the recognized tax benefit is still appropriate. The recognition and measurement of tax benefits requires significant judgment. Judgments concerning the recognition and measurement of a tax benefit might change as new information becomes available.
As of December 31, 2020, our total net deferred tax assets were $35.0 million. A valuation allowance is established against the net deferred tax assets to reduce their carrying value to an amount that is more likely than not to be realized. The deferred tax assets and liabilities are classified as noncurrent along with the related valuation allowance. Due to a lack of earnings history, the net deferred tax assets have been fully offset by a valuation allowance. The deferred tax assets were primarily comprised of federal and state tax net operating losses, or NOLs. Utilization of NOLs may be limited by the “ownership change” rules, as defined in Section 382 of the Code. Similar rules may apply under state tax laws. Our ability to use our remaining NOLs may be further limited if we experience an ownership change in connection with this offering, future offerings or as a result of future changes in our stock ownership.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the periods indicated (dollars in thousands):
Research and Development Expenses
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses:
For the year ended December 31, 2020 research and development expenses increased $31.1 million or 102.9%, from 2019. This was primarily due to an increase of $18.7 million in expenses for our lead product candidate, atuzaginstat, which is in our Phase 2/3 GAIN clinical trial. This increase is attributed to expenses of $10.1 million in clinical trial expense, $7.0 million in drug manufacturing costs as we scaled production of atuzaginstat and other clinical costs of approximately $1.6 million in support of advancing atuzaginstat’s development through the study. Personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation, increased by $9.4 million due to an increase in headcount as we scaled the GAIN clinical trial and our clinical manufacturing operating relationships and capabilities during 2020. In addition, we had an increase of $2.5 million in research and development expenses related to other preclinical programs currently in development and $0.4 million increase in our facilities costs. We expect our GAIN trial related expenses to decrease in 2021 as the trial concludes with top-line results being reported by the end of 2021. This decrease will be offset to some extent as we start our Phase 2 PEAK trial and advance other pipeline indications through pre-clinical and the clinical trial process.
General and Administrative Expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2020, general and administrative expenses increased $8.6 million, or 96.4 %, from 2019 primarily due to an increase of $7.7 million in personnel costs, including stock-based compensation of $6.1 million, as a result of an increase in our employee headcount and an increase of $1.3 million in insurance, legal, accounting, investor relations and other compliance cost associated with becoming a public company offset by a decrease in travel and entertainment expense of $0.4 million due to travel restrictions related to COVID-19.
Interest Income
For the year ended December 31, 2020, interest income decreased $0.1 million or 6.6% due to a decrease in interest rate yields on the portfolio during the year.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have incurred cumulative net losses and negative cash flows from operations since our inception and anticipate we will continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $146.7 million. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and investments of $184.3 million.
Based on our existing business plan, we believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and investments will be sufficient to fund our anticipated level of operations through at least 2023.
We will continue to require additional capital to develop our drug candidates and fund operations for the foreseeable future. We may seek to raise capital through private or public equity or debt financings, collaborative or other arrangements with other companies, or through other sources of financing. Adequate additional funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms or at all. Our failure to raise capital as and when needed could have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategies. We anticipate that we will need to raise substantial additional capital, the requirements of which will depend on many factors, including:
•
the progress, costs, trial design, results of and timing of our Phase 2/3 GAIN trial and other clinical trials of atuzaginstat, including our Phase 2 PEAK trial for Parkinson’s disease and for potential additional indications that we may pursue beyond Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease;
•
the willingness of the FDA or EMA to accept our Phase 2/3 GAIN trial, as well as data from our completed and planned clinical and preclinical studies and other work, as the basis for review and approval of atuzaginstat for Alzheimer’s disease;
•
the outcome, costs and timing of seeking and obtaining FDA, EMA and any other regulatory approvals;
•
the number and characteristics of drug candidates that we pursue;
•
our ability to manufacture sufficient quantities of our drug candidates;
•
our need to expand our research and development activities;
•
the costs associated with securing and establishing commercialization and manufacturing capabilities;
•
the costs of acquiring, licensing or investing in businesses, drug candidates and technologies;
•
our ability to maintain, expand and defend the scope of our intellectual property portfolio, including the amount and timing of any payments we may be required to make, or that we may receive, in connection with the licensing, filing, prosecution, defense and enforcement of any patents or other intellectual property rights;
•
our need and ability to retain management and hire scientific and clinical personnel;
•
the effect of competing drugs and drug candidates and other market developments;
•
our need to implement additional internal systems and infrastructure, including financial and reporting systems; and
•
the economic and other terms, timing of and success of any collaboration, licensing or other arrangements into which we may enter in the future.
If we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, our stockholders will experience dilution. Any future debt financing into which we enter may impose upon us additional covenants that restrict our operations, including limitations on our ability to incur liens or additional debt, pay dividends, repurchase our common stock, make certain investments and engage in certain merger, consolidation or asset sale transactions. Any debt financing or additional equity that we raise may contain terms that are not favorable to us or our stockholders. If we are unable to raise additional funds when needed, we may be required to delay, reduce, or terminate some or all of our development programs and clinical trials. We may also be required to sell or license to others rights to our drug candidates in certain territories or indications that we would prefer to develop and commercialize ourselves.
Summary Statement of Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash and cash equivalents for each of the periods presented below (in thousands):
Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $50.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, $33.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Cash used in operating activities in the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to our net loss for the period of $76.8 million, which included non-cash expenses of $15.8 million and changes to operating assets and liabilities of $10.2 million.
Cash used in operating activities in the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to our net loss for the period of $37.0 million, which included non-cash expenses of $2.6 million and changes to operating assets and liabilities of $1.9 million offset by non-cash interest income of $0.8 million.
Cash Used in Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities was $52.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily related to the purchase of investments of $187.1 million and maturities of debt investments of $134.8 million.
Cash used in investing activities was $17.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily related to the purchase of investments of $135.4 million and maturities of debt investments of $117.7 million.
Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities was $118.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, which consisted of net proceeds of $117.6 million from our private placement and $1.3 million from the exercise of stock options.
Cash provided by financing activities was $77.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, which consisted of net proceeds of $77.8 million from our IPO, $0.1 million from the exercise of stock options, less payment on our finance leases of $0.6 million.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
We have contractual obligations from our operating and finance leases. The following table summarizes our significant binding contractual obligations at December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
The terms of certain third party contract organizations for clinical trials, non-clinical studies and testing, manufacturing, and other services and products for operating purposes require us to pay potential future payments based on milestone achievement by the vendor. The amount and timing of the payments under these contracts varies based upon the timing of the services performed. We have not included in this disclosure any such contingent payment obligations as the amount, timing and likelihood of such payments are not known.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Since our inception, we have not engaged in any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Indemnification
As permitted under Delaware law and in accordance with our bylaws, we indemnify our officers and directors for certain events or occurrences while the officer or director is or was serving in such capacity. We are also party to indemnification agreements with our officers and directors. We believe the fair value of the indemnification rights and agreements is minimal. Accordingly, we have not recorded any liabilities for these indemnification rights and agreements as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements Adopted
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-13, Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820): Disclosure Framework-Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement. The new guidance changes disclosure requirements related to fair value measurements as part of the disclosure framework project. The disclosure framework project aims to improve the effectiveness of disclosures in the notes to the financial statements by focusing on requirements that clearly communicate the most important information to users of the financial statements. The Company adopted this effective January 1, 2020. The adoption of this pronouncement did not have a material impact on its financial statements or disclosures.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-15, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other-Internal-Use Software (Subtopic 350-40)”: Customer’s Accounting for Implementation Costs Incurred in a Cloud Computing Arrangement That Is a Service Contract (“ASU 2018-15”), which clarifies the accounting for implementation costs in cloud computing arrangements. The Company adopted the standard prospectively on January 1, 2020. The adoption of this pronouncement did not have a material impact on its financial statements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted
The following are new accounting pronouncements that the Company is evaluating for future impacts on its financial statements:
Financial Instruments-Credit Losses: In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments which amends the principles around the recognition of credit losses by mandating entities incorporate an estimate of current expected credit losses when determining the value of certain assets. The guidance also amends reporting around allowances for credit losses on available-for-sale marketable securities. In November 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-10, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326), Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815) and Leases (Topic 842): Effective Dates, which established that a one-time determination of the effective date for ASU 2016-13 would be based on the Company’s SEC reporting status as of November 15, 2019. The Company was a Smaller Reporting Company as defined by the SEC, and therefore, ASU 2016-13 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022, including interim periods within those fiscal years. The Company is evaluating the impact of the guidance on its financial statements.
All other newly issued accounting pronouncements not yet effective have been deemed either immaterial or not applicable.