Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This form 10-K contains certain forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. For this purpose, any statements contained in this Form 10-K that are not statements of historical fact may be deemed to be forward-looking statements. Without limiting the foregoing, words such as “may”, “will”, “expect”, “believe”, “anticipate”, “estimate” or “continue” or comparable terminology are intended to identify forward-looking statements. These statements by their nature involve substantial risks and uncertainties, and actual results may differ materially depending on a variety of factors, many of which are not within our control. These factors include by are not limited to economic conditions generally and in the industries in which we may participate; competition within our chosen industry, including competition from much larger competitors; technological advances and failure to successfully develop business relationships.
This discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements.
SUMMARY OF BUSINESS
Quanta Basics
Quanta, Inc. (“Quanta”) is a cutting-edge technology platform whose patented, proprietary technology harnesses advances in quantum biology to increase the potency of active ingredients. Currently, Quanta supports product formulations in pain management, anti-inflammation, skincare, agriculture, nutritional supplements, and plant-based consumables. Ultimately, Quanta’s mission is to deliver better, more effective ingredients to elevate product efficacy, reduce waste and facilitate healthier, more sustainable consumption.
The established resonance theory behind Quanta’s polarization process has many potential applications. From potentiating bio-ingredients to produce more-effective carbon-trapping plants to transformative anti-aging solutions Quanta’s technology has the opportunity to upend how commercial products are made and the benefits from them. Already we see multi-trillion-dollar global industries benefiting from Quanta’s technology.
Our proof of concept, Quanta’s market-leading CBD pain-relief rub (“Muscle Rub”), is only the first in a series of paradigm shift products to emerge from our labs. At the heart of its well-documented effectiveness is our proprietary “polarization” process, which uses electromagnetic force to markedly enhance bioactivity at the molecular level-a polarized active ingredient is more soluble and creates stronger bonds with the body’s receptors. This allows us to enhance ingredients so they work faster and more powerfully without the use of chemical by-products or cellular penetration. Quanta believes this natural solution has nearly limitless applications in the world of plant-based consumer products.
Quanta is involved in ambitious projects that we believe will reshape the next wave of climate science, sustainability, nutrition, and more. Having harnessed the technology of the future, Quanta is dedicated to bringing tomorrow’s health and wellness solutions to the billions in need today.
Proof of Concept
Creating, producing and selling consumer products was never our primary focus; Quanta’s Muscle Rub was simply a means to an end - proof of concept and a revenue driver in a small emerging market as our business model took shape. Fundamentally, Quanta can be a licensing concern designed to collaborate with large brands to improve product quality and the profit margins of existing and new products. But the market needed proof and we chose to start in the under-developed category of CBD because of its speed to market.
Understandably, we met the same initial hurdles every start-up encounters. In addition to simply explaining quantum mechanics, we had no track record of success from a business standpoint. The immediate goal was to prove our model was defensible. Hence, we chose CBD as a launch category. This market provided protection from industry titans that may have felt threatened by such a powerful technology while allowing us to drive profits during R&D.
Over the last two years, we have developed and sold products largely to the medical industry, along with some consumer retail. This effort was designed to drive revenue and to prove the concept of our model: that polarizing a single ingredient can produce a demonstrably superior product that consumers find safe and effective (establish consumer appetite).
Discovery Synopsys
Using our product development process and business-to-business and direct-to-consumer sales approaches as a benchmark for future business, we developed the Quanta business model. Our technology’s unique ability to strengthen ingredients renders them more potent without added chemicals or penetrating cells means Quanta is in a first-of-its-kind position in the market. As the world’s first company focused on Quantum Biology we sit in a strong, but unique position in the market.
Our ability to increase ingredient efficacy by up to 500% means we are in a rare position to truly disrupt many areas of material science.
Quanta’s technology renders products superior to any on the market today. A 30% re-purchase rate (on one SKU alone) illustrates consumer appetite for the product.
Upcoming products and ventures will be designed to achieve or surpass this level of consumer benefit and uptake.
Quanta Business Model in 3 P’s: Potentiation, Partners, and Profits
After two years we believe the best possible model for the long-term success of the company is collaborating with best-in-class partners through joint ventures for new verticals, products, and research. These joint ventures may involve a jointly owned special purpose entity or they may be entirely based on contractual obligations.
Our mission has never been to create the best novel products on the planet. Our mission has always been to revolutionize the way formulations are developed and how products perform. We seek to work with the best product makers in the world to positively impact as many industries as possible.
The unique ability to increase the ingredient and product performance opens the doors for major opportunities. Higher performing ingredients mean less is needed to make a strong impact (increased margins, increase overall efficacy). We proved this with our Muscle Rub, which uses approximately 1/3 the CBD of competing products with demonstrably improved results.
The level of potentiation delivered by Quanta allows our partners the unique ability to provide higher-performing products, lower material costs, more competitive pricing and increased profit margins. In short, our partners will be able to make better performing, more affordable products with a higher repeat purchase. This is true disruption and consumer utopia.
We aim to work with groups that specialize in manufacturing, marketing, selling and distributing existing product lines that utilize ingredients we can potentiate. Partners like this facilitate efficient market delivery of joint innovations.
We believe this strategy provides greater shareholder value, enhances revenue potential, defrays upfront expenses and affords us the ability to raise capital for new projects without massive dilution.
Ultimately, these ventures would result in licensing out our technology to other reputable brands and companies to create co-branded products whereas the term “Powered by Quanta” becomes as recognized as “Intel Inside.”
We believe this type of partnership will afford a company Quanta partners with:
● Development of emerging products with cutting edge ingredients.
● A product line with a true point of differentiation.
● New SKUs with an increased margin.
● Decreased cost of goods sold.
Simultaneously these partnerships will allow Quanta:
● Greater brand recognition.
● Increased revenue and in turn profitability.
● Quicker timeline to more licensing opportunities because of a track record of success.
● Brand to become synonymous with improving the performance of ingredients within products.
Manufacturing Partnerships -
Quanta is currently focused on partnering with large-scale manufacturers and distributors able to produce products that meet the requirements of applicable regulations IE: Good Manufacturing Practices to fulfill orders of our own product line. This type of partnership is crucial because it will afford:
● New product development that meets certification requirements
● Much larger production scale
● Speed to market
● Increased distribution and profitability
With our licensing capabilities, Quanta technology can render better, more efficacious products that cost less to create but command a higher purchase value because of polarized ingredients. This, in turn, allows companies to diversify their catalog of products while simultaneously providing them with a distinguished advantage. More efficacious ingredients.
Employees
As of the date of this report, Quanta has 10 full time and no part time employees. We believe we enjoy good employee relations. None of our employees are members of any labor union, and we are not a party to any collective bargaining agreement.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Summary of Key Results
Results of Operations for year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019
Revenue
Net sales are comprised of wholesale sales to our retail partners and sales through our direct-to-consumer channel. Net sales in both channels reflect the impact of product returns as well as discounts for certain sales programs or promotions.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 the Company recognized $1,124,721 in net sales. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recognized $1,232,200 in net sales. The decrease in sales is due to the change in management and furlough of most employees during the three months ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2019.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 the Company recognized $33,394 in license revenue. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recognized $31,788 in license revenue.
Expenses
Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $6,262,680. The Company incurred $452,443 in research and development costs ($420,000 paid to related party), and $4,273,394 in selling, general, and administrative costs, including legal and professional fees of $886,589, and $1,281,750 of compensation and related costs, and an impairment of an operating lease right of use asset of $255,093.
Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 were $6,453,091. The Company incurred $351,670 ($343,300 paid to related party) in research and development costs, and $4,799,030 in selling, general, and administrative costs, including legal and professional fees of $651,764, and $1,302,391 of compensation and related costs.
Other Income (Expense)
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recognized $2,778,593 of net other expenses, including interest expense of $512,907, private placement costs of $381,084, debt discount amortization of $755,538, loss on debt extinguishment of $1,230,290 and income of $101,226 for the change in the fair market value of derivative liabilities.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recognized $299,541 of net other expenses, including interest expense of $226,202, private placement costs of $238,395, $145,565 of extinguishment of derivative liabilities and income of $19,491 for the change in the fair market value of derivative liabilities.
Net Loss
Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $8,164,428. Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $5,787,364. We recorded no provision for federal income taxes for either period.
Basic and diluted loss per share - Basic and diluted loss per share for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0.14 per share. Basic and diluted number of shares outstanding was 59,908,938 for 2020. Basic and diluted loss per share for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $.14 per share. Basic and diluted number of shares outstanding was 42,808,603 for 2019.
Going concern
We have yet to establish any history of profitable operations. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company incurred a net loss of $8,164,428 and used cash in operating activities of $2,118,428, and at December 31, 2020 the Company had a stockholders’ deficit of $2,608,246. These factors raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date the financial statements are issued. As a result, our independent registered public accounting firm included an explanatory paragraph in its report on our financial statements as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020 with respect to this uncertainty. This going concern opinion could materially limit our ability to raise additional funds through the issuance of new debt or equity securities and future reports on our financial statements may also include an explanatory paragraph with respect to our ability to continue as a going concern.
At December 31, 2020, the Company had cash on hand in the amount of $6,270. Subsequent to December 31, 2020, the Company issued convertible notes payable and received net proceeds of $275,000 and received $1,263,000 for subscriptions to purchase 31,575,000 shares of common stock. Management estimates that the current funds on hand will be sufficient to continue operations through the next six months. The Company’s ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon improving its profitability and the continuing financial support from its shareholders. Management believes the existing shareholders or external financing will provide the additional cash to meet the Company’s obligations as they become due. No assurance can be given that any future financing, if needed, will be available or, if available, that it will be on terms that are satisfactory to the Company. Even if the Company is able to obtain additional financing, if needed, it may contain undue restrictions on its operations, in the case of debt financing, or cause substantial dilution for its stockholders, in the case of equity financing
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, or GAAP. GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts in our financial statements including various allowances and reserves for accounts receivable and inventories, the estimated lives of long-lived assets and trademarks and trademark licenses, as well as claims and contingencies arising out of litigation or other transactions that occur in the normal course of business. The following summarizes our most significant accounting and reporting policies and practices:
Use of estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Significant accounting estimates include certain assumptions related to, among others, impairment analysis of long-term assets, valuation allowance on deferred income taxes, assumptions used in valuing stock instruments issued for services, assumptions made in valuing derivative liabilities, and the accrual of potential liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Revenue Recognition
The Company follows the guidance of Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers”. Product revenue and costs of sales are recognized when control of the products transfers to our customer, which generally occurs upon shipment from our facilities. The Company’s performance obligations are satisfied at that time. The Company does not have any significant contracts with customers requiring performance beyond delivery, and contracts with customers contain no incentives or discounts that could cause revenue to be allocated or adjusted over time. The Company historically has offered no discounts, rebates, rights of return, or other allowances to clients which would result in the establishment of reserves against revenue.
Stock Compensation
The Company issues stock options, warrants, and shares of common stock as share-based compensation to employees and non-employees. The Company accounts for its share-based compensation to employees in accordance with FASB ASC 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation (Topic 718). Stock-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date, based on the estimated fair value of the award, and is recognized as expense over the requisite service period. Recognition of compensation expense for non-employees is in the same period and manner as if the Company had paid cash for the services.
Convertible Notes with Fixed Rate Conversion Options
The Company may enter into convertible notes, some of which contain, predominantly, fixed rate conversion features, whereby the outstanding principal and accrued interest may be converted by the holder, into common shares at a fixed discount to the market price of the common stock at the time of conversion. This results in a fair value of the convertible note being equal to a fixed monetary amount. The Company records the convertible note liability at its fixed monetary amount by measuring and recording a premium, as applicable, on the Note date with a charge to interest expense in accordance with ASC 480 - “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity”.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.