ITEM
7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The
following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated
financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements
that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. See “Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Our actual results
could differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors discussed in “Risk
Factors” and elsewhere in this report.
Overview
Our
principal operations include the development, acquisition, licensing and enforcement of intellectual property rights that are
either owned or controlled by us or one of our wholly owned subsidiaries. We currently own, control or manage ten intellectual
property portfolios, which principally consist of patent rights. As part of our intellectual property asset management activities
and in the ordinary course of our business, it has been necessary for either us or the intellectual property owner who we represent
to initiate, and it is likely to continue to be necessary to initiate, patent infringement lawsuits and engage in patent infringement
litigation.
We
generate revenue from two sources:
● Patent licensing
fees relating to our intellectual property portfolio, which includes fees from the licensing of our intellectual property,
primarily from litigation relating to enforcement of our intellectual property rights.
● Licensed packaging
sales, which relate to the sale of licensed products, although we did not generate any revenue from licensed packaging sales
in the year ended December 31, 2020.
We
previously received management fees for managing litigation related to our intellectual property rights. We do not currently receive
these fees, we do not have any agreements that provide for such payments and we may not generate revenue from such fees in the
future.
To
a significantly lesser extent, we generate revenue from sale of packaging materials based on our TurtlePakTM technology.
We did not generate any revenue from our TurtlePakTM in the year ended December 31, 2020. Our gross profit from sales
reflects the cost of contract manufacturing and labor. We did not generate any revenue from the TurtlePakTM Portfolio
other than from the sale of products using our technology.
Because
of the nature of our business transactions to date, we recognize revenues from licensing upon execution of a license agreement
following settlement of litigation and not over the life of the patent. Thus, we would recognize revenue when we enter into the
agreement pursuant to which we are to receive the license fee or settlement payment. Although we intend to seek to develop portfolios
of intellectual property rights that provide us for a continuing stream of revenue, to date we have not been successful in doing
so, and we cannot give you any assurance that we will be able to generate any significant revenue from licenses that provide a
continuing stream of revenue. Thus, to the extent that we continue to generate cash from single payment licenses, our revenues
can, and are likely to, vary significantly from quarter to quarter and year to year. Our gross profit from license fees reflects
any royalties which we pay in connection with our license.
Our
agreements with our funding sources have typically provided that the funding source pay the litigation costs and receive a percentage
of the recovery, thus reducing our recovery in connection with any settlement of the litigation. To the extent that our counsel
represents us on a contingent fee basis, our recovery would also be reduced by the percentage of the settlement payable to counsel.
From September 2015 until December 2020, under our agreements with Intelligent Partners, as the assignee of United Wireless, and
under the terms of our agreements to purchase certain intellectual property portfolios, a portion of our recovery may be payable
to Intelligent Partners or the seller of the intellectual property rights. All of these payments, which are reflected as cost
of revenues, significantly reduce the net payment to us.
On
October 22, 2015, we, together with certain of our subsidiaries, and United Wireless, entered into a securities purchase agreement
and related agreements, pursuant to which, among other actions, we issued our 10% secured convertible promissory notes due September
30, 2020 to United Wireless. The rights of United Wireless under the securities purchase agreement and the related notes were
assigned to Intelligent Partners. The proceeds of the notes were used to purchase certain of our intellectual portfolios. At September
30, 2020, promissory notes in the aggregate principal amount of $4,672,810 were outstanding. The notes became due by their terms
on September 30, 2020, and we did not have the resources to make, and we did not make, payments due on September 30, 2020. As
a result of the possibility that Intelligent Partners could declare a default under the securities purchase agreement and the
note, which would likely to result in our seeking protection under the Bankruptcy Act, we were not able to obtain any litigation
financing and no litigation counsel would represent us on a contingency fee basis. Accordingly, we did not generate any revenue
during the fourth quarter of 2020, and we devoted our efforts to negotiating a funding agreement with QFL and a restructure of
our agreement with Intelligent Partners, which was required by QFL as a condition to entering into a funding agreement with us.
Agreements
for QFL and Intelligent Partners
On
February 22, 2020, we entered into a funding agreement with QFL and a restructure agreement with Intelligent Partners.
Pursuant
to the Purchase Agreement with QFL, QFL agreed to make available to us a financing facility of: (a) up to $25,000,000 for the
acquisition of mutually agreed patent rights that we intend to monetize; (b) up to $2,000,000 for operating expenses; and (iii)
$1,750,000 to fund the cash payment portion of the restructure of our obligations to Intelligent Partners. In return we transferred
to QFL a right to receive a portion of net proceeds generated from the monetization of those patents. We used $1,750,000 of proceeds
from the QFL financing as the cash payment portion of the restructure of our obligations to Intelligent Partners. Our obligations
to QFL are secured by the proceeds from the patents acquired with their funding, the patents and all general intangibles now or
hereafter arising from or related to the foregoing and the proceeds and products of the foregoing. We also granted QFL a ten-year
warrant to purchase a total of up to 96,246,246 shares of our common stock, with an exercise price of $0.0054 per share which
may be exercised from February 19, 2021 through February 18, 2031on a cash or cashless basis, subject to certain limitations on
exercisability. The warrant also contains certain minimum ownership percentage antidilution rights pursuant to which the aggregate
number of shares of common stock purchasable upon the initial exercise of the Warrant shall not be less than 10% of the aggregate
number of outstanding shares of our capital stock (determined on a fully diluted basis). A portion of any gain from sale of the
shares, net of taxes and costs of exercise, realized prior to the completion of all monetization activities shall be credited
against the total return due to QFL pursuant to the Purchase Agreement. We also agreed to take all commercially reasonable steps
necessary to regain compliance with the OTCQB eligibility standards as soon as practicable, but in no event later than 12 months
from the closing date, and granted QFL registration rights with respect to the common stock issuable upon exercise of the warrants.
We also granted QFL certain board observation rights. Pursuant to the Purchase Agreement, the all of the net proceeds from the
monetization of the intellectual property acquired with funds from QFL are paid directly to QFL. After QFL has received a negotiated
rate of return, we and QFL share net proceeds equally until QFL achieves its investment return, as defined in the agreement. Thereafter,
we retain 100% of all net proceeds. Except in an Event of Default, as defined therein, all payments by us to QFL pursuant to the
Purchase Agreement are non-recourse and shall be paid only if and after net proceeds from monetization of the patent rights owned
or acquire by us are received, or to be received.
Contemporaneously
with the execution of the agreement with QFL, we entered into a restructure agreement with Intelligent Partners to eliminate
any obligations we had with respect to the outstanding notes and the securities purchase agreement. As part of the restructure
of our agreements with Intelligent Partners, we amended the existing MPAs and granted Intelligent Partners certain rights in the
monetization proceeds from any new intellectual property we acquire. Under these MPAs, Intelligent Partners receives a 60% interest
in the proceeds from our intellectual property owned by the eight Subsidiary Guarantors. Intelligent Partners also participates
in the monetization proceeds from new intellectual property that we acquire until the total payments under all the monetization
participation agreements equal $2,805,000, as follows: for net proceeds between $0 and $1,000,000, Intelligent Partners receives
10% of the net proceeds realized from new patents, except that if, in any calendar quarter, net proceeds realized by us exceed
$1,000,000, Intelligent Partners’ entitlement for that quarter only shall increase to 30% on the portion of net proceeds
in excess of $1,000,000 but less than $3,000,000. If in the same calendar quarter, net proceeds exceed $3,000,000, Intelligent
Partners’ entitlement for that quarter only shall increase to 50% on the portion of net proceeds in excess of $3,000,000.
The payments with respect to the new patents terminate once total payments to Intelligent Partners under all monetization participation
agreements reach $2,805,000. The payments to Intellectual Partners with respect new patents are payable from the proceeds which
are allocated to us under the QFL agreements, which start after QFL has received a negotiated rate of return.
Inventor
Royalties, Contingent Litigation Funding Fees and Contingent Legal Expenses
In
connection with the investment in certain patents and patent rights, certain of our operating subsidiaries executed agreements
which grant to the former owners of the respective patents or patent rights, the right to receive inventor royalties based on
future net revenues (as defined in the respective agreements) generated as a result of licensing and otherwise enforcing the respective
patents or patent portfolios.
Our
operating subsidiaries may engage third party funding sources to provide funding for patent licensing and enforcement. The agreements
with the third party funding sources may provide that the funding source receives a portion of any negotiated fees, settlements
or judgments. In certain instances, these third party funding sources are entitled to receive a significant percentage of any
proceeds realized until the third party funder has recouped agreed upon amounts based on formulas set forth in the underlying
funding agreement, which may reduce or delay and proceeds due to us.
Our
operating subsidiaries may retain the services of law firms in connection with their licensing and enforcement activities. These
law firms may be retained on a contingent fee basis whereby the law firms are paid by the funding source on a scaled percentage
of any negotiated fees, settlements or judgments awarded based on how and when the fees, settlements or judgments are obtained.
Depending on the amount of any recovery, it is possible that all the proceeds from a specific settlement may be paid to the funding
source and legal counsel.
The
economic terms of the inventor agreements, funding agreements and contingent legal fee arrangements associated with the patent
portfolios owned or controlled by our operating subsidiaries, if any, including royalty rates, proceeds sharing rates, contingent
fee rates and other terms, vary across the patent portfolios owned or controlled by the operating subsidiaries. Inventor royalties,
payments to non-controlling interests, payments to third party funding providers and contingent legal fees expenses fluctuate
period to period, based on the amount of revenues recognized each period, the terms and conditions of revenue agreements executed
each period and the mix of specific patent portfolios with varying economic terms and obligations generating revenues each period.
Inventor royalties, payments to third party funding sources and contingent legal fees expenses will continue to fluctuate and
may continue to vary significantly period to period, based primarily on these factors.
In
December 2018, we entered into a funding agreement whereby a third party agreed to provide funds to us to enable us to support
our structured licensing programs for the CMOS and M-RED portfolios. Under the funding agreement, the third party receives an
interest in the proceeds from the programs, and we have no other obligation to the third party. As of December 31, 2020, the third
party funding source advanced $150,000 for costs and expenses, and has no further obligation to provide additional funds. Under
the terms of the funding agreement, the third party funder is entitled to a priority return of funds advanced from net proceeds
recovered.
In
connection with any litigation seeking to enforce our intellectual property rights, it is possible that a defendant may request
and/or a court may rule that an operating subsidiary has violated statutory authority, regulatory authority, federal rules, local
court rules, or governing standards relating to the substantive or procedural aspects of such enforcement actions. In such event,
a court may issue monetary sanctions against us or its operating subsidiaries or award attorney’s fees and/or expenses to
a defendant(s), which could be material, and if required to be paid by us or its operating subsidiaries, could materially harm
our operating results and financial position. Since the operating subsidiaries do not have any assets other than the patents,
and the Company does not have any available financial resources to pay any judgment which a defendant may obtain against a subsidiary,
such a judgement may result in the bankruptcy of the subsidiary and/or the loss of the patents, which are the subsidiaries’
only assets.
At
present, we are pursuing litigation with respect to the CXT portfolio and MRED portfolio. The actions are described in Item 1.
Business. We cannot estimate when or whether we will receive any revenue from these litigations, or whether, in the event we do
not prevail, the defendant will not obtain an award of legal fees against our plaintiff subsidiary which could result in the bankruptcy
of the subsidiary and a default under our agreements with QFL and Intelligent Partners.
Restricted
Stock Grants and Options
In
February 2021, we issued restricted stock grants to consultants (30,000,000 shares) and to our officers and directors (74,000,000
shares) all of which vested immediately. The value of the shares will be reflected as non-cash compensation in the first quarter
of 2021. Also in February 2021, we granted restricted stock options to consultants (90,000,000 shares) and to our chief executive
officer (60,000,000 shares). With respect to two of the consultants and the chief executive officer the options become cumulatively
exercisable as follows: 1/3rd at an exercise price of $0.01 per share, becoming exercisable upon the commencement of
trading of the Common Stock on the OTCQB; 1/3rd at an exercise price of $0.03 per share becoming exercisable on the
first day on which we file with the SEC a Form 10-K or Form 10-Q with stockholders’ equity of at least $5,000,000; and 1/3rd
at an exercise price of $0.05 per share on the date on which the Common Stock is listed for trading on the Nasdaq Stock
Market or the New York Stock Exchange. We will incur non-cash compensation with respect to the value of the options, based of
Black-Scholes valuation, as the options become exercisable.
Results
of Operations
Years
Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The
following table shows the revenue and cost of revenue from our two categories of revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020
and 2019:
Revenues
for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $5,488,088, as compared with $4,143,169 in 2019, an increase of $1,344,919, or approximately
32.5%. The increase in 2020 principally reflects an increase in patent licensing fees of $1,370,193, or 33.3%. Our licensing fees
reflect the settlement of litigation for infringement of our patent rights. These fees are one-time fees, with the result that
there is no continuity of revenues from period to period, and any revenue we generate in future periods will be solely dependent
upon the results of pending and future litigation. We cannot assure you that we will generate any revenue from patent licensing
fees in the future. The patent licensing fees for 2020 resulted from licensing and settlements of Power Management/Bus Control
Portfolio, the CXT Portfolio, the MRED Portfolio and the Financial Data Portfolio. The patent licensing fees of $4,117,895 in
2019 resulted from the licensing and settlements of Power Management/Bus Control Portfolio, the CXT Portfolio, the Anchor Structure
Portfolio and the CMOS Portfolio litigations. Our revenue, at least in the near future if not longer, may be affected by factors
relating to the COVID-19 pandemic. See “Item 1. Business - Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic on our Business.”
Cost
of revenues was approximately $4,693,000 for 2020 as compared with approximately $3,391,000 for 2019. Our cost of revenue includes
expenses which we incurred in connection with our pending litigations and fees we pay to litigation funding sources, legal counsel,
prior owners and pursuant to monetization proceeds agreements in connection with license fees. Cost of revenue for 2020 includes
approximately $4,693,000 of litigation and licensing fees paid to litigation funding sources and legal counsel in connection with
the Power Management/Bus Control, the CXT Portfolio, the MRED Portfolio and the Financial Data Portfolio licensing programs. Cost
of revenues for 2019 includes approximately $3,384,000 of litigation and licensing fees paid to litigation funding sources and
legal counsel in connection with the Power Management/Bus Control, the CXT Portfolio, the Anchor Structure Portfolio and the CMOS
Portfolio licenses, approximately $2,000 for management support services in connection with management of the Mobile Data Portfolio,
and approximately $5,000 relating to TurtlePakTM. We did not have any sales or cost of sales relating to TurtlePakTM
for 2020.
Selling,
general, and administrative expenses for 2020 increased by approximately $292,000, or approximately 24%, from approximately $1,222,000
in 2019 to approximately $1,514,000 in 2020. Our principal selling, general and administrative expense for 2020 and 2019 was amortization
expense of approximately $648,000 and approximately $529,000 for 2020 and 2019, respectively, related to amortization of the patent
assets acquired from Intellectual Ventures in October 2015, IV 34/37 in July 2017, and IV 62/71 in January 2018 and IV 113/108.
Selling, general and administrative expenses also reflect executive compensation, which was approximately $300,000 for 2020 and
2019.
Other
expense consists primarily of interest expense of approximately $804,000 in 2020 as compared with approximately $808,000 in 2019.
In 2020, we recognized a $275,000 gain on derivative liability as compared with $55,000 loss on derivative liability in 2019.
Other income in 2020 reflects miscellaneous income of $1,000. Other expense in 2019 reflect a $28,000 gain on forgiveness of debt.
As a result of the termination of our obligations under the United Wireless notes, commencing in 2021, we no longer have a derivative
liability. See Note 4 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
We had an income tax expense of approximately $65,000 for 2020 as compared with approximately $5,000 in 2019. The income tax expense results primarily from foreign taxes paid with respect to certain of our settlement agreements.
As
a result of the foregoing we had a net loss of approximately $1,313,000, or $0.00 per share (basic and diluted) for 2020 compared
to net loss of approximately $1,309,000, or $0.00 per share (basic and diluted), for 2019.
Liquidity
and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2020, we had current assets of approximately $1,287,000, current liabilities of approximately $9,497,000. Our current liabilities at December 31, 2020 include approximately $4,673,000 payable to Intelligent Partners, which was due and payable on September 30, 2020 and subsequently restructured, and loans payable of $147,000 and accrued interest of approximately $285,000 due to former directors and minority stockholders. As of December 31, 2020, we have an accumulated deficit of approximately $21,281,000 and a negative working capital of approximately $8,210,000. Other than salary to our chief executive officer, we do not contemplate any other material operating expense in the near future other than normal general and administrative expenses, including expenses relating to our status as a public company filing reports with the SEC. Because our agreements with our litigation funding sources do not require us to make any payments relating to the litigation, we do not incur expenses with respect to litigation covered by the funding sources.
As
a result of our restructure of our agreement with Intelligent Partners, the outstanding notes to Intelligent Partners were cancelled
and replaced with agreements that provide for payments if we receive proceeds from our intellectual property as described above
under “Agreements for QFL and Intelligent Partners.” If the note payable to Intelligent Partners were excluded from
current liabilities, we would have a pro forma working capital deficiency of approximately $3,500,000.
For 2020, we used approximately $246,000 in operations. Our cash flow used in operations for 2020 reflected our loss of approximately $1,300,000, and the amount used in operations increased primarily by a decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses of approximately $471,000, and the gain on derivative liability of $275,000 offset by a decrease in accounts receivable of approximately $750,000, depreciation and amortization of approximately $648,000, amortization of debt discount of approximately $435,000 and bad debt expense of $66,000.
For
2019, we had cash flow from operations $746,523 in our operations, reflecting our loss of $1,310,295, which was offset principally
by depreciation and amortization of our intellectual property rights of $529,486, amortization of debt discount on the loan from
United Wireless of $349,691, an increase in accounts receivable of $1,850,375, an increase in account payable and accrued liabilities
of $954,806,and decreased by the $55,000 loss on derivative liability, and increased by a gain on forgiveness of debt of $27,628
and accrued but unpaid interest of $8,700.
Cash flow from financing activities for 2020 reflected the proceeds of an SBA loan of approximately $172,000, the payment of the purchase price of patents of approximately $194,000 and proceeds from the sale of future revenues of approximately $95,000 offset by payment made on the sale of future revenues of approximately $20,000. Under the agreement with the litigation funder, the third party lender receives an interest in the proceeds.
Cash
flow from financing activities in 2019 included repayments to the third party in the amount of approximately $130,000, the payment
of the purchase price of patents of approximately $156,000 and the payment of $16,000 of a loan from a third party.
In
2020 and 2019, cash flow from investing activities included $95,000 and $75,000, respectively for the purchase of patents from
third parties.
In
2020 we did not have non-cash investing and financing activities. In 2019, non-cash investing and financing activities consisted
of an account payable of $1,238,219 representing the $1,500,000 payment due to Intellectual Ventures, net of $75,000 advanced
at closing and imputed interest of $336,781.
We
cannot assure you that we will be successful in generating future revenues, in obtaining additional debt or equity financing or
that such additional debt or equity financing will be available on terms acceptable to us, if at all, or that we will be able
to obtain any third party funding in connection with any of our intellectual property portfolios.
Historically,
our only source of financing was loans from officers and directors. In October 2015, we entered into an agreement with United
Wireless, pursuant to which provided us with funds to purchase intellectual property.
We
cannot predict the success of any pending or future litigation seeking to enforce our intellectual property rights.
In
February 2021, we signed a funding agreement with QFL, as described in “Overview” and under “Recent Developments”
in Item 1. Business.
As
noted below, there is a substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Critical
Accounting Policies
The
discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our financial statements that have
been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of
these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities.
On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates including the allowance for doubtful accounts, the salability and recoverability
of our products, income taxes and contingencies. We base our estimates on historical experience and on other assumptions that
we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form our basis for making judgments about the carrying
values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates
under different assumptions or conditions.
Principles
of Consolidation
Our
consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with US GAAP and present the financial statements of us and our wholly-owned
subsidiary. In the preparation of our consolidated financial statements, intercompany transactions and balances are eliminated.
Use
of Estimates and Assumptions
The
preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America
requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure
of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses
during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Revenue
Recognition
We
adopted ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers as of January 1, 2018 using the modified retrospective transition
method. The core principle of the revenue recognition standard is that a company should recognize revenue to depict the transfer
of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the company expects to be entitled
in exchange for those goods or services. The following five steps are applied to achieve that core principle:
● Step 1: Identify
the contract with the customer
● Step 2: Identify
the performance obligations in the contract
● Step 3: Determine
the transaction price
● Step 4: Allocate
the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
● Step 5: Recognize
revenue when the company satisfies a performance obligation
A
performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer and is the unit of account
in ASC 606. In order to identify the performance obligations in a contract with a customer, a company must assess the promised
goods or services in the contract and identify each promised good or service that is distinct. A performance obligation meets
ASC 606’s definition of a “distinct” good or service (or bundle of goods or services) if both of the following
criteria are met:
●
The customer can
benefit from the good or service either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available to the customer
(i.e., the good or service is capable of being distinct).
● The entity’s
promise to transfer the good or service to the customer is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract (i.e.,
the promise to transfer the good or service is distinct within the context of the contract).
If
a good or service is not distinct, the good or service is combined with other promised goods or services until a bundle of goods
or services is identified that is distinct.
The
transaction price is the amount of consideration to which an entity expects to be entitled in exchange for transferring promised
goods or services to a customer. The consideration promised in a contract with a customer may include fixed amounts, variable
amounts, or both. When determining the transaction price, an entity must consider the effects of all of the following:
●
Variable consideration
● Constraining estimates
of variable consideration
● The existence of
a significant financing component in the contract
● Noncash consideration
● Consideration payable
to a customer
Variable
consideration is included in the transaction price only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount
of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently
resolved.
The
transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation on a relative standalone selling price basis.
The
transaction price allocated to each performance obligation is recognized when that performance obligation is satisfied, at a point
in time or over time as appropriate.
In
general, we are required to make certain judgments and estimates in connection with the accounting for revenue contracts with
customers. Such areas may include identifying performance obligations in the contract, estimating the timing of satisfaction of
performance obligations, determining whether a promise of consideration, whether a license to intellectual property or an entitlement
to payment of a percentage of net proceeds, is distinct from other promised goods or services, evaluating whether consideration
transfers to a customer at a point in time or over time, allocating the transaction price to separate performance obligations,
determining whether contracts contain a significant financing component, and estimating revenues recognized at a point in time
for licensed sales.
Patent
Licensing Fees
Revenue
is recognized upon transfer of control of promised bundled intellectual property rights and other contractual performance obligations
to licensees in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those intellectual property rights.
Revenue contracts that provide promises to grant “the right” to use intellectual property rights as they exist at
the point in time at which the intellectual property rights are granted, are accounted for as performance obligations satisfied
at a point in time and revenue is recognized at the point in time that the applicable performance obligations are satisfied and
all other revenue recognition criteria have been met.
For
the periods presented, revenue contracts executed by the Company primarily provided for the payment of contractually
determined, one-time, paid-up license fees in consideration for the grant of certain intellectual property rights for
patented technologies owned or controlled by the Company’s operating subsidiaries. Intellectual property rights granted
included the following, as applicable: (i) the grant of a non-exclusive, retroactive and future license to manufacture
and/or sell products covered by patented technologies, (ii) a covenant-not-to-sue, (iii) the release of the licensee from
certain claims, and (iv) the dismissal of any pending litigation. The intellectual property rights granted were
perpetual in nature, extending until the legal expiration date of the related patents. The individual intellectual property
rights are not accounted for as separate performance obligations, as (a) the nature of the promise, within the context of the
contract, is to transfer combined items to which the promised intellectual property rights are inputs and (b) the
Company’s promise to transfer each individual intellectual property right described above to the customer is not
separately identifiable from other promises to transfer intellectual property rights in the contract.
Since
the promised intellectual property rights are not individually distinct, the Company combined each individual IP right in the
contract into a bundle of IP rights that is distinct, and accounted for all of the intellectual property rights promised in the
contract as a single performance obligation. The intellectual property rights granted were “functional IP rights”
that have significant standalone functionality. The Company’s subsequent activities do not substantively change that functionality
and do not significantly affect the utility of the IP to which the licensee has rights. The Company’s subsidiaries have
no further obligation with respect to the grant of intellectual property rights, including no express or implied obligation to
maintain or upgrade the technology, or provide future support or services. The contracts provide for the grant (i.e. transfer
of control) of the licenses, covenants-not-to-sue, releases, and other significant deliverables upon execution of the contract. Licensees
legally obtain control of the intellectual property rights upon execution of the contract. As such, the earnings process is complete
and revenue is recognized upon the execution of the contract, when collectability is probable and all other revenue recognition
criteria have been met. Revenue contracts generally provide for payment of contractual amounts within 30-90 days of execution
of the contract. Contractual payments made by licensees are generally non-refundable. We do not have any significant payment terms,
as payment is received shortly after goods are delivered or services are provided, therefore there is no significant financing
component or consideration payable to the customer in these transactions.
Licensed
Sales
The
balance of our revenue in 2019, from licensed sales, was not significant but included sales-based revenue contracts pursuant to
purchase orders. There was no sales-based revenue in 2020. There is only one distinct performance obligation in each purchase
order, transfer of the promised good to the customer, and the customer can benefit from the good together with other resources
readily available to the customer. For licensed sales, the transaction price is allocated to the performance obligation on a relative
standalone selling price basis per the purchase order, and the Company includes in the transaction price some or all of an amount
of estimated variable consideration to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative
revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved. Estimates
are generally based on historical levels of activity, if available. Notwithstanding, revenue is recognized for a licensed
sale when the performance obligation has been satisfied - transfer of the good to the customer. The purchase order
generally provides for payment of contractual amounts within 30 days of transfer of the goods to the customer, therefore there
is no significant financing component or consideration payable to the customer in these transactions.
Cost
of Revenues
Cost
of revenues include the costs and expenses incurred in connection with our patent licensing and enforcement activities, including
inventor royalties paid to original patent owners, contingent litigation funding fees, contingent legal fees paid to external
patent counsel, other patent-related legal expenses paid to external patent counsel, licensing and enforcement related research,
consulting and other expenses paid to third-parties and the amortization of patent-related investment costs. These costs are included
under the caption “Cost of revenues” in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations. No such fees are recognized
as a cost of revenue to the extent that we have no obligation with respect to fees prior to a settlement or license.
Inventor
Royalties, Contingent Litigation Funding Fees and Contingent Legal Expenses.
Inventor
royalties are expensed in the consolidated statements of operations in the period that the related revenues are recognized. Contingent
litigation funding and legal fees are expensed in the consolidated statements of operations in the period that the related revenues
are recognized. In instances where there are no recoveries from potential infringers, no contingent litigation funding fees are
due.
Accounts
Receivable
Accounts receivable, which generally relate to licensed sales, are presented on the balance sheet net of estimated uncollectible amounts. The Company records an allowance for estimated uncollectible accounts in an amount approximating anticipated losses. Individual uncollectible accounts are written off against the allowance when collection of the individual accounts appears doubtful. We recorded an allowance for doubtful accounts of $66,000 and $0 as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
Intangible
Assets
Intangible
assets consist of patents which are amortized using the straight-line method over their estimated useful lives or statutory lives
whichever is shorter and are reviewed for impairment upon any triggering event that may give rise to the assets ultimate recoverability
as prescribed under the guidance related to impairment of long-lived assets. Costs incurred to acquire patents, including legal
costs, are also capitalized as long-lived assets and amortized on a straight-line basis with the associated patent.
Patents
include the cost of patents or patent rights (collectively “patents”) acquired from third-parties or acquired in connection
with business combinations. Patent acquisition costs are amortized utilizing the straight-line method over their remaining economic
useful lives, ranging from one to ten years. Certain patent application and prosecution costs incurred to secure additional patent
claims, that based on management’s estimates are deemed to be recoverable, are capitalized and amortized over the remaining
estimated economic useful life of the related patent portfolio.
Impairment
of long-lived assets
Long-lived
assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may
not be recoverable through the estimated undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the
assets. Whenever any such impairment exists, an impairment loss will be recognized for the amount by which the carrying value
exceeds the fair value. No impairment was recorded for the either the year ended December 31, 2020 or of the year ended December
31, 2019.
Derivative
Financial Instruments
Management
evaluates the embedded conversion feature within its convertible debt instruments under ASC 815-15 and ASC 815-40 to determine
if the conversion feature meets the definition of a liability and, if so, whether to bifurcate the conversion feature and account
for it as a separate derivative liability. For derivative financial instruments that are accounted for as liabilities, the derivative
instrument is initially recorded at its fair value and is then re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value
reported in the statements of operations. For stock-based derivative financial instruments, management uses a Black Scholes model,
in accordance with ASC 815-15 “Derivative and Hedging” to value the derivative instruments at inception and on subsequent
valuation dates. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities
or as equity, is evaluated at the end of each reporting period. Derivative instrument liabilities are classified in the balance
sheet as current or non-current based on whether net-cash settlement of the derivative instrument could be required within 12
months after the balance sheet date.
Fair
Value of Financial Instruments
We
adopted Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures”,
for assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis. ASC 820 establishes a common definition for fair value
to be applied to existing US GAAP that require the use of fair value measurements which establishes a framework for measuring
fair value and expands disclosure about such fair value measurements.
ASC
820 defines fair value as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction
between market participants at the measurement date. Additionally, ASC 820 requires the use of valuation techniques that maximize
the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs. These inputs are prioritized below:
Level 1: Observable inputs
such as quoted market prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities
Level 2: Observable market-based
inputs or unobservable inputs that are corroborated by market data
Level 3: Unobservable inputs
for which there is little or no market data, which require the use of the reporting entity’s own assumptions.
In
addition, FASB ASC 825-10-25 “Fair Value Option” was effective for January 1, 2008. ASC 825-10-25 expands opportunities
to use fair value measurements in financial reporting and permits entities to choose to measure many financial instruments and
certain other items at fair value.
Income
Tax
We record revenues on a gross basis, before deduction for income taxes. We incurred income tax expenses of approximately $65,000 and $5,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Stock-based
Compensation
We
account for stock-based compensation pursuant to ASC 718, “Compensation - Stock Compensation,” which prescribes
accounting and reporting standards for all stock-based payment transactions in which employee services, and, since January1, 2019,
non-employee services, are acquired. Transactions include incurring liabilities, or issuing or offering to issue shares, options
and other equity instruments such as employee stock ownership plans and stock appreciation rights. Stock-based payments to employees,
including grants of employee stock options, are recognized as compensation expense in the financial statements based on their
fair values. That expense is recognized over the period during which an employee is required to provide services in exchange for
the award, known as the requisite service period (usually the vesting period).
Leases
In
February 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-02, “Leases” (Topic 842), to provide a new comprehensive model for lease accounting
under this guidance, lessees and lessors should apply a “right-of-use” model in accounting for all leases (including
subleases) and eliminate the concept of operating leases and off-balance-sheet leases. Recognition, measurement and presentation
of expenses will depend on classification as a finance or operating lease. Similar modifications have been made to lessor accounting
in-line with revenue recognition guidance.
We
adopted Topic 842 as of January 1, 2019 using the modified retrospective transition method with no impact on the consolidated
financial position or results of operations.
Recent
Accounting Pronouncements
Management
does not believe that there are any recently issued, but not effective, accounting standards which, if currently adopted, would
have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.
Going
Concern
We
have an accumulated deficit of approximately $21.3 million and negative working capital of approximately $8.2 million as of December
31, 2020. Because of our continuing losses, our working capital deficiency, the uncertainty of future revenue, the possible effect
of a judgement against one or more of our subsidiaries for legal fees; our low stock price and the absence of a trading market
in our common stock, our ability to raise funds in equity market or from lenders is severely impaired. These conditions raise
substantial doubt as to our ability to continue as a going concern. Although we may seek to raise funds and to obtain third party
funding for litigation to enforce its intellectual property rights, the availability of such funds in uncertain, and our use of
the funds from funding sources relating to the monetization of our intellectual property may not be available for working capital
purposes. Our financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Off-balance
Sheet Arrangements
We
have no off-balance sheet arrangements.