ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements, based upon our current expectations and related to future events and our future financial performance, that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors,” “Forward-Looking Statements,” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our Business
We are a national provider of waste and recycling services to customers from across multiple industry sectors that are typically larger, multi-location businesses. We provide businesses with a single source solution for the reuse, recycling, and disposal of a wide variety of waste streams and recyclables generated by their operations. We create customer-specific programs and perform the related services for the collection, processing, recycling, disposal, and tracking of waste streams and recyclables. In addition, our programs and services enable our customers to address their environmental and sustainability goals and responsibilities.
We believe our services are comprehensive, innovative, and cost effective. Our services are designed to enable our business customers to capture the commodity value of their waste streams and recyclables, reduce their disposal costs, enhance their management of environmental risks, enhance their legal and regulatory compliance, and achieve their sustainability goals while maximizing the efficiency of their assets. Our services currently focus on the waste streams and recyclables from big box, grocers, and other specialty retailers; automotive after-market operations such as automotive maintenance, quick lube, dealerships, and collision repair; transportation, logistics, and internal fleet operators; manufacturing plants; multi-family and commercial properties; restaurant chains and food operations; and construction and demolition projects. We currently concentrate on programs for recycling motor oil and automotive lubricants, oil filters, scrap tires, oily water, goods destruction, food waste, meat renderings, cooking oil and grease trap waste, plastics, cardboard, metal, glass, mixed paper, construction debris, as well as a large variety of regulated and non-regulated solid, liquid, and gas wastes. In addition, we offer products such as antifreeze and windshield washer fluid, dumpster and compacting equipment, and other minor ancillary services.
We also provide information and data that tracks and reports the detailed transactional and environmental results of our services and provides actionable data to improve business operations. The data we generate also enables our customers to address their environmental and sustainability goals and responsibilities and report to internal and external parties such as employees, investors, business partners, and governmental agencies.
Our results of operations from October 19, 2020 to December 31, 2020 reflect the results of Green Remedies. See Note 3 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of this transaction.
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 Operating Results
Our consolidated financial statements include the operating activities of our company and our subsidiaries for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The following table summarizes our operating results for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Year Ended December 31, 2020 compared with Year Ended December 31, 2019
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
In response to the global COVID-19 pandemic crisis, we have prioritized the health and safety of our employees, customers and subcontractors and continue to work to support their needs. While we continue to implement actions to mitigate the effects of this crisis on our business and operations, the uncertainty around the duration and economic impact of this crisis makes it difficult for management to predict the future impact on our business operations and financial performance.
To date, we have experienced some limitations in employee resources resulting from travel restrictions and “stay at home” orders. Despite these restrictions, we continue to efficiently manage supply chain requirements of our customers and subcontractors. The waste management and recycling services we provide are currently designated an essential critical infrastructure business under the President’s COVID-19 guidance, the continued operation of which is vital for national public health, safety, and national economic security. While some of our customers shut down or scaled back their businesses in the short term, other customers operating in the restaurant, grocery, automotive and certain specialty retail industries, which may be considered as essential businesses in different jurisdictions or who are more capable of working remotely than other industries, have continued to operate.
The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operational and financial performance will depend on future developments, including the severity and duration of the crisis and the impact of actions taken and that will be taken to contain COVID-19 or treat its impact. These future impacts are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence. The economic impact from COVID-19 may adversely impact our results of operations in the future and may affect the credit condition of some of our customers, which could increase delays in customer payments and credit losses.
Revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2020, revenue was $98.7 million, a decrease of $319,000, or 0.3%, compared with revenue of $99.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The decrease was primarily due to lower levels of services due to COVID-19 related shutdowns or reduced operations at our customers. This impact was partially offset by increased services from both our continuing and new customer base and from the acquired customer base related to the Green Remedies asset acquisition in October 2020. See Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements for a discussion of the October 19, 2020 acquisition.
Cost of Revenue/Gross Profit
Cost of revenue decreased $648,000 to $79.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $80.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to lower levels of services due to COVID-19 related shutdowns or reduced operations at our customers.
The year-over-year decrease in revenue was more than offset by a net decrease in cost of revenue, resulting in increased gross profit dollars and gross margin performance in 2020. The decrease in cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to lower levels of services due to COVID-19 related shutdowns or reduced operations at our customers plus lower costs related to certain contracted services. Gross profit increased $329,000, or 1.8%, to $19.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $18.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our gross margin was 19.3% in 2020 compared with 18.9% in 2019. The increase in gross profit dollars and gross margin percentage for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the net effect of increased services from the acquired customer base related to the Green Remedies acquisition in October 2020, lower levels of services due to COVID-19 related shutdowns or reduced operations at our customers, and lower costs related to certain contracted services.
Revenue, gross profit and gross margins are affected period to period by the volumes of waste and recycling materials generated by our customers, the frequency and type of services provided, the price and mix of the services provided, commodity index adjustments for recycled materials, and the cost and mix of subcontracted services provided in any one reporting period.
Operating Expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2020, operating expenses increased $174,000 to $18.3 million from $18.1 million for 2019. Selling, general, and administrative expenses were $17.1 million and $16.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, a year-over-year increase of $325,000. The increase primarily relates to increases in stock related compensation of $402,000, severance and COVID recall expenses of $178,000, corporate development expenses of $347,000, and acquisition, integration, and related expenses of $743,000 inclusive of professional fees of $640,000, partially offset by decreases in labor related expenses of $559,000, travel expenses of $343,000, professional fees of $322,000, tradeshow/advertising expenses of $111,000, and other administrative expenses of $11,000.
In the year ended December 31, 2019, three stockholders sold approximately 4.3 million shares of our Common Stock in a registered public offering. In a separate private transaction, a selling stockholder sold 1,750,000 shares of our Common Stock. The offering and private transaction, together the “Transactions”, closed on April 11, 2019. We did not receive any proceeds from sales by the selling stockholders in the Transactions. We incurred costs and expenses in connection with the Transactions, consisting of various
registration, due diligence, printing, and professional service fees and expenses, and such costs, less amounts reimbursed by the selling stockholders at the closing of the Transactions, were $248,000, and are included in selling, general, and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Operating expenses also included depreciation and amortization of $1.2 million and $1.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Other Income
Other income was $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and represented the use of proceeds received under the Paycheck Protection Program, or “PPP,” under a promissory note from BMO Harris Bank National Association, the “PPP Loan,” to fund eligible payroll, rent and utility expenses. Such proceeds were subsequently forgiven in accordance with the PPP program. See Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements for a discussion of the PPP Loan.
Interest Expense
For the year ended December 31, 2020, interest expense increased to $702,000 from $432,000 for 2019 as a result of an increase in debt, primarily related to the Green Remedies asset acquisition. We are amortizing debt issuance costs of $1.8 million to interest expense over the life of the related debt arrangements as discussed in Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
We recorded $168,000 in loss on extinguishment of debt in connection with the loan termination of our Citizens Bank Loan Agreement, including the write-off of the unamortized portion of debt issuance costs and fees directly associated with the loan payoff.
Income Taxes
We recorded a provision for income taxes of $254,000 and $219,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, primarily attributable to state tax obligations based on current estimated state tax apportionments for states with no net operating loss carryforwards.
We recorded a full valuation allowance against all of our deferred tax assets, or “DTAs”, as of both December 31, 2020 and 2019. We intend on maintaining a full valuation allowance on our DTAs until there is sufficient evidence to support the reversal of all or some portion of these allowances. However, given our current earnings and anticipated future earnings, we believe that there is a reasonable possibility that within the next 12 months, sufficient positive evidence may become available to allow us to reach a conclusion that a significant portion of the valuation allowance will no longer be needed. Release of the valuation allowance would result in the recognition of certain DTAs and a decrease to income tax expense for the period the release is recorded. However, the exact timing and amount of the valuation allowance release are subject to change based on the level of profitability that we are able to actually achieve.
Net Income (Loss)
Net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.0 million compared with a net loss of $55,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The explanations above explain the primary changes related to the improvement in net results.
Our operating results, including revenue, operating expenses, and operating margins, vary from period to period depending on commodity prices of recycled materials, the volumes and mix of services provided, as well as customer mix during the reporting period.
Income (Loss) per Share
Net income per basic and diluted share was $0.05 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with a net loss per basic and diluted share of $(0.00) for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net income attributable to common stockholders in the year ended December 31, 2020 includes a deemed dividend of $205,014 as a result of the triggering of a down round provision in certain outstanding warrants. The basic and diluted weighted average number of shares of Common Stock outstanding was approximately 16.7 million and 16.8 million, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 15.3 million basic and diluted outstanding for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Adjusted EBITDA
We use the non-GAAP measurement of earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization, stock-related compensation charges, acquisition-related costs, and other adjustments, or “Adjusted EBITDA,” to evaluate our performance. Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP measure that is also frequently used by analysts, investors and other interested parties to evaluate the market value of companies considered to be in similar businesses. We suggest that Adjusted EBITDA be viewed in conjunction with our reported financial results or other financial information prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or “GAAP.” In 2020, other adjustments included $(1,408,000) use of PPP Loan proceeds, partially offset by certain severance and COVID-recall labor costs of $178,000, and loss on extinguishment of debt of $168,000. In 2019, other adjustments of $247,589 included costs related to the Transactions as further discussed above.
The following table reflects the reconciliation of net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had $7.5 million of cash and cash equivalents and working capital of $8.7 million, compared with cash and cash equivalents of $3.4 million and working capital of $5.1 million as of December 31, 2019.
We derive our primary sources of funds for conducting our business activities from operating revenues; borrowings under our credit facilities; and the placement of our equity securities with investors. We require working capital primarily to carry accounts receivable, service debt, purchase capital assets, fund operating expenses, address unanticipated competitive threats or technical problems, withstand adverse economic conditions, fund potential acquisition transactions, and pursue goals and strategies.
We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents of $7.5 million, our borrowing capacity under our $15.0 million ABL Facility (which such capacity was $12.8 million as of December 31, 2020), and cash expected to be generated from operations will be sufficient to fund our operations for the next 12 months. As discussed in Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements, as a result of the uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our operating results, in May 2020 we received loan proceeds of $1.4 million under the PPP, which were subsequently fully forgiven in accordance with the PPP program. As discussed in Notes 7 and 13 to our consolidated financial statements, we entered into the BBVA Loan Agreement which provides for an asset-based revolving credit facility of up to $15.0 million and an equipment loan facility in the maximum principal amount of $2.0 million, and we closed on a registered direct offering of our Common Stock, which provided gross proceeds to us of approximately $3.4 million. The BBVA Loan Agreement replaced our prior credit facility under the Citizens Bank Loan Agreement, which was paid off and terminated effective August 5, 2020. On October 19, 2020, we and certain of our domestic subsidiaries entered into the Credit Agreement which provided financing for the acquisition of Green Remedies. Among other things, the Credit Agreement provides for the following:
•
A senior secured term loan facility in the principal amount of $11.5 million. The senior secured term loan at the LIBOR Rate for LIBOR Loans plus the Applicable Margin; provided, that if the provision of LIBOR Loans becomes unlawful or unavailable, then interest will be payable at a rate per annum equal to the Base Rate from time to time in effect plus the Applicable Margin for Base Rate Loans. The maturity date of the term loan facility is October 19, 2025, the “Maturity Date.” The senior secured term loan will amortize in aggregate annual amounts equal to 1.00% of the original principal amount of the senior secured term loan facility with the balance payable on the Maturity Date. Proceeds of the senior secured term loan were permitted to be used in connection with the Acquisition.
•
A delayed draw term loan facility in the maximum principal amount of $12.5 million. Loans under the delayed draw term loan facility may be requested at any time until October 19, 2021. Pricing and maturity for the outstanding principal amount of the delayed draw term loan shall be the same as for the senior secured term loan. Proceeds of the delayed draw term loan are to be used for Permitted Acquisitions.
•
An accordion term loan facility in the maximum principal amount of $40.0 million. Loans under the accordion loan facility may be requested at any time until the Maturity Date. Each accordion term loan shall be on the same terms as
those applicable to the senior secured term loan. Proceeds of accordion term loans are permitted to be used for Permitted Acquisitions.
Certain of the Company’s domestic subsidiaries are the borrowers under the Credit Agreement. The Company is the guarantor under the Credit Agreement. As security for the obligations of the borrowers under the Credit Agreement, (i) the borrowers under the Credit Agreement have granted a first priority lien on substantially all of their tangible and intangible personal property, including a pledge of the capital stock and membership interests, as applicable, of certain of the Company’s direct and indirect subsidiaries, and (ii) the guarantors under the Credit Agreement have granted a first priority lien on the capital stock and membership interests, as applicable, of the Company’s direct and indirect domestic subsidiaries.
The Credit Agreement contains certain financial covenants, including a minimum fixed charge coverage ratio and a senior net leverage ratio. In addition, the Credit Agreement contains negative covenants limiting, among other things, additional indebtedness, transactions with affiliates, additional liens, sales of assets, dividends, investments and advances, prepayments of debt, mergers and acquisitions, and other matter customarily restricted in such agreements. The Credit Agreement also contains customary events of default, including payment defaults, breaches of representations and warranties, covenant defaults, events of bankruptcy and insolvency, change of control, and failure of any guaranty or security document supporting the Credit Agreement to be in full force and effect. Upon the occurrence of an event of default, the outstanding obligations under the Credit Agreement may be accelerated and become immediately due and payable. The foregoing is a summary only and does not purport to be a complete description of all the terms, provisions, covenants and agreements contained in the Loan Agreement and is subject to and qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of the Credit Agreement.
Cash Flows
The following discussion relates to the major components of our cash flows.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $3.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 related primarily to the net effect of the following:
•
net income of $1,034,000, which includes other income of $1,408,000 for the use of PPP Loan proceeds as discussed further above;
•
offset by non-cash items of $3.3 million, which related primarily to depreciation, amortization of intangible assets and debt issuance costs, provision for doubtful accounts, loss on extinguishment of debt and stock-based compensation; and
•
cash used in the net change in operating assets and liabilities of $1.2 million, primarily associated with relative changes in accounts receivable, accounts payable, and accrued liabilities.
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 related primarily to the net effect of the following:
•
net loss of $55,000;
•
offset by non-cash items of $2.6 million, which related primarily to depreciation, amortization of intangible assets and debt issuance costs, provision for doubtful accounts, and stock-based compensation; and
•
cash used in the net change in operating assets and liabilities of $310,000, primarily associated with relative changes in accounts receivable, accounts payable, and accrued liabilities.
Our business, including revenue, operating expenses, and operating margins, may vary depending on the blend of services we provide to our customers, the terms of customer contracts, commodity contracts, and our business volume levels. Our operating activities may require additional cash in the future from our debt facilities and/or equity financings depending on the level of our operations.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $506,000 and $301,000, respectively, primarily from costs related to software development and purchases of property and equipment. The increase in cash used in 2020 was primarily due to an increase in purchases of property and equipment, which was partially offset by a decline in capitalized software development in 2020 compared with 2019.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily from $3.0 million net proceeds from the sale of Common Stock in a registered direct offering that closed on August 7, 2020, partially offset by net repayments of $540,000 on our ABL Facilities and $1.1 million debt issuance costs related to the ABL Facility and the Credit Agreement with Monroe Capital. See Note 13 to our consolidated financial statements for further discussion regarding the registered direct offering. Net cash used in financing activities was $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily from net
repayments of $754,000 on our prior credit facility under the Citizens Bank Loan Agreement. See Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements for a discussion of the ABL Facility, the repayment of the Citizens Bank Loan Agreement, and the Credit Agreement with Monroe Capital.
Inflation
We do not believe that inflation had a material impact on us for the years ended December 31, 2020 or 2019.
Critical Accounting Estimates and Policies
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to areas that require a significant level of judgment or are otherwise subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. These areas include carrying amounts of accounts receivable, goodwill and other intangible assets, stock-based compensation expense, deferred taxes and the fair value of assets and liabilities acquired in asset acquisitions. We base our estimates on historical experience, our observance of trends in particular areas, and information or valuations and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances and which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that may not be readily apparent from other sources. Actual amounts could differ significantly from amounts previously estimated.
We believe that of our significant accounting policies, the following may involve a higher degree of judgment and complexity.
Collectability of Accounts Receivable
Our accounts receivable consists primarily of amounts due from customers for the performance of services, and we record the amount net of an allowance for doubtful accounts. To record our accounts receivable at their net realizable value, we assess their collectability, which requires a considerable amount of judgment. We perform a detailed analysis of the aging of our receivables, the credit worthiness of our customers, our historical bad debts, and other adjustments. If economic, industry, or customer specific business trends worsen, we increase the allowance for uncollectible accounts by recording additional expense in the period in which we become aware of the new conditions.
Impairment of Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
In accordance with ASC Topic 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other, we perform goodwill impairment testing at least annually during the third quarter, unless indicators of impairment exist in interim periods. Our test of goodwill impairment included assessing qualitative factors and the use of judgment in evaluating economic conditions, industry and market conditions, cost factors, and entity-specific events, as well as overall financial performance. The impairment test for goodwill compares the estimated fair value of a reporting unit with goodwill to its carrying value. If the carrying amount of a reporting unit’s goodwill exceeds the fair value of its goodwill, we recognize an impairment loss equal to the excess, not to exceed the total amount of recorded goodwill.
In addition to the required goodwill impairment analysis, we also review the recoverability of our net intangible assets with finite lives when an indicator of impairment exists. Based on our analysis of estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to result from the use of these net intangibles with finite lives, we determine if we will recover their carrying values as of the test date. If not recoverable, we record an impairment charge.
We performed our most recent goodwill impairment analysis in the third quarter of 2020, utilizing an income approach with no impairment recorded. We believe that the discounted cash flow method best captures the significant value-creating activities we are undertaking. The primary assumptions in our income approach included estimating cash flows and projections. We determined that the fair value of our goodwill exceeded our carrying value, and consequently, no impairment was deemed to have occurred. However, a prolonged period of declining gross margins or a significant decrease in our anticipated revenue growth could result in the write-off of a portion or all of our goodwill and other intangible assets in future periods.
Stock Options
We estimate the fair value of stock options using the Black-Scholes-Merton valuation model. Significant assumptions used in the calculation were determined as follows:
•
We determine the expected term under the simplified method using an average of the contractual term and vesting period of the award as appropriate statistical data required to properly estimate the expected term was not available;
•
We measure the expected volatility using the historical daily changes in the market price of our Common Stock; and
•
We approximate the risk-free interest rate using the implied yield on zero-coupon U.S. Treasury bonds with a remaining maturity equal to the expected term of the awards.
Accounting for Income Taxes
We use the asset and liability method to account for income taxes. We use significant judgment in determining the provision for income taxes, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and any valuation allowance recorded against net deferred tax assets. We then assess the likelihood that deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income, and to the extent that recovery is not likely or there is insufficient operating history, we establish a valuation allowance. To the extent we establish or increase a valuation allowance in a period, we include an adjustment within the tax provision of our consolidated statements of operations. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had established a full valuation allowance for all deferred tax assets.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we did not recognize any assets or liabilities relative to uncertain tax positions, nor do we anticipate any significant unrecognized tax benefits will be recorded during the next 12 months. We recognize any interest or penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense. Since there are no unrecognized tax benefits as a result of tax positions taken, there are no accrued penalties or interest.
Business Combinations
We account for acquisitions in accordance with ASC Topic 805, Business Combinations. In purchase accounting, identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed are recognized at their estimated fair values at the acquisition date, and any remaining purchase price is recorded as goodwill. In determining the fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, we make significant estimates and assumptions, particularly with respect to long-lived tangible and intangible assets. Critical estimates used in valuing tangible and intangible assets include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows, discount rates, market prices and asset lives.
Our consolidated financial statements include the results of operations from the date of the acquisition.
We expense all acquisition-related costs as incurred in selling, general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statements of operations.
Financial Instruments
Our financial instruments consist of cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, accounts payable, accrued liabilities, deferred revenue, and notes payable. We do not believe that we are exposed to significant interest, currency, or credit risks arising from these financial instruments. The fair values of these financial instruments approximate their carrying values using Level 3 inputs, based on their short maturities or, for long-term portions of notes payable, based on borrowing rates currently available to us for loans with similar terms and maturities.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet debt or similar obligations. We have no transactions or obligations with related parties that are not disclosed, consolidated into, or reflected in our reported results of operations or financial position. We do not guarantee any third-party debt.