ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with, and is qualified in its entirety by reference to, our audited consolidated financial statements, including the notes thereto, set forth in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
OVERVIEW
Company
Qorvo® is a leader in the development and commercialization of technologies and products for wireless and wired connectivity. We combine highly differentiated technologies, systems-level expertise and manufacturing scale to serve a diverse set of customers a broad portfolio of innovative solutions that enable a more connected world.
The COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting economic downturn are affecting business conditions in our industry. During fiscal 2021, we did not encounter material disruptions to our global supply chain or operations, and we believe that our cash on hand, cash flow from operations and availability under our revolving credit facility provide us with sufficient liquidity. The duration, severity and future impact of the COVID-19 pandemic remains uncertain and may result in significant disruptions to our operations, including our supply chain, and may negatively impact our financial condition. We will continue to monitor the implications of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, as well as on our customers' and suppliers' businesses.
As always, we are committed to protecting the health and safety of our employees in all locations. We implemented multiple protocols in our facilities worldwide, including increased cleaning and sanitation procedures, pre-shift temperature screenings, and enhanced use of personal protective equipment. In addition, we have taken steps to effectively implement social distancing, including rotating shifts and remote-work options whenever possible.
Business Segments
We design, develop, manufacture and market our products to U.S. and international OEMs and ODMs in two operating segments, which are also our reportable segments: Mobile Products ("MP") and Infrastructure and Defense Products ("IDP").
MP is a global supplier of cellular, UWB and Wi-Fi solutions for a variety of applications, including smartphones, wearables, laptops, tablets and IoT.
IDP is a global supplier of RF, SoC and power management solutions for applications in wireless infrastructure, defense, Wi-Fi, smart home, automotive and IoT.
These business segments are based on the organizational structure and information reviewed by our Chief Executive Officer, who is our chief operating decision maker ("CODM") and are managed separately based on the end markets and applications they support. The CODM allocates resources and evaluates the performance of each reportable segment primarily based on operating income. For financial information about the results of our reportable operating segments for each of the last three fiscal years, refer to Note 17 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Fiscal 2021 Financial Highlights
•Revenue increased 24.0% in fiscal 2021 to $4,015.3 million, compared to $3,239.1 million in fiscal 2020, driven primarily by higher demand for our 5G mobile solutions, 5G base station products and Wi-Fi products, partially offset by lower shipments of our mobile products to Huawei.
•Gross margin for fiscal 2021 was 46.9%, compared to 40.8% in fiscal 2020, primarily due to increased volume, improved mix, and higher factory utilization associated with the ramp of 5G, Wi-Fi 6, and other products. Productivity and lower inventory charges also contributed to gross margin expansion, partially offset by more moderate price effects.
•Operating income was $906.6 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $423.2 million in fiscal 2020. This increase was primarily due to higher revenue and higher gross margin, partially offset by higher operating expenses. Operating expenses increased primarily due to higher personnel costs and increased product development spend, partially offset by lower acquisition and integration related expenses and lower travel expense.
•Net income per diluted share was $6.32 for fiscal 2021, compared to net income per diluted share of $2.80 for fiscal 2020.
•Cash flow from operations was $1,301.9 million for fiscal 2021, compared to $945.6 million for fiscal 2020. This year-over-year increase was primarily due to increased profitability, partially offset by changes in working capital driven by accounts receivable.
•Capital expenditures were $187.0 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $164.1 million in fiscal 2020. Our capital expenditures in fiscal 2021 included investments in premium filter capacity.
•We completed the acquisition of 7Hugs Labs S.A.S. ("7Hugs") for a total purchase price of $48.7 million, including cash acquired of $1.0 million.
•We issued an additional $300.0 million aggregate principal amount of the 2029 Notes.
•We issued $700.0 million aggregate principal amount of the 2031 Notes.
•We entered into a five-year unsecured credit facility, which includes a senior term loan (the "2020 Term Loan") of up to $200.0 million. On the closing date, we drew the full amount of the 2020 Term Loan and
concurrently repaid the $97.5 million remaining principal balance of the term loan under a previous credit facility.
•We redeemed all of our 5.50% senior notes due July 15, 2026 (the "2026 Notes") at a redemption price equal to 106.363% of the $900.0 million outstanding principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest. In connection with the redemption, we recognized a loss on debt extinguishment of $61.0 million.
•We redeemed the remaining 7.00% senior notes due December 1, 2025 (the "2025 Notes") at a redemption price equal to 103.50% of the $23.4 million outstanding principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest. In connection with the redemption, we recognized a loss on debt extinguishment of $1.0 million.
•We repurchased approximately 3.6 million shares of our common stock for approximately $515.1 million.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Consolidated
The table below presents a summary of our results of operations for fiscal years 2021 and 2020 along with a year-over-year comparison. See Part II, Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended March 28, 2020, filed with the SEC on May 20, 2020, which is incorporated by reference herein, for a summary of our results of operations for the fiscal year ended March 30, 2019 along with a year-over-year comparison between fiscal years 2020 and 2019.
Revenue
Revenue increased primarily due to higher demand for our 5G mobile solutions, 5G base station products and Wi-Fi products, partially offset by lower shipments of our mobile products to Huawei.
We provided our products to our largest end customer (Apple) through sales to multiple contract manufacturers, which in the aggregate accounted for 30% and 33% of total revenue in fiscal years 2021 and 2020, respectively. Huawei accounted for less than 5% of total revenue in fiscal 2021 and 10% of total revenue in fiscal 2020. These customers primarily purchase RF solutions for a variety of mobile devices. See Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
In May 2019, the Bureau of Industry and Security of the U.S. Department of Commerce ("Commerce") added Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd. and over 100 of its affiliates to the Entity List maintained by Commerce, which caused us to temporarily suspend the export, reexport, and transfer of products to Huawei. In August 2020, Commerce issued a final rule adding additional Huawei non-U.S. affiliates to the Entity List, confirming the expiration of a temporary general license applicable to Huawei, and amending the foreign-produced direct product rule in a manner that represents a significant expansion of its application to Huawei. While we were able to ship certain products to Huawei in fiscal years 2021 and 2020, trade restrictions and our ability to secure any required licenses will continue to impact sales to Huawei.
International shipments amounted to $2,384.2 million in fiscal 2021 (approximately 59% of revenue) compared to $1,770.8 million in fiscal 2020 (approximately 55% of revenue). Shipments to Asia totaled $2,191.2 million in
fiscal 2021 (approximately 55% of revenue) compared to $1,616.4 million in fiscal 2020 (approximately 50% of revenue).
Gross Margin
Gross margin increased primarily due to increased volume, improved mix, and higher factory utilization associated with the ramp of 5G, Wi-Fi 6, and other products. Productivity and lower inventory charges also contributed to gross margin expansion, partially offset by more moderate price effects.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
R&D spending increased primarily due to higher personnel costs and increased product development spend, partially offset by lower travel expense.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expense increased primarily due to higher personnel and commission expenses, partially offset by lower travel expense and lower intangible amortization expense.
Other Operating Expense
In fiscal 2021, we recognized $27.3 million of post-combination compensation expense as well as other acquisition and integration related costs. In fiscal 2021, we also recorded restructuring related charges of $2.7 million related to employee termination benefits and other exit costs as a result of restructuring actions.
In fiscal 2020, we recognized $50.9 million of post-combination compensation expense as well as other acquisition and integration related costs. In fiscal 2020, we also recorded restructuring related charges of $13.4 million related to employee termination benefits and other exit costs as a result of restructuring actions.
See Note 5 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information on business acquisitions and see Note 12 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information on restructuring actions.
Operating Segments
Mobile Products
MP revenue increased primarily due to higher demand for our 5G mobile solutions and Wi-Fi products, partially offset by lower shipments of our mobile products to Huawei.
MP operating income increased primarily due to increased volume, improved mix, and higher factory utilization and productivity associated with the ramp of 5G mobile solutions and Wi-Fi products, partially offset by more moderate price effects and higher operating expenses. Operating expenses increased primarily due to higher personnel costs and increased product development spend, partially offset by lower travel expense.
Infrastructure and Defense Products
IDP revenue increased primarily due to higher demand for our 5G base station products, Wi-Fi products and defense and aerospace products.
IDP operating income increased primarily due to increased revenue, higher factory utilization and lower inventory adjustments, partially offset by unfavorable changes in product mix and increased operating expenses. Operating expenses increased primarily due to higher personnel costs and increased product development spend, partially offset by lower travel expense.
See Note 17 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a reconciliation of segment operating income to the consolidated operating income for fiscal years 2021, 2020 and 2019.
INTEREST, OTHER (EXPENSE) INCOME AND INCOME TAXES
Interest expense
We recognized $79.3 million of interest expense in fiscal 2021 primarily related to the 2026 Notes, the 2029 Notes and the 2031 Notes. We recognized $66.0 million of interest expense in fiscal 2020 primarily related to the 2026 Notes and the 2029 Notes. Interest expense in the preceding table for fiscal years 2021 and 2020 is net of capitalized interest of $4.1 million and $5.6 million, respectively.
Other (expense) income, net
During fiscal 2021, we recognized a loss on debt extinguishment of $62.0 million. See Note 9 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding our debt extinguishment activity. During fiscal 2021, we recorded $21.5 million of income based on our share of the earnings from our equity method investments.
During fiscal 2020, we recorded a gain of $43.0 million related to the remeasurement of our previously held equity interest in Cavendish Kinetics Limited ("Cavendish") in connection with our purchase of the remaining issued and outstanding capital of the entity. See Note 5 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding the Cavendish acquisition. During fiscal 2020, we recorded an impairment of $18.3 million on an equity investment without a readily determinable fair value. See Note 7 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding our investments.
Income tax expense
Income tax expense for fiscal 2021 was $73.8 million. This was primarily comprised of tax expense related to domestic and international operations generating pre-tax book income, the impact of the Tax Act's GILTI provisions, taxes on certain foreign earnings which are not permanently reinvested, and an increase in gross unrecognized tax benefits, offset by a tax benefit related to domestic and international operations generating pre-tax book losses and domestic tax credits. For fiscal 2021, this resulted in an annual effective tax rate of 9.1%.
Income tax expense for fiscal 2020 was $60.8 million. This was primarily comprised of tax expense related to international operations generating pre-tax book income, the impact of the Tax Act's GILTI provisions, the reversal of the permanent reinvestment assertion with regards to certain unrepatriated foreign earnings, and an increase in gross unrecognized tax benefits, offset by a tax benefit related to international operations generating pre-tax book losses and domestic tax credits. For fiscal 2020, this resulted in an annual effective tax rate of 15.4%.
A valuation allowance has been established against deferred tax assets in the taxing jurisdictions where, based upon the positive and negative evidence available, it is more likely than not that the related deferred tax assets will not be realized. Realization is dependent upon generating future income in the taxing jurisdictions in which the operating loss carryovers, credit carryovers, depreciable tax basis, and other deferred tax assets exist. Management reevaluates the ability to realize the benefit of these deferred tax assets on a quarterly basis. As of the end of fiscal years 2021 and 2020, the valuation allowance against domestic and foreign deferred tax assets was $36.5 million and $35.3 million, respectively.
See Note 13 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding income taxes.
STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION
Under Financial Accounting Standards Board Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") 718, "Compensation - Stock Compensation," stock-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date, based on the estimated fair value of the award using an option pricing model for stock options (Black-Scholes) and market price for restricted stock units, and is recognized as expense over the employee's requisite service period.
As of April 3, 2021, total remaining unearned compensation cost related to unvested restricted stock units was $103.7 million, which will be amortized over the weighted-average remaining service period of approximately 1.2 years.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Cash generated by operations is our primary source of liquidity. As of April 3, 2021, we had working capital of approximately $1,802.2 million, including $1,397.9 million in cash and cash equivalents, compared to working capital of $1,151.5 million, including $714.9 million in cash and cash equivalents, as of March 28, 2020.
Our $1,397.9 million of total cash and cash equivalents as of April 3, 2021, includes approximately $1,070.3 million held by our foreign subsidiaries, of which $954.8 million is held by Qorvo International Pte. Ltd. in Singapore. If the undistributed earnings of our foreign subsidiaries are needed in the U.S., we may be required to pay state income and/or foreign local withholding taxes to repatriate these earnings.
At this time, we are not able to estimate the long-term impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, financial condition, results of operations, and/or cash flow. We believe we have sufficient liquidity available from operating cash flow, cash on hand, and availability under our revolving credit facility. However, as the situation continues to evolve, we will assess our liquidity needs, evaluate available alternatives and take appropriate actions.
Credit Agreement
On September 29, 2020, we and certain of our U.S. subsidiaries (the “Guarantors”) entered into a five-year unsecured senior credit facility pursuant to a credit agreement (the “2020 Credit Agreement”) with Bank of America, N.A. acting as administrative agent and a syndicate of lenders. The 2020 Credit Agreement amended and restated our previous credit agreement dated as of December 5, 2017 (the “2017 Credit Agreement”). The 2020 Credit Agreement includes the 2020 Term Loan and a senior revolving line of credit (the “Revolving Facility”) of up to $300.0 million (collectively the “Credit Facility”).
During fiscal 2021, we made principal payments totaling $2.5 million on the term loan under the 2017 Credit Agreement (the “2017 Term Loan”). On the closing date of the 2020 Credit Agreement, we repaid the remaining principal balance of $97.5 million on the 2017 Term Loan and concurrently drew $200.0 million under the 2020 Term Loan.
During fiscal 2021, we made principal payments totaling $2.5 million on the 2020 Term Loan. Interest paid on the 2017 Term Loan and 2020 Term Loan during fiscal years 2021 and 2020 was $2.1 million and $2.4 million, respectively.
Pursuant to the 2020 Credit Agreement, we may request one or more additional tranches of term loans or increases to the Revolving Facility, up to an aggregate of $500.0 million and subject to securing additional funding commitments from the existing or new lenders. The Revolving Facility includes a $25.0 million sublimit for the issuance of standby letters of credit and a $10.0 million sublimit for swing line loans. The Credit Facility is available to finance working capital, capital expenditures and other general corporate purposes. Outstanding amounts are due in full on the maturity date of September 29, 2025, subject to scheduled amortization of the 2020 Term Loan principal prior to the maturity date as set forth in the 2020 Credit Agreement. During fiscal 2021, there were no borrowings under the Revolving Facility.
See Note 9 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information about the Credit Agreement, including applicable interest rates and financial covenants. As of April 3, 2021, we were in compliance with all the financial covenants under the Credit Agreement.
Stock Repurchases
On October 31, 2019, we announced that our Board of Directors authorized a share repurchase program to repurchase up to $1.0 billion of our outstanding common stock, which included approximately $117.0 million authorized under the prior program which was terminated concurrent with this authorization. Under this program, share repurchases were made in accordance with applicable securities laws on the open market or in privately negotiated transactions. The number and timing of shares repurchased depended on general market conditions, regulatory requirements, alternative investment opportunities and other considerations. The program did not require us to repurchase a minimum number of shares and did not have a fixed term.
We repurchased 3.6 million shares, 6.4 million shares and 9.1 million shares of our common stock during fiscal years 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, at an aggregate cost of $515.1 million, $515.1 million and $638.1 million, respectively. On May 5, 2021, we announced that our Board of Directors authorized a new share repurchase program. See Note 18 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of our new repurchase program.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Operating activities in fiscal 2021 generated cash of $1,301.9 million, compared to $945.6 million in fiscal 2020, primarily due to increased profitability, partially offset by changes in working capital driven by accounts receivable.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities in fiscal 2021 was $218.7 million, compared to $1,105.7 million in fiscal 2020. During fiscal 2021, we acquired 7Hugs for $47.7 million and during fiscal 2020, we acquired Active-Semi International, Inc., Cavendish, Custom MMIC and Decawave Limited, which resulted in net cash outflows of $946.0 million. See Note 5 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities in fiscal 2021 was $401.9 million, compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $165.6 million in fiscal 2020. This decrease in cash flows was due primarily to our debt financing activity. See Note 9 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Our future capital requirements may differ materially from those currently anticipated and will depend on many factors, including market acceptance of and demand for our products, acquisition opportunities, technological advances and our relationships with suppliers and customers. Based on current and projected levels of cash flow from operations, coupled with our existing cash and cash equivalents and our Credit Facility, we believe that we have sufficient liquidity to meet both our short-term and long-term cash requirements. However, if there is a significant decrease in demand for our products, or if our revenue grows faster than we anticipate, operating cash
flows may be insufficient to meet our needs. If existing resources and cash from operations are not sufficient to meet our future requirements or if we perceive conditions to be favorable, we may seek additional debt or equity financing. Additional equity or debt financing could be dilutive to holders of our common stock. Further, we cannot be sure that additional equity or debt financing, if required, will be available on favorable terms, if at all.
IMPACT OF INFLATION
We do not believe that the effects of inflation had a significant impact on our revenue or operating income during fiscal years 2021 and 2020. However, there can be no assurance that our business will not be affected by inflation in the future.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
As of April 3, 2021, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of SEC Regulation S-K.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
The following table summarizes our significant contractual obligations and commitments (in thousands) as of April 3, 2021, and the effect such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods.
(1) Capital commitments represent obligations for the purchase of property and equipment, a majority of which are not recorded as liabilities on our Consolidated Balance Sheet because we had not received the related goods or services as of April 3, 2021.
(2) Purchase obligations represent payments due related to the purchase of materials and manufacturing services, a majority of which are not recorded as liabilities on our Consolidated Balance Sheet because we had not received the related goods or services as of April 3, 2021.
(3) Long-term debt obligations represent future cash payments of principal and interest over the life of the 2029 Notes, the 2031 Notes and the 2020 Term Loan, including anticipated interest payments not recorded as liabilities on our Consolidated Balance Sheet as of April 3, 2021. Debt obligations are classified based on their stated maturity date, and any future redemptions would impact our cash payments. See Note 9 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Other Contractual Obligations
As of April 3, 2021, in addition to the amounts shown in the contractual obligations table above, we have $140.3 million of unrecognized income tax benefits and accrued interest and penalties, of which $21.2 million has been recorded as a liability. We are uncertain as to if, or when, such amounts may be settled. We also have an obligation related to the Transitional Repatriation Tax. We have elected to pay the remaining obligation of $5.4 million, which has been recorded as a liability, over four years. See Note 13 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
As discussed in Note 10 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, we have two pension plans in Germany with a combined benefit obligation of approximately $14.0 million as of April 3, 2021. Pension benefit payments are not included in the schedule above due to the uncertainty regarding the amount and timing of any future cash outflows. Pension benefit payments were approximately $0.3 million in fiscal 2021 and are expected to be approximately $0.3 million in fiscal 2022.
We also offer a non-qualified deferred compensation plan to eligible participants to defer and invest a specified percentage of their cash compensation. We record an obligation under the plan for the distributions to be made to participants upon certain triggering events. Although participants are required to make distribution elections at the time of enrollment, the amount and timing of any future cash outflows is uncertain until such triggering events occur. The total deferred compensation obligation as of April 3, 2021 was $32.8 million, of which $1.2 million is
estimated to be paid out in fiscal 2022. See Note 10 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
SUPPLEMENTAL PARENT AND GUARANTOR FINANCIAL INFORMATION
In accordance with the Indentures, our obligations under the 2029 Notes and the 2031 Notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed on a joint and several unsecured basis by the Guarantors, which are listed on Exhibit 22 to this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Each Guarantor is 100% owned, directly or indirectly, by Qorvo, Inc. ("Parent"). A Guarantor can be released in certain customary circumstances. Our other U.S. subsidiaries and our non-U.S. subsidiaries do not guarantee the 2029 Notes and the 2031 Notes (such subsidiaries are referred to as the "Non-Guarantors").
The following presents summarized financial information for the Parent and the Guarantors on a combined basis as of and for the periods indicated, after eliminating (i) intercompany transactions and balances among the Parent and Guarantors, and (ii) equity earnings from, and investments in, any Non-Guarantor. The summarized financial information may not necessarily be indicative of the financial position and results of operations had the combined Parent and Guarantors operated independently from the Non-Guarantors.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The preparation of consolidated financial statements requires management to use judgment and estimates. The level of uncertainty in estimates and assumptions increases with the length of time until the underlying transactions are completed. Actual results could differ from those estimates. The accounting policies that are most critical in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements are those that are both important to the presentation of our financial condition and results of operations and require significant judgment and estimates on the part of management. Our critical accounting policies are reviewed periodically with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors. We also have other policies that we consider key accounting policies; however, these policies typically do not require us to make estimates or judgments that are difficult or subjective. See Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Inventory Reserves. The valuation of inventory requires us to estimate obsolete or excess inventory. The determination of obsolete or excess inventory requires us to estimate the future demand for our products
within specific time horizons, generally 12 to 24 months. The estimates of future demand that we use in the valuation of inventory reserves are the same as those used in our revenue forecasts and are also consistent with the estimates used in our manufacturing plans to enable consistency between inventory valuations and build decisions. Product-specific facts and circumstances reviewed in the inventory valuation process include a review of the customer base, market conditions, and customer acceptance of our products and technologies, as well as an assessment of the selling price in relation to the product cost.
Historically, inventory reserves have fluctuated as new technologies have been introduced and customers’ demand has shifted. Inventory reserves had an impact on margins of less than 2% in fiscal years 2021 and 2020.
Property and Equipment. Periodically, we evaluate the period over which we expect to recover the economic value of our property and equipment, considering factors such as changes in machinery and equipment technology, our ability to re-use equipment across generations of process technology and historical usage trends. When we determine that the useful lives of assets are shorter or longer than we had originally estimated, we adjust the rate of depreciation to reflect the revised useful lives of the assets.
We assess property and equipment for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the assets or the asset group may not be recoverable. Factors that we consider in deciding when to perform an impairment review include an adverse change in our use of the assets or an expectation that the assets will be sold or otherwise disposed. We assess the recoverability of the assets held and used by comparing the projected undiscounted net cash flows associated with the related asset or group of assets over their remaining estimated useful lives against their respective carrying amounts. Assets identified as "held for sale" are recorded at the lesser of their carrying value or their fair market value less costs to sell. Impairment, if any, is based on the excess of the carrying amount over the fair value of those assets. The process of evaluating property and equipment for impairment is highly subjective and requires significant judgment as we are required to make assumptions about items such as future demand for our products and industry trends.
Business Acquisitions. We allocate the fair value of the purchase price to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair value. The excess of the purchase price over the fair values of the identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded to goodwill. Goodwill is assigned to our reporting unit that is expected to benefit from the synergies of the business combination.
A number of assumptions, estimates and judgments are used in determining the fair value of acquired assets and liabilities, particularly with respect to the intangible assets acquired. The valuation of intangible assets requires our use of valuation techniques such as the income approach. The income approach includes management’s estimation of future cash flows (including expected revenue growth rates and profitability), the underlying product or technology life cycles and the discount rates applied to future cash flows.
Judgment is also required in estimating the fair values of deferred tax assets and liabilities, uncertain tax positions and tax-related valuation allowances, which are initially estimated as of the acquisition date, as well as inventory, property and equipment, pre-existing liabilities or legal claims, deferred revenue and contingent consideration, each as may be applicable.
While we use our best estimates and assumptions to accurately value assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date as well as contingent consideration, where applicable, our estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. As a result, during the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed with the corresponding offset to goodwill. After the measurement period, any purchase price adjustments are recognized in our Consolidated Statements of Income.
Goodwill. We perform an annual impairment assessment of goodwill at the reporting unit level on the first day of the fourth quarter in each fiscal year, or more frequently if indicators of potential impairment exist. In accordance with ASC 350, we may assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, including goodwill.
In performing a qualitative assessment, we consider (i) our overall historical and projected future operating results, (ii) if there was a significant decline in our stock price for a sustained period, (iii) if there was a significant change in our market capitalization relative to our net book value, and (iv) if there was a prolonged or more significant slowdown in the worldwide economy of the semiconductor industry, as well as other relevant events and factors affecting the reporting unit. If we assess these qualitative factors and conclude that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, or if we decide not to perform a qualitative assessment, then a quantitative impairment test is performed.
In fiscal years 2021 and 2019, we completed qualitative assessments and concluded that based on the relevant facts and circumstances, it was more likely than not that each reporting unit’s fair value exceeded its related carrying value and no further impairment testing was required.
In fiscal 2020, we performed a quantitative impairment test. Our quantitative impairment test considered both the income approach and the market approach to estimate each reporting unit’s fair value. The resulting fair value, based on the income and market approaches, was then compared to the carrying value to determine if impairment is necessary. As a result of the quantitative analysis performed, it was determined that the fair value of each of our reporting units substantially exceeded their carrying values.
Identified Intangible Assets. We amortize finite-lived intangible assets (including developed technology, customer relationships, technology licenses, backlog and trade names) over their estimated useful life. In-process research and development ("IPRD") assets represent the fair value of incomplete R&D projects that had not reached technological feasibility as of the date of the acquisition; initially, these are classified as IPRD and are not subject to amortization. Upon completion of development, IPRD assets are transferred to developed technology and are amortized over their useful lives. The asset balances relating to abandoned projects are impaired and expensed to R&D.
We perform a quarterly review of significant intangible assets to determine whether facts and circumstances (including external factors such as industry and economic trends and internal factors such as changes in our business strategy and forecasts) indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable. If such facts and circumstances exist, we assess the recoverability of identified intangible assets by comparing the projected undiscounted net cash flows associated with the related asset or group of assets over their remaining lives against their respective carrying amounts. Impairments, if any, are based on the excess of the carrying amounts over the fair value of those assets and occur in the period in which the impairment determination was made.
Revenue Recognition. We generate revenue primarily from the sale of semiconductor products, either directly to a customer or to a distributor, or at completion of a consignment process. Revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. A majority of our revenue is recognized at a point in time, either on shipment or delivery of the product, depending on individual customer terms and conditions. Revenue from sales to our distributors is recognized upon shipment of the product to the distributors (sell-in). Revenue is recognized from our consignment programs at a point in time when the products are pulled from consignment inventory by the customer. Revenue recognized for products and services over-time is immaterial (less than 2% of overall revenue). We apply a five-step approach as defined in ASC 606, "Revenue from Contracts with Customers," in determining the amount and timing of revenue to be recognized: (1) identifying the contract with a customer; (2) identifying the performance obligations in the contract; (3) determining the transaction price; (4) allocating the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (5) recognizing revenue when the corresponding performance obligation is satisfied.
Sales agreements are in place with certain customers and contain terms and conditions with respect to payment, delivery, warranty and supply, but typically do not require minimum purchase commitments. In the absence of a sales agreement, our standard terms and conditions apply. We consider a customer's purchase order, which is governed by a sales agreement or our standard terms and conditions, to be the contract with the customer.
Our pricing terms are negotiated independently, on a stand-alone basis. In determining the transaction price, we evaluate whether the price is subject to a refund or adjustment to determine the net consideration to which we expect to be entitled. Variable consideration in the form of rebate programs is offered to certain customers, including distributors, and represents less than 7% of net revenue. We determine variable consideration by estimating the most likely amount of consideration we expect to receive from the customer. Our terms and conditions do not give our customers a right of return associated with the original sale of our products. However, we may authorize sales returns under certain circumstances, which include courtesy returns and like-kind exchanges. We reduce revenue and record reserves for product returns and allowances, rebate programs and scrap allowance based on historical experience or specific identification depending on the contractual terms of the arrangement.
Our accounts receivable balance is from contracts with customers and represents our unconditional right to receive consideration from our customers. Payments are due upon completion of the performance obligation and subsequent invoicing. Substantially all payments are collected within our standard terms, which do not include any financing components. To date, there have been no material impairment losses on accounts receivable. Contract assets and contract liabilities recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheets were immaterial as of April 3, 2021 and March 28, 2020.
We invoice customers upon shipment and recognize revenues in accordance with delivery terms. As of April 3, 2021, we had $87.5 million in remaining unsatisfied performance obligations with an original duration greater than one year, of which the majority is expected to be recognized as income over the next 12 months.
We include shipping charges billed to customers in "Revenue" and include the related shipping costs in "Cost of goods sold" in the Consolidated Statements of Income. Taxes assessed by government authorities on revenue-producing transactions, including tariffs, value-added and excise taxes, are excluded from revenue in the Consolidated Statements of Income.
We incur commission expense that is incremental to obtaining contracts with customers. Sales commissions (which are recorded in the "Selling, general and administrative" expense line item in the Consolidated Statements of Income) are expensed when incurred because such commissions are not owed until the performance obligation is satisfied, which coincides with the end of the contract term, and therefore no remaining period exists over which to amortize the commissions.
Income Taxes. In determining income for financial statement purposes, we must make certain estimates and judgments in the calculation of tax expense, the resultant tax liabilities, and the recoverability of deferred tax assets that arise from temporary differences between the tax and financial statement recognition of revenue and expense.
As part of our financial process, we assess on a tax jurisdictional basis the likelihood that our deferred tax assets can be recovered. If recovery is not more likely than not (a likelihood of less than 50 percent), the provision for taxes must be increased by recording a reserve in the form of a valuation allowance for the deferred tax assets that are estimated not to ultimately be recoverable. In this process, certain relevant criteria are evaluated including: the amount of income or loss in prior years, the existence of deferred tax liabilities that can be used to absorb deferred tax assets, the taxable income in prior carryback years that can be used to absorb net operating losses and credit carrybacks, future expected taxable income, and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. Changes in taxable income, market conditions, U.S. or international tax laws, and other factors may change our judgment regarding whether we will be able to realize the deferred tax assets. These changes, if any, may require material adjustments to the net deferred tax assets and an accompanying reduction or increase in income tax expense which will result in a corresponding increase or decrease in net income in the period when such determinations are made. See Note 13 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding changes in the valuation allowance and net deferred tax assets.
As part of our financial process, we also assess the likelihood that our tax reporting positions will ultimately be sustained. To the extent it is determined it is more likely than not (a likelihood of more than 50 percent) that some portion or all of a tax reporting position will ultimately not be recognized and
sustained, a provision for unrecognized tax benefit is provided by either reducing the applicable deferred tax asset or accruing an income tax liability. Our judgment regarding the sustainability of our tax reporting positions may change in the future due to changes in U.S. or international tax laws and other factors. These changes, if any, may require material adjustments to the related deferred tax assets or accrued income tax liabilities and an accompanying reduction or increase in income tax expense which will result in a corresponding increase or decrease in net income in the period when such determinations are made. See Note 13 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding our uncertain tax positions and the amount of unrecognized tax benefits.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
For a description of accounting pronouncements recently adopted, see Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.