Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
On November 25, 2020, Kensington acquired us. The Business Combination was accounted for as a reverse recapitalization in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Under this method of accounting, Kensington was treated as the “acquired” company for financial reporting purposes. Except as otherwise provided herein, our financial statement presentation includes (1) the results of Legacy QuantumScape and its consolidated subsidiaries as our accounting predecessor for periods prior to the completion of the Business Combination, and (2) the results of the Company (including the consolidation of Legacy QuantumScape and its subsidiaries) for periods after the completion of the Business Combination.
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statement the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Report. This discussion may contain forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth in the section titled “Risk Factors” as set forth in this Report. Unless the context otherwise requires, references in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” to “Legacy QuantumScape”, “the Company”, “we”, “us” and “our” refer to the business and operations of Legacy QuantumScape and its consolidated subsidiaries prior to the Business Combination and to QuantumScape Corporation and its consolidated subsidiaries, following the closing of the Business Combination.
Overview
We are developing next generation battery technology for electric vehicles (“EVs”) and other applications. We believe that our technology will enable a new category of battery that meets the requirements for broader market adoption. The lithium-metal solid-state battery technology that we are developing is being designed to offer greater energy density, longer life, faster charging, and greater safety when compared to today’s conventional lithium-ion batteries.
We are a development stage company with no revenue to date, have incurred a net loss of approximately $1,099.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and an accumulated deficit of approximately $1,395.8 million from our inception through December 31, 2020. A significant portion of the net loss incurred during the year ended December 31, 2020 is associated with the non-cash fair value adjustment of the Legacy QuantumScape preferred stock tranche liabilities of $999.9 million.
Key Trends, Opportunities and Uncertainties
We are pre-revenue company; we believe that our performance and future success depend on several factors that present significant opportunities for us but also pose significant risks and challenges, including those discussed below and in the section titled “Risk Factors” appearing elsewhere in this Report.
Product Development
We are developing our battery technology with the goal of enabling commercial production in 2024. We have validated capabilities of our solid-state separator and battery technology in single-layer solid-state cells. We are now working to develop multi-layer cells, to continue improving yield and performance and to optimize all components of the cell.
We have described our research and development programs to make further improvements to our battery technology, including improvements to battery performance and cost under the “Research and Development” section in Item 1 above. Major remaining development activities include, but are not limited to:
•
Multi-layering. To date, we have only produced single-layer solid-state cells at the commercially required size (70x85mm) and four-layer cells at a smaller size (30x30mm). In order to produce commercially-viable solid-state battery cells, we must produce battery cells which may require from several dozen to over one hundred layers, depending on our customers’ requirements. We will need to overcome the developmental challenges to stack these layers and implement the appropriate cell design for our solid-state battery cell.
•
Continued improvement in the solid-state separator. We are working to improve the reliability and performance of our solid-state separator, including decreasing the thickness.
•
Integration of advanced cathode materials. We benefit from industry cathode chemistry improvements and/or cost reduction. Our solid-state separator platform is being designed to enable some of the most promising next-generation cathode technologies, including high voltage or high capacity cathode active materials.
Our team of over 275 scientists, engineers, technicians, and other staff is highly motivated and committed to solving these challenges ahead. However, any delays in the completion of these tasks will require additional cash use and delay market entry. As we grow our team, size of engineering pilot line, and materials consumption, the rate of cash utilization as a function of time will also increase significantly.
Process Development
Our architecture depends on our proprietary solid-state ceramic separator which we will manufacture ourselves. Though our separator’s design is unique, its manufacturing relies on well-established, high-volume production processes currently deployed globally in other industries at large scale.
The solid-state separator is being designed to enable our ‘anode-free’ architecture. As manufactured, the cell has no anode; the lithium-metal anode is formed during the first charge of the cell; 100% of the lithium that forms the anode comes from the cathode material we purchase. Eliminating the anode bill of materials and associated manufacturing costs found in conventional lithium-ion cells could result in a meaningful cost of goods sold advantage for us. In addition, our solid-state battery cell is being designed to reduce the time and capital-intensity of the formation process step as compared to conventional lithium-ion manufacturing.
We are focused on both the continued expansion of the throughput and capability of our San Jose engineering line and QS-0 as well as the planning and execution of our initial Pilot Facility for our first commercial manufacturing facility.
Continued expansion of the throughput and capability of our San Jose engineering line and QS-0 serves two purposes. First, the engineering line and QS-0 provides a sufficient quantity of solid-state separators and cells for internal development and for customer sampling. And second, our San Jose engineering line provides the basis for continued manufacturing process development and helps inform tool selection and specifications for equipment for our Pilot Facility. Delays in the successful buildout of our San Jose engineering line may impact both our development and the Pilot Facility timelines.
Capturing our forecasted cost advantage at scale as compared to conventional lithium-ion cells will require our team to continue process development to achieve rates of throughput, use of electricity and consumables, yield, and rate of automation demonstrated of mature battery, battery material, and ceramic manufacturing processes. Notably, heat treatment of ceramic parts is a process step in ceramic manufacturing critical to both quality and product cost. We believe achieving required process cost advances is possible; our processes are designed around tools which are already used at scale in the battery or ceramics industries. In addition, we are investigating alternative processing methods that may further increase the capital efficiency of the process. However, delay or failure on these fronts, and in particular with respect to ceramic heat treatment, would result in a higher cost of goods sold, which may limit our ability to profitably sell our batteries.
Commercialization and Market Focus
As noted above, we will continue developing our battery technology with the goal of enabling commercial production in 2024; we have validated the performance capabilities of our solid-state separator and battery technology in single-layer solid-state cells at the commercially required size (70x85mm) and four-layer solid-state battery cells at a smaller size (30x30mm); and are now working to develop multi-layer cells at the commercially required size, to continue improving yield and performance and to optimize all components of the cell. We will continue to work to further develop and validate the volume manufacturing processes to enable high volume manufacturing and minimize manufacturing costs. We will continue to work on increasing the yield of our separators to reduce scrappage and to increase utilization of manufacturing tools. The funds available to us will enable us to expand and accelerate research and development activities and undertake additional initiatives. Finally, we will continue to use and expand on our engineering line in San Jose, California to prepare for high volume manufacturing and plan our first commercial production Pilot Facility through our joint venture partnership with Volkswagen, including the recently announced planned expansion into our QS-0 facility.
The joint venture partnership with Volkswagen is described in the section titled “Business” and the sub-section titled “Joint Venture Relationship” appearing elsewhere in this Report. The Pilot Facility to be built and run by QSV, the joint venture between us and Volkswagen and the 20GWh expansion of the Pilot Facility (the “20GWh Expansion Facility”) would represent a small fraction of Volkswagen’s demand for batteries and implies vehicle volumes under 2% of Volkswagen’s total production in 2019, assuming a 100KWh pack size. Our goal is to significantly expand the production capacity of the joint venture, in partnership with Volkswagen, to meet more of their projected demand. While we expect Volkswagen will be the first to commercialize vehicles using our battery technology, we intend to work closely with other automotive original equipment manufacturers (“OEMs”) to make our solid-state battery cells widely available over time. We are focused on automotive EV applications, which have the most stringent set of requirements for batteries. However, we recognize that our solid-state battery technology has applicability in other large and growing markets including stationary storage and consumer electronics such as smartphones and wearables.
Our technology enables a variety of business models. In addition to joint ventures, such as the one with Volkswagen, we may operate solely-owned manufacturing facilities or license technology to other manufacturers. Where appropriate, we may build and sell separators rather than complete battery cells. We intend to continue to invest in research and development to improve battery cell performance, improve manufacturing processes, and reduce cost.
Access to Capital
Following the Business Combination and assuming we experience no significant delays in the research and development of our solid-state battery cells, we believe that our cash resources are sufficient to fund our initial start of production, including our share of contributions to our Pilot Facility with Volkswagen. However, any delays could materially impact us.
Regulatory Landscape
We operate in an industry that is subject to many established environmental regulations, which have generally become more stringent over time, particularly in hazardous waste generation and disposal and pollution control. Regulations in our target markets include economic incentives to purchasers of EVs, tax credits for EV manufacturers, and economic penalties that may apply to a car manufacturer based on its fleet-wide emissions which may indirectly benefit us in that the regulations will expand the market size of EVs. While we expect environmental regulations to provide a tailwind to our growth, it is possible for certain regulations to result in margin pressures. Trade restrictions and tariffs, while historically minimal between the European Union and the United States where most of our production and sales are expected, are subject to unknown and unpredictable change that could impact our ability to meet projected sales or margins.
Basis of Presentation
We currently conduct our business through one operating segment. As a pre-revenue company with no commercial operations, our activities to date have been limited and were conducted primarily in the United States. Our historical results are reported under GAAP and in U.S. dollars. Upon commencement of commercial operations, we expect to expand our global operations substantially, including in the United States and the European Union, and as a result we expect our future results to be sensitive to foreign currency transaction and translation risks and other financial risks that are not reflected in our historical financial statements. As a result, we expect that the financial results we report for periods after we begin commercial operations will not be comparable to the financial results included in this Report.
Components of Results of Operations
We are a research and development stage company and our historical results may not be indicative of our future results for reasons that may be difficult to anticipate. Accordingly, the drivers of our future financial results, as well as the components of such results, may not be comparable to our historical or projected results of operations.
Research and Development Expense
To date, our research and development expenses have consisted primarily of personnel-related expenses for scientists, experienced engineers and technicians as well as costs associated with the expansion and ramp up of our engineering facility in San Jose, California, including the material and supplies to support the product development and process engineering efforts. As we ramp up our engineering operations to complete the development of our solid-state, lithium-metal batteries and required process engineering to meet automotive cost targets, we anticipate that research and development expenses will increase significantly for the foreseeable future as we expand our hiring of scientists, engineers, and technicians and continue to invest in additional plant and equipment for product development (e.g. multi-layer cell stacking, packaging engineering), building prototypes, and testing of battery cells as our team works to meet the full set of automotive product requirements.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expenses consist mainly of personnel-related expenses for our executive, sales and marketing and other administrative functions and expenses for director and officer insurance and outside professional services, including legal, accounting and other advisory services. We are rapidly expanding our personnel headcount, in anticipation of planning for and supporting the ramping up of commercial manufacturing operations and being a public company. Accordingly, we expect our general and administrative expenses to increase significantly in the near term and for the foreseeable future. Upon commencement of commercial operations, we also expect general and administrative expenses to include customer and sales support and advertising costs.
Other Income (Expense)
Our other income (expense) consists of interest income from marketable securities, sublease income, and interest expense related to fair value adjustments for our convertible preferred stock warrants, and other expense related to fair value adjustment for the convertible preferred stock tranche liabilities. A portion of the convertible preferred stock tranche liabilities were settled upon the issuance of the shares of Series F Preferred Stock concurrent with the Business Combination, and the remaining commitment to issues shares of Class A Common Stock pursuant to the Series F Stock Purchase Agreements and the convertible preferred stock warrants became equity classified upon the consummation of the Business Combination. Accordingly, the Company does not expect to incur incremental fair value adjustments related to the convertible preferred stock tranche liabilities and convertible preferred stock warrants in future periods.
Income Tax Expense / Benefit
Our income tax provision consists of an estimate for U.S. federal and state income taxes based on enacted rates, as adjusted for allowable credits, deductions, uncertain tax positions, changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities, and changes in the tax law. We maintain a valuation allowance against the full value of our U.S. and state net deferred tax assets because we believe the recoverability of the tax assets is not more likely than not.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2020 to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following table sets forth our historical operating results for the periods indicated (amounts in thousands):
Research and Development
The increase in research and development expense primarily resulted from the $7.2 million increase in personnel cost due to the growth in research and development headcount to support technology development, an increase of $2.2 million in material supplies to support the increase of research and development cell builds in our commercial form factor, an increase of $1.9 million related to depreciation and amortization and a $2.5 million increase in facility, professional fees and outside services related to the growth in research and development. These costs were partially offset by a decrease in travel related expenditures. Additionally, non-cash stock-based compensation expense increased by $5.8 million from $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $9.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the effect of refresh option grants in June 2019 and retention restricted stock unit (“RSU”) grants to employees in 2020.
General and Administrative
The increase in general and administrative expenses is due in part to the increase of $4.4 million for stock-based compensation in the year ended December 31, 2020 for employees and director refresh grants in December 2019 and RSU grants to employees in 2020. Additionally, personnel costs increased by $0.8 million due to the headcount increase to support business growth and director and officer insurance expenses increased by $0.7 million.
Interest Expense
Interest expense primarily represents the non-cash fair value adjustment of the warrants to purchase shares of our Series A Preferred Stock and our Series C Preferred Stock. Prior to the Business Combination, the commitments were considered free standing financial instruments and are subject to fair value measurement at issuance and at each reporting period. The increase in the fair value of the warrants was due to the accretion in the valuation of the underlying convertible preferred stock prior to the Business Combination. In connection with the Business Combination, the fair value of the warrants to purchase these shares of our Preferred Stock were adjusted based on the fair value of the underlying common stock. The warrant liability was reclassified to additional paid-in capital and there will be no further re-measurement of these warrants.
Interest Income
The decrease in interest income was due to the reduction of market interest rates and due to the decrease of our marketable securities balance prior to the Business Combination.
Other Income
Other income for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of the receipt for a legal settlement, as compared to other income for the year ended December 31, 2019 which was related to sublease income.
Other Expense
Other expense represents the non-cash fair value adjustment of our preferred stock tranche liabilities. In May 2020 and August 2020, we entered into the commitment to sell, and investors commitment to buy, the Series F Preferred Stock totaling up to $388.0 million in gross proceeds. Approximately $188.0 million closed in connection with the Business Combination and $100.0 million closed on December 1, 2020. An additional $100.0 million is expected to close by March 31, 2021, contingent on QuantumScape meeting a certain technical milestone. Since the second tranche will be funded after the closing of Business Combination, QuantumScape has reserved shares of Class A Common Stock to be issued in lieu of our Series F Preferred Stock.
Prior to the Business Combination, the commitments were considered free standing financial instruments and were classified as liabilities and subject to fair value measurement at issuance and at each reporting period. Concurrent with the Business Combination, the entire commitment was adjusted based on the fair value of the underlying common stock and a portion of the convertible preferred stock tranche liabilities were settled upon the issuance of the shares of Series F Preferred Stock. Additionally, the remaining commitment to issues shares of Class A Common Stock pursuant to the Series F Stock Purchase Agreements became equity classified and were reclassified to additional paid-in capital, with no further remeasurement required.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, our principal sources of liquidity were our cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities in the amount of $997.6 million. Our cash equivalents are invested in U.S. Treasury money market funds and short-term U.S. Treasury notes and bonds. Our marketable securities are primarily invested in U.S. Treasury notes and bonds.
We have yet to generate any revenue from our business operations. To date, we have funded our capital expenditure and working capital requirements through equity as further discussed below. Our ability to successfully develop our products, commence commercial operations and expand our business will depend on many factors, including our working capital needs, the availability of equity or debt financing and, over time, our ability to generate cash flows from operations.
Prior to the Business Combination, we financed our operations primarily from the sales of redeemable convertible preferred stock. In connection with the Business Combination, we received net cash proceeds of approximately $676.9 million. Additionally, after the Business Combination, we received proceeds from the Series F Preferred Stock agreements described above under “Other Expense”.
We believe that our cash on hand will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure requirements for a period of at least twelve months from the date of this filing, and also sufficient to fund our operations until we initially commence production of the pilot line solid-state battery through the first commercial sales, assuming QuantumScape is able to do so as currently contemplated. We may, however, need additional cash resources due to changed business conditions or other developments, including unanticipated delays in negotiations with OEMs and tier-one automotive suppliers or other suppliers, supply chain challenges, disruptions due to the COVID-19 pandemic, competitive pressures, and regulatory developments, among other developments. To the extent that our current resources are insufficient to satisfy our cash requirements, we may need to seek additional equity or debt financing. If the financing is not available, or if the terms of financing are less desirable than we expect, we may be forced to decrease our level of investment in product development or scale back our operations, which could have an adverse impact on our business and financial prospects.
Cash Flows
The following table provides a summary of our cash flow data for the periods indicated (amounts in thousands):
Cash Used in Operating Activities
Our cash flows used in operating activities to date have been primarily comprised of payroll, material and supplies, facilities expense, and professional service related to research and development and general and administrative activities. As we continue to ramp up hiring for technical headcounts to accelerate our engineering efforts ahead of starting the pilot line operations, we expect our cash used in operating activities to increase significantly before we start to generate any material cash flows from our business.
The most significant component of our cash used during the year ended December 31, 2020 was a net loss of $1,099.9 million, which included non-cash expenses of $20.8 million for the change in the fair value of Legacy QuantumScape convertible preferred stock warrants, and $999.9 million for the issuance and change in the fair value of the Legacy QuantumScape Series F Preferred Stock tranche liabilities, $17.0 million related to stock based compensation and $7.5 million related to depreciation and amortization.
The most significant component of cash used during the year ended December 31, 2019 was a net loss of $51.3 million, which included non-cash expenses of $5.6 million related to depreciation and amortization and $6.8 million related to stock-based compensation.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Our cash flows from investing activities, to date, have been comprised of purchases of property and equipment and purchases and maturities of our marketable securities. We expect the costs to acquire property and equipment to increase substantially in the near future as we fully build out our engineering lines as well as acquire the property and equipment for QS-0 and the pilot line of the separator and cell manufacturing operations.
Cash used for the purchase of marketable securities increased $695.2 million to $891.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $196.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 due to the investment of proceeds from the Business Combination and the convertible Series F Preferred Stock financing. Proceeds from the maturities of marketable securities decreased $126.5 million to $113.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $239.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 due to the timing of the maturity of securities. Cash used for property and equipment purchases in the year ended December 31, 2020 was $24.1 million, a significant increase over the $9.8 million of cash used for equipment purchases in the year ended December 31, 2019.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Prior to the Business Combination, we financed our operations primarily through the sale of equity securities including agreements for the sale of Legacy QuantumScape Series F Preferred Stock for $388 million (before fees and expenses) in gross proceeds, of which $288 million (before fees and expenses) of the purchase commitment has been sold, and $100 million of the purchase commitment is subject to completion of a certain technical milestone by the end of the first quarter of 2021.
The increase in cash provided by financing activities is due to $676.9 million in net proceeds received from the Business Combination and related PIPE financing, as well as $276.3 million in net proceeds received from the Legacy QuantumScape Series F Preferred Stock agreements discussed above.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
QuantumScape is not a party to any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under SEC rules.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. In the preparation of these financial statements, we are required to use judgment in making estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods.
We consider an accounting judgment, estimate or assumption to be critical when (1) the estimate or assumption is complex in nature or requires a high degree of judgment and (2) the use of different judgments, estimates and assumptions could have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report. We have the critical accounting policies and estimates which are described below.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize the cost of share-based awards granted to employees and directors based on the estimated grant-date fair value of the awards. Cost is recognized on a straight-line basis over the service period, which is generally the vesting period of the award. We reverse previously recognized costs for unvested awards in the period that forfeitures occur. We determine the fair value of stock options using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, which is impacted by the following assumptions:
•
Expected Term- We use the simplified method when calculating the expected term due to insufficient historical exercise data.
•
Expected Volatility-Given the limited market trading history of our common stock, volatility is based on a benchmark of comparable companies within the automotive and energy storage industries.
•
Expected Dividend Yield-We have never paid any cash dividends on common stock and do not anticipate doing so in the foreseeable future.
•
Risk-Free Interest Rate-The interest rates used are based on the implied yield available on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with an equivalent remaining term equal to the expected life of the award.
Common Stock Valuations
Prior to the Business Combination, the grant date fair value of our common stock was typically determined by our board of directors with the assistance of management and a third-party valuation specialist. Given its pre-revenue stage of development, our management believed that an Option Pricing Model (“OPM”) was the most appropriate method for allocating enterprise value to determine the estimated fair value of Common Stock prior to the Business Combination. Application of the OPM involves the use of estimates, judgment, and assumptions that are highly complex and subjective, such as those regarding our expected future revenue, expenses, and cash flows, discount rates, market multiples, the selection of comparable companies, and the probability of future events. The deemed fair value for common stock for options and restricted stock units granted in August 2020 and September 2020 (prior to the announcement of the Business Combination) were based on the accreted estimated Business Combination price per the Business Combination Agreement. There were no grants of options to purchase common stock or restricted stock units subsequent to September 2, 2020 for us. Subsequent to the Business Combination, the Board determines the fair value of the Common Stock based on the closing market price on or around the date of grant.
Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock Warrant Liabilities
Prior to the Business Combination, warrants to purchase shares of redeemable convertible preferred stock were classified as liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets at fair value upon issuance because the underlying shares of redeemable convertible preferred stock were redeemable outside of our control. The initial liability recorded was adjusted for changes in the fair value at each reporting date and recorded as interest expense in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss. In connection with the Business Combination, the warrant liabilities were adjusted based on the fair value of the underlying common stock. The warrant liabilities became classified as equity as the shares issuable upon exercise of the warrants are shares of the Class A Common Stock, and the fair value of the warrants were reclassified to additional paid-in capital, with no further remeasurement required.
Convertible Preferred Stock Tranche Liabilities
Prior to the Business Combination, the obligation to issue, and the Company’s investors’ right to purchase, shares of redeemable convertible Series F Preferred Stock represented a freestanding financial instrument classified as liabilities (the “tranche liabilities”). The tranche liabilities were initially recorded at fair value and remeasured at each reporting period with gains and losses arising from subsequent changes in its fair value recognized in Other expense, net, in the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss. Concurrent with the Business Combination, the entire commitment was adjusted based on the fair value of the underlying common stock and a portion of the convertible preferred stock tranche liabilities were settled upon the issuance of the shares of Series F Preferred Stock. The remaining commitment to issue shares of Class A Common Stock pursuant to the Series F Stock Purchase Agreements became equity classified and were reclassified to additional paid-in capital with no further remeasurement required.
Emerging Growth Company Status
Section 102(b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can choose not to take advantage of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies, and any such election to not take advantage of the extended transition period is irrevocable.
The Company is an “emerging growth company” as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”) and has elected to take advantage of the benefits of the extended transition period for new or revised financial accounting standards. The Company expects to remain an emerging growth company at least through the end of second quarter of 2021 and expects to continue to take advantage of the benefits of the extended transition period, although it may decide to early adopt such new or revised accounting standards to the extent permitted by such standards. This may make it difficult or impossible to compare our financial results with the financial results of another public company that is either not an emerging growth company or is an emerging growth company that has chosen not to take advantage of the extended transition period exemptions because of the potential differences in accounting standards used.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 3 to the audited consolidated financial statements in this report for more information about recent accounting pronouncements, the timing of their adoption, and our, to the extent it has made one, of their potential impact on our financial condition and its results of operations and cash flows.