Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical consolidated financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in the section titled "Risk Factors."
Overview
We are a leading provider of secure, cloud-based digital solutions that transform the ways in which traditional and emerging financial services providers engage with account holders and end users, or End Users. We sell our solutions to financial institutions, alternative finance and leasing companies, or Alt-FIs, and financial technology companies, or FinTechs. Our solutions enable our customers to deliver robust suites of digital banking, lending, leasing, and banking as a service, or BaaS, services that make it possible for End Users to transact and engage anytime, anywhere and on any device. Our solutions are often the most frequent point of engagement between our customers and their End Users. As such, we purpose-build our solutions to deliver compelling and consistent End-User experiences across digital channels and to drive the success of our customers by optimizing their digital brands and enhancing End-User acquisition, retention and engagement.
The effective delivery and management of secure and advanced digital solutions in the complex and heavily regulated financial services industry requires significant resources, personnel and expertise. We provide digital solutions that are designed to be highly configurable, scalable and adaptable to the specific needs of our customers. We design and develop our solutions with an open platform approach intended to provide comprehensive integration among our solution offerings and our customers' internal and third-party systems. This integrated approach allows our customers to deliver unified and robust financial experiences across digital channels. Our solutions provide our customers the flexibility to configure their digital services in a manner that is consistent with each customer's specific workflows, processes and controls. Our solutions also allow our customers to personalize the digital experiences they deliver to their End Users by extending their individual services and brand requirements across digital channels. Our solutions and our data center infrastructure and resources are also designed to comply with the stringent security and technical regulations applicable to financial institutions and financial services providers and to safeguard our customers and their End Users.
We began by providing digital banking solutions to domestic regional and community financial institutions, or RCFIs, with the mission of empowering them to leverage technology to compete more effectively and to strengthen the communities and End Users they serve. To date, a substantial majority of our revenues continue to come from sales of our digital banking platform, and we continue to be focused on our founding mission of building stronger and more diverse communities by strengthening their financial institutions. However, the continued proliferation and ubiquity of mobile and tablet devices and End Users' increasing expectations for digital services have driven increases in the number of providers, greater fragmentation of financial services markets and a broadening set of new and innovative digital services, creating challenges and opportunities in the markets served by financial institutions as well as emerging providers such as Alt-FIs and FinTechs. End Users increasingly expect to transact and engage with financial services providers anytime, anywhere and on any device, and seamlessly across devices. End Users also select digital solutions based on the quality and intuitiveness of the digital user experience.
Financial institutions, Alt-FIs and FinTechs are seeking to address these challenges and opportunities and capture End-User engagement by providing new, innovative digital financial services, solutions and experiences. Traditional financial services providers such as banks and credit unions are experiencing reduced End-User engagement in their physical branches and increased End-User engagement with their digital services and thus, they are increasing their investment in digital services. Emerging providers such as Alt-FIs and FinTechs are leveraging their digital focus and expertise and capitalizing on increased End-User demand for digital financial services by creating new and expanding existing digital service offerings. The combination of these two drivers of investment by traditional and emerging financial services providers is driving new competition, innovation and unique market opportunities.
We deliver our solutions to the substantial majority of our customers using a software-as-a-service, or SaaS, model under which our customers pay subscription fees for the use of our solutions. A small portion of our revenues are derived from customers which host our solutions in their own data centers under term license and maintenance agreements. Our digital banking platform customers have numerous End Users, and those End Users can represent one or more consumer or commercial users registered on our digital banking platform, or Registered Users, on our solutions. We generally price our digital banking platform solutions based on the number of solutions purchased by our customers and the number of Registered Users utilizing our solutions. We generally earn additional revenues from our digital banking platform customers based on the number of transactions that Registered Users perform on our solutions in excess of the levels included in our standard
subscription fee. As a result, our revenues from digital banking platform customers grow as our customers buy more solutions from us and increase the number of Registered Users utilizing our solutions and as those users increase their number of transactions on our solutions. The structure and terms of the arrangements for our newer lending and leasing and BaaS solutions are varied, but we generally sell these solutions on a subscription basis through our direct sales organization, and the related revenues are recognized over the terms of the customer agreements.
We have achieved significant growth since our inception. During each of the past eight years, our average number of Registered Users per installed customer on our digital banking platform, or Installed Customer, has grown, and in many instances we have been able to sell additional solutions to existing customers. Our revenues per Installed Customer and per Registered User vary period-to-period based on the length and timing of customer implementations, changes in the average number of Registered Users per customer, sales of additional solutions to existing customers, changes in the number of transactions on our solutions by Registered Users and variations among existing customers and new customers with respect to the mix of purchased solutions and related pricing. Please see "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Key Operating Measures" for additional detail on how we define "Installed Customers" and "Registered Users."
The COVID-19 pandemic creates significant risks and uncertainties for our customers, their End Users, our partners and suppliers, our employees and our business generally. However, we believe that these events could accelerate the transition to digital financial solutions and that our portfolio of digital financial services solutions and our position and reputation in the market provide us with an opportunity to continue to serve customers and grow our business. We considered the uncertainties and risks posed by the continuing COVID-19 pandemic when preparing our 2021 budget and hiring plans and though hiring may be somewhat lower than the growth rates experienced in 2019 and prior, we expect our hiring plans to accelerate during 2021 based on our expectations that buying environments and cross sale opportunities continue to improve in 2021. In the long term, and subject to more certainty regarding the COVID-19 pandemic, we remain committed to continuing to strategically invest across our organization to position us to increase revenues and to improve operating efficiencies. We are also considering how our physical facilities requirements might change when we eventually return to increased onsite operations, including the costs associated with ensuring a safe work environment and the likely increased prevalence of working from home for employees. The timing and amount of these investments will vary based on the rate at which we expect to add new customers or sell additional solutions to existing customers, our customer retention rates, the implementation and support needs of our customers, our software development plans, our technology and physical infrastructure requirements, and changes thereto resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, and other needs of our organization (including needs resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic). Many of these investments will occur in advance of our realizing any resultant benefit which may make it difficult to determine if we are effectively allocating our resources.
If we are successful in growing our revenues by increasing the number and scope of our customer relationships, we anticipate that greater economies of scale and increased operating leverage will improve our margins over the long term. We also anticipate that increases in the number of Registered Users for existing digital banking platform customers in the longer term will improve our margins. However, we do not have any control or influence over whether End Users of our digital banking platform elect to become Registered Users of our customers' digital banking services.
We sell our solutions primarily through our professional sales organization. While the financial institutions market is well-defined due to the regulatory classifications of those financial institutions, the Alt-FI and FinTech markets are broader and more difficult to define due to the changing number of providers in each market. Over the long term, we intend to continue to invest in additional sales representatives to identify and address the financial institution, Alt-FI and FinTech markets across the U.S. and internationally and to increase our number of sales support and marketing personnel, as well as our investment in marketing initiatives designed to increase awareness of our solutions and generate new customer opportunities.
We have continuously invested in expanding and improving our digital banking platform since its introduction in 2005, and we currently intend to continue investing both organically and inorganically through acquisitions to expand our portfolio. Over the past five years we have acquired or developed new solutions and additional functions that serve a broader range of needs of financial institutions as well as the needs of Alt-FIs and FinTechs. Our solutions now include a broad range of services and experiences including commercial banking, regulatory and compliance, digital lending and leasing, BaaS, digital account opening and data-driven sales enablement and portfolio management solutions both in the U.S. and internationally.
We believe that financial services providers are best served by a broad, integrated portfolio of digital solutions that provide rapid, flexible and comprehensive integration with internal and third-party systems allowing them to provide modern, intuitive digital financial services in a secure, regulatory-compliant manner. We also believe that the breadth and depth of our solution offerings across the financial institution, Alt-FI and FinTech markets, our open and flexible platform approach, our position as a leading provider of digital banking solutions to a large network of RCFIs, and our expertise in delivering new, innovative, secure and regulatory-compliant digital solutions uniquely position us in the market for digital financial services
solutions. We currently intend to increase investments in technology innovation and software development as we enhance our solutions and platforms and increase or expand the number of solutions that we offer.
We believe that delivery of consistent, high-quality customer support is a significant driver of purchasing and renewal decisions of our prospects and customers. To develop and maintain a reputation for high-quality service, we seek to build deep relationships with our customers through our customer service organization, which we staff with personnel who are motivated by our common mission of using technology to help our customers succeed and who are knowledgeable with respect to the regulated and complex nature of the financial services industry. As our business grows, we currently intend to continue to invest in and grow our services and delivery organization to support our customers' needs and maintain our reputation.
COVID-19 Pandemic
Global health concerns with respect to the COVID-19 pandemic and related government actions taken to reduce the spread of the virus have caused significant disruption to the macroeconomic environment, and the pandemic has significantly increased economic uncertainty and reduced economic activity, including consumer and business spending. The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operational and financial performance will depend on future developments unknown and unpredictable at this time, including the duration, severity and spread of the pandemic, related restrictions on travel and transportation and other actions that may be taken by governmental authorities, the impact to our customers, their End Users, our suppliers and partners, and other items identified under "Risk Factors" above. There are no comparable recent events that provide guidance as to the impacts that the spread of COVID-19 may have, and, as a result, the ultimate impacts of the pandemic are highly uncertain and subject to change.
We have for many years maintained a business continuity plan and a pandemic plan, which we regularly test and update as needed. Based on the information available to us to date, we believe we have taken an informed, proactive and effective approach to addressing the direct known effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on us, our customers and other third parties on which we rely.
In late February 2020, we implemented enhanced sanitation efforts at our locations, including more strict cleaning protocols for common surfaces and additional hand sanitization stations across our locations. In early March 2020, we indefinitely suspended all non-essential, work-related domestic and international travel, instituted two-week self-quarantines for any employees who had recently traveled prior to the suspension, and implemented protocols for employees to report personal health situations which resemble COVID-19. By early March 2020, over 90% of our employees had transitioned to working remotely from home and by mid-March 2020 virtually every one of our employees had transitioned to working remotely from home. We have now implemented strict protocols for any employee to enter any of our facilities, including the approval of senior management, advance health screening for COVID-19 symptoms and strict social distancing requirements while onsite, including mask-wearing, physical-spacing and indoor foot-traffic requirements. As of the filing date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we continue to operate with nearly every employee working remotely, except for minimal essential functions requiring facility access from time to time, only if required, in compliance with such protocols. We currently have no firm plans to begin having employees return to onsite work. We also modified our 2020 annual customer conference to be a virtual event, which we hosted in multiple segments from April to June 2020. We have similarly cancelled all in-person aspects of our contemplated spring 2021 customer conference and are currently evaluating to what extent and in what format we may hold the conference in the future. In addition, we have performed additional due diligence with critical vendors and other third parties on which we rely to assess their responses to the COVID-19 pandemic and impacts on their operations and services. To date, we have not experienced any material adverse impacts from any of our vendors or other third parties on which we rely. We intend to continue to conduct enhanced due diligence on such vendors and third parties for the foreseeable future as the uncertainty caused by the COVID-19 pandemic continues to persist.
We believe that to date our business continuity and pandemic plans are operating effectively and that we have been able to effectively deliver and support our solutions for our customers utilizing numerous remote capabilities and channels. We do not yet have firm plans on when or how we will transition back to onsite operations across our facilities, but we continue to monitor the situation closely and to plan accordingly. To date, we believe our corporate culture, business model, customer relations, and technology and information technology infrastructure have effectively allowed our employees to substantially perform their roles while working remotely. We are also considering how our physical facilities requirements might change when we eventually return to increased onsite operations, including the costs associated with ensuring a safe work environment and the likely increased prevalence of working from home for many employees.
We also have conducted an extensive outreach to our customers and many prospective customers to assess their needs in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic and to seek to identify ways that we may assist them with our solutions and services. We believe the impacts of COVID-19 on our existing and prospective customers present both challenges and opportunities. While we believe the pandemic will increase the importance and prominence of digital financial solutions, the increased economic uncertainty and reduced economic activity, including consumer and business spending, has resulted in delays in certain purchasing decisions and implementations. For example, we are able to deliver our solutions remotely. However, the
COVID-19 pandemic and its related restrictions have caused challenges for financial institutions to execute in-branch operations which makes executing more complex projects, such as implementations of new technology solutions, more difficult. Further, we have experienced and expect to continue to experience delays in some implementations and the associated revenue recognition as our customers focus on other initiatives in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and manage their own operations in light of the pandemic. We also have experienced and expect to continue to experience certain customers requesting reduced or extended payment terms to assist them with cost reduction measures as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, which we have to date made conditional on associated contract extensions to offset the impact of the reduced payments. Accordingly, we expect to continue to see negative impacts of COVID-19 on our bookings, revenues, gross margins and cash flows from operations, although we anticipate gradual improvement during 2021 as compared to the impacts we experienced in 2020.
Given the uncertainty that still surrounds the COVID-19 pandemic, we are expecting sales performance across all our solutions to continue to be slower than what it otherwise would have been for the year ending December 31, 2021. However, based on feedback we have received from our existing and prospective customers and observations from our sales team after operating since March 2020 in the COVID-19 pandemic, we believe we will begin to see improvements in the predictability of purchasing decisions and implementations by customers, and a corresponding gradual increase in bookings during the year ending December 31, 2021, although at this time we are unable to predict the extent of such improvement. However, the duration and impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic continue to be highly unpredictable and may continue to disrupt any seasonality trends that may otherwise typically be inherent in our historical operating results.
Despite these challenges among financial institutions, the usage by End Users of digital financial solutions has never been higher, and we are making additional investments to enhance our technology infrastructure to support this heightened usage. We have seen increased online banking activity as a result of shelter-in-place and similar orders as well as spikes in logins as End Users check accounts for such things as government stimulus funds. We believe the challenges and opportunities posed by the COVID-19 pandemic have and will continue to cause financial institutions to increase their focus on maintaining and improving their digital financial services offerings.
Refer to "COVID-19 Measures" included in Item 1, "Business - People" for additional information on actions we have taken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Recent Events
On November 18-19, 2020 we consummated privately negotiated exchanges and subscriptions with certain holders of our 2023 Notes and certain new investors pursuant to which we issued $350 million principal amount of 0.125% Convertible Senior Notes due 2025, or 2025 Notes, consisting of (a) $210.7 million of 2025 Notes and either shares of our common stock or cash in exchange for approximately $181.9 million principal amount of the 2023 Notes, or the Exchange Transactions, and (b) $139.3 million principal amount of 2025 Notes for cash, or the Subscription Transactions. The 2025 Notes bear interest at a fixed rate of 0.125% per year, payable semi-annually in arrears on May 15 and November 15 of each year, beginning on May 15, 2021. In connection with the issuance of the 2025 Notes, we entered into capped call transactions with one or more counterparties, with the intention of using the capped calls to offset the potential dilution to the common stock upon any conversion of the 2025 Notes and/or offset any cash payments we are required to make in excess of the principal amount of the 2025 Notes, as the case may be, in the event the market price per share of common stock is greater than the strike price of the capped calls, with such offset subject to a cap. We did not receive any cash proceeds from the Exchange Transactions. In exchange for issuing the 2025 Notes pursuant to the Exchange Transactions, we received and cancelled the exchanged 2023 Notes. The Subscription Transactions generated net proceeds to us of approximately $92.6 million, after deducting $6.9 million in offering costs, including $39.8 million to purchase the capped calls. We refer to the capped call transactions entered into in connection with our 2025 Notes and our previously issued 2026 Notes as the Capped Calls.
Key Operating Measures
In addition to the United States generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP, measures described below in "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Components of Operating Results," we monitor the following operating measures to evaluate growth trends, plan investments and measure the effectiveness of our sales and marketing efforts:
Installed Customers
We define Installed Customers as the number of customers on our digital banking platform from which we are currently recognizing revenues. The average size of our Installed Customers, measured in both Registered Users per Installed Customer and revenues per Installed Customer, has increased over time as our existing Installed Customers continue to add Registered Users and buy more solutions from us, and as we add larger RCFIs to our Installed Customer base. The net rate at which we add Installed Customers varies based on our implementation capacity, the size and unique needs of our customers, the readiness of
our customers to implement our solutions, and customer attrition, including as a result of merger and acquisition activity among financial institutions. While we believe the COVID-19 pandemic has and will continue to increase the importance and prominence of our portfolio of digital financial services solutions and provide us with an opportunity to continue to grow our business, the increased economic uncertainty and reduced economic activity resulting from the pandemic, including consumer and business spending, is resulting in delays in certain purchasing decisions and implementations, which we anticipate will continue to slow the rate at which we add new Installed Customers during 2021 as compared to what our growth rate would have been without the effects of the pandemic. We had 450, 414 and 401 Installed Customers on our digital banking platform as of December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Registered Users
We define a Registered User as an individual related to an account holder of an Installed Customer on our digital banking platform who has registered to use one or more of our solutions and has current access to use those solutions as of the last day of the reporting period presented. We price our digital banking platform solutions based on the number of Registered Users, so as the number of Registered Users of our solutions increases, our revenues typically grow. Our average number of Registered Users per Installed Customer grows as our existing digital banking platform customers add more Registered Users and as we add larger RCFIs to our Installed Customer base. We anticipate that the number of Registered Users will grow at a faster rate than our number of Installed Customers. The rate at which our customers add Registered Users and the incremental revenues we recognize from new Registered Users vary significantly period-to-period based on the timing of our implementations of new customers and the timing of registration of new End Users. We add new Registered Users through both organic growth from existing customers and from the addition of End Users from new Installed Customers. We believe the COVID-19 pandemic has and will result in increased registration of new End Users with existing customers; however, the increased economic uncertainty and reduced economic activity, including consumer and business spending, is also resulting in delays in certain purchasing decisions and implementations, that has and may continue to slow the rate at which we add new Installed Customers and with them, new Registered Users from such customers. Accordingly, at this time we are unable to predict the anticipated long-term impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the growth in our number of Registered Users. Our Installed Customers had approximately 17.8 million, 14.6 million and 12.8 million Registered Users as of December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Revenue Retention Rate
We believe that our ability to retain our customers and expand their use of our products and services over time is an indicator of the stability of our revenue base and the long-term value of our customer relationships. We assess our performance in this area using a metric we refer to as our revenue retention rate. We calculate our revenue retention rate as the total revenues in a calendar year, excluding any revenues from solutions of businesses acquired during such year, from customers who were implemented on any of our solutions as of December 31 of the prior year, expressed as a percentage of the total revenues during the prior year from the same group of customers. Our revenue retention rate provides insight into the impact on current year revenues of: the number of new customers implemented on any of our solutions during the prior year; the timing of our implementation of those new customers in the prior year; growth in the number of End Users on such solutions and changes in their usage of such solutions; sales of new products and services to our existing customers during the current year, excluding any products or services resulting from businesses acquired during such year and customer attrition. The most significant drivers of changes in our revenue retention rate each year have historically been the number of new customers in the prior year and the timing of our implementation of those new customers. The timing of our implementation of new customers in the prior year is significant because we do not start recognizing revenues from new customers until they are implemented. If implementations are weighted more heavily in the first or second half of the prior year, our revenue retention rate will be lower or higher, respectively. We believe the COVID-19 pandemic has and will continue to create incentives for our existing customers to purchase additional features to support the increase in demand for digital banking; however, the increased economic uncertainty and reduced economic activity, including consumer and business spending, also has and likely will continue to result in delays in certain purchasing decisions and implementations and customer decisions with respect to contract extensions, which may adversely affect our revenue retention rate. We also have and could continue to experience contract terminations with customers who become insolvent as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Accordingly, at this time we are unable to predict the anticipated long-term impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our revenue retention rate. Our use of revenue retention rate has limitations as an analytical tool, and investors should not consider it in isolation. Other companies in our industry may calculate revenue retention rate differently, which reduces its usefulness as a comparative measure. Our revenue retention rate was 122%, 120% and 114% for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Churn
We utilize churn to monitor the satisfaction of our customers and evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies. We define churn as the amount of any monthly recurring revenue losses due to customer cancellations and downgrades, net of upgrades and additions of new solutions, during a year, divided by our monthly recurring revenue at the beginning of the year. Cancellations refer to customers that have either stopped using our services completely or remained a customer but terminated a particular service. Downgrades are a result of customers taking less of a particular service or renewing their contract for identical services at a lower price. We believe the COVID-19 pandemic has and will continue to create incentives for our existing customers to purchase additional features to support the increase in demand for digital banking; however, the increased economic uncertainty and reduced economic activity, including consumer and business spending, has and likely will continue to result in delays in certain purchasing decisions and implementations and customer decisions with respect to contract extensions and also may result in certain downgrades and cancellations from existing customers, each of which may adversely affect our churn. For example, we have experienced certain customers requesting reduced or extended payment terms to assist them with cost reduction measures as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, which we have to date made conditional on associated contract extensions to offset the impact of the reduced payments. We also have and could continue to experience contract terminations with customers who become insolvent as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Accordingly, at this time we are unable to predict the anticipated long-term impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our churn. Our annual churn has ranged from 5.9% to 3.5% over the last nine years, and we had annual churn of 5.9%, 5.1%, and 5.0% for the years ended and December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. Our use of churn has limitations as an analytical tool, and investors should not consider it in isolation. Other companies in our industry may calculate churn differently, which reduces its usefulness as a comparative measure.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to financial measures prepared in accordance with GAAP, we use certain non-GAAP financial measures to clarify and enhance our understanding, and aid in the period-to-period comparison, of our performance. We believe that these non-GAAP financial measures provide supplemental information that is meaningful when assessing our operating performance because they exclude the impact of certain categories that our management and board of directors do not consider part of core operating results when assessing our operational performance, allocating resources, preparing annual budgets and determining compensation. Accordingly, these non-GAAP financial measures may provide insight to investors into the motivation and decision-making of management in operating the business. Set forth in the tables below are the corresponding GAAP financial measures for each non-GAAP financial measure. Investors are encouraged to review the reconciliation of each of these non-GAAP financial measures to its most comparable GAAP financial measure included below. While we believe that these non-GAAP financial measures provide useful supplemental information, non-GAAP financial measures have limitations and should not be considered in isolation from, or as a substitute for, their most comparable GAAP measures. These non-GAAP financial measures are not prepared in accordance with GAAP, do not reflect a comprehensive system of accounting and may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies due to potential differences in their financing and accounting methods, the book value of their assets, their capital structures, the method by which their assets were acquired and the manner in which they define non-GAAP measures. Items such as the deferred revenue reduction from purchase accounting, stock-based compensation, acquisition related costs, amortization of acquired technology, amortization of acquired intangible assets, partnership termination charges and unoccupied lease charges can have a material impact on our GAAP financial results.
Non-GAAP Revenue
We define non-GAAP revenue as total revenue excluding the impact of PrecisionLender purchase accounting. We monitor these measures to assess our performance because we believe our revenue growth rates would be understated without these adjustments. We believe presenting non-GAAP revenue aids in the comparability between periods and in assessing our overall operating performance.
Non-GAAP Operating Income
We provide non-GAAP operating income using non-GAAP revenue as discussed above and excluding such items as deferred revenue reduction from purchase accounting, stock-based compensation, acquisition related costs, amortization of acquired technology, amortization of acquired intangible assets, partnership termination charges and unoccupied lease charges. We believe these measures are useful for the following reasons:
•Deferred revenue reduction from purchase accounting. We provide non-GAAP information that excludes the deferred revenue reduction from purchase accounting. We believe that the exclusion of deferred revenue reduction from purchase accounting allows users of our financial statements to better review and understand the historical and current results of our continuing operations.
•Stock-based compensation. We provide non-GAAP information that excludes expenses related to stock-based compensation. We believe that the exclusion of stock-based compensation expense provides for a better comparison of our operating results to prior periods and to our peer companies as the calculations of stock-based compensation vary from period to period and company to company due to different valuation methodologies, subjective assumptions and the variety of award types. Because of these unique characteristics of stock-based compensation, we exclude these expenses when analyzing the organization's business performance.
•Acquisition related costs. We exclude certain expense items resulting from our acquisitions, such as legal, accounting and consulting fees, changes in fair value of contingent consideration, and retention expense. We consider these adjustments, to some extent, to be unpredictable and dependent on a significant number of factors that are outside of our control. Furthermore, acquisitions result in operating expenses that would not otherwise have been incurred by us in the normal course of our organic business operations. We believe that providing these non-GAAP measures that exclude acquisition related costs, allows users of our financial statements to better review and understand the historical and current results of our continuing operations, and also facilitates comparisons to our historical results and results of less acquisitive peer companies, both with and without such adjustments.
•Amortization of acquired technology. We provide non-GAAP information that excludes expenses related to purchased technology associated with our acquisitions. We believe that eliminating this expense from our non-GAAP measures is useful to investors, because the amortization of acquired technology can be inconsistent in amount and frequency and is significantly impacted by the timing and magnitude of our acquisition transactions, which also vary in frequency from period to period. Accordingly, we analyze the performance of our operations in each period without regard to such expenses.
•Amortization of acquired intangible assets. We provide non-GAAP information that excludes expenses related to purchased intangible assets associated with our acquisitions. We believe that eliminating this expense from our non-GAAP measures is useful to investors, because the amortization of acquired intangible assets can be inconsistent in amount and frequency and is significantly impacted by the timing and magnitude of our acquisition transactions, which also vary in frequency from period to period. Accordingly, we analyze the performance of our operations in each period without regard to such expenses.
•Partnership termination charges. In the quarter ended June 30, 2020, in connection with the termination of a strategic partnership, we agreed to pay a termination fee of $5.6 million in May 2020 and $7.6 million in the third quarter of 2021. We are excluding the charges associated with this partnership termination as they are non-recurring in nature and would not otherwise have been incurred by us in the normal course of our organic business operations. We believe that providing these non-GAAP measures that exclude partnership termination charges allows users of our financial statements to better review and understand the historical and current results of our continuing operations, and also facilitates comparisons to our historical results and results of peer companies, both with and without such adjustments.
•Unoccupied lease charges. We provide non-GAAP information that excludes restructuring charges related to the estimated costs of exiting and terminating facility lease commitments, as they relate to our corporate restructuring and exit activities. These charges are inconsistent in amount and are significantly impacted by the timing and nature of these events. Therefore, although we may incur these types of expenses in the future, we believe that eliminating these charges for purposes of calculating the non-GAAP financial measures facilitates a more meaningful evaluation of our operating performance and comparisons to our past operating performance.
Adjusted EBITDA
We define adjusted EBITDA as net loss before depreciation, amortization, stock-based compensation, certain costs related to our recent acquisitions, (benefit from) provision for income taxes, interest and other (income) expense, net, deferred revenue reduction from purchase accounting, partnership termination charges, loss on extinguishment of debt, and unoccupied lease charges. We believe that adjusted EBITDA provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results for the following reasons:
•adjusted EBITDA is widely used by investors and securities analysts to measure a company's operating performance without regard to items that can vary substantially from company to company depending upon their financing, capital structures and the method by which assets were acquired;
•our management uses adjusted EBITDA in conjunction with GAAP financial measures for planning purposes, in the preparation of our annual operating budget, as a measure of our operating performance, to assess the effectiveness of our business strategies and to communicate with our board of directors concerning our financial performance;
•adjusted EBITDA provides more consistency and comparability with our past financial performance, facilitates period-to-period comparisons of our operations and also facilitates comparisons with other companies, many of which use similar non-GAAP financial measures to supplement their GAAP results; and
•our investor and analyst presentations include adjusted EBITDA as a supplemental measure of our overall operating performance.
Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as an alternative to net loss or any other measure of financial performance calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP. The use of adjusted EBITDA as an analytical tool has limitations such as:
•depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, and the assets being depreciated or amortized will often have to be replaced in the future and adjusted EBITDA does not reflect cash requirements for such replacements;
•adjusted EBITDA may not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs or contractual commitments;
•adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the potentially dilutive impact of stock-based compensation;
•adjusted EBITDA does not reflect interest or tax payments that could reduce cash available for use; and
•other companies, including companies in our industry, might calculate adjusted EBITDA or similarly titled measures differently, which reduces their usefulness as comparative measures.
Because of these and other limitations, you should consider adjusted EBITDA together with our GAAP financial measures including cash flow from operations and net loss. The following table presents a reconciliation of net loss to adjusted EBITDA for each of the periods indicated (in thousands):
Components of Operating Results
Revenues
Revenue-generating activities directly relate to the sale, implementation and support of our solutions within a single operating segment. We derive the majority of our revenues from subscription fees for the use of our solutions hosted in either our data centers or with cloud-based services, transaction revenue from bill-pay solutions, and revenues for customer support and implementation services related to our solutions. We recognize the corresponding revenues over time on a ratable basis over the customer agreement term. A small portion of our revenues are derived from customers which host and manage our solutions on-premises or in third-party data centers under term license and maintenance agreements. We recognize the software license revenue once the customer obtains control of the license and the remaining arrangement consideration for maintenance revenue over time on a ratable basis over the term of the software license.
Subscription fees are based on the number of solutions purchased by our customers, the number of End Users using the solutions and the number of bill-pay and certain other transactions those users conduct using our solutions in excess of the levels included in our standard subscription fee. Subscription fees are billed monthly, quarterly, or annually and are recognized monthly over the term of our customer agreements. The initial term of our digital banking platform agreements averages over five years, although it varies by customer. The structure and terms of the arrangements for our newer lending and leasing and BaaS solutions are varied, but we generally sell these solutions on a subscription basis through our direct sales organization, and the related revenues are recognized over the terms of the customer agreements. We begin recognizing subscription fees when the control of the service transfers to the customer, generally when the solution is implemented and made available to the customer. The timing of our implementations varies period-to-period based on our implementation capacity, the number of solutions purchased by our customers, the size and unique needs of our customers and the readiness of our customers to implement our solutions. We recognize any related implementation services revenues ratably over the initial customer agreement term beginning on the date we commence recognizing subscription fees. Contract asset balances arise primarily when we provide services in advance of billing for those services. Amounts that have been invoiced but not paid are recorded in accounts receivable or other long-term assets, depending on the timing of expected billing, and in revenues or deferred revenues, depending on when control of the service transfers to the customer.
As a result of the economic and operational impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our customers, our bookings, in particular with respect to new customer agreements, have been and we anticipate will continue to be adversely impacted as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, although at this time we are unable to the predict the extent or duration of such impact. We have experienced a significant slowing of net new customer deals, partially offset by an increase in cross sales of additional features and functionality to our existing customer base due to the increased utilization and demand for digital banking solutions caused by the decreased in-branch operations resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. Given the uncertainty that still surrounds the COVID-19 pandemic, we are expecting sales performance across all our solutions to continue to be slower than they would have been without the pandemic during the year ending December 31, 2021. However, based on feedback we have received from our existing and prospective customers and observations from our sales team after operating since March 2020 in
the COVID-19 pandemic, we believe we will see improvements in the predictability of purchasing decisions and implementations by customers, and a corresponding gradual increase in bookings, in 2021. However, the duration and impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic continue to be highly unpredictable and may continue to disrupt any seasonality trends that may otherwise typically be inherent in our historical operating results.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues is comprised primarily of salaries and other personnel-related costs, including employee benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation, for employees providing services to our customers. This includes the costs of our implementation, customer support, data center and customer training personnel, as well as costs related to research and development personnel who perform implementation and customer support services. Cost of revenues also includes the direct costs of bill-pay and other third-party intellectual property included in our solutions, the amortization of deferred solution and services costs, co-location facility costs and depreciation of our data center assets, cloud-based hosting services, an allocation of general overhead costs, the amortization of acquired technology, and referral fees. We allocate general overhead expenses to all departments based on the number of employees in each department, which we consider to be a fair and representative means of allocation.
We capitalize certain personnel costs directly related to the implementation of our solutions to the extent those costs are recoverable from future revenues. We amortize the costs for an implementation once revenue recognition commences, and we amortize those implementation costs to cost of revenues over the expected period of customer benefit, which has been determined to be the estimated life of the technology. Other costs not directly recoverable from future revenues are expensed in the period incurred.
We capitalize certain software development costs related to programmers, software engineers and quality control teams working on our software solutions. We have commenced amortization of capitalized costs in which products have reached general release. Capitalized software development costs are computed on an individual product basis and products available for market are amortized to cost of revenues over the products' estimated economic lives.
We intend to continue to increase our investments in our implementation and customer support teams and technology infrastructure to serve our customers and support our growth. Over the long-term, we expect cost of revenues to continue to grow in absolute dollars as we grow our business but to fluctuate as a percentage of revenues based principally on the level and timing of implementation and support activities and other related costs, including during periods where revenues are lower or implementations are delayed due to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses consist of sales and marketing, research and development and general and administrative expenses. They also include costs related to our acquisitions and the resulting amortization of acquired intangible assets from those acquisitions. Over the long term, we intend to continue to hire new employees and make other investments to support our anticipated growth. As a result, we expect our operating expenses to increase in absolute dollars but to decrease as a percentage of revenues over the long term as we grow our business.
The uncertainties and risks posed by the continuing COVID-19 pandemic were considered while preparing our 2021 budget and hiring plans and while hiring may be somewhat lower than the growth rates experienced in 2019 and prior, we do expect them to accelerate in 2021 as compared to hiring in 2020 based on our expectation that buying environments and cross sale opportunities continue to improve. Additionally, while nearly all of our employees are working remotely from home and we have suspended all non-essential business travel and conference participation, including cancelling in-person attendance at our own customer conference typically held in April of each year, we do expect that as the COVID-19 vaccine becomes more widely available and based on the expectation that cases would correspondingly begin to decline, that some of these activities will begin to return in the second half of 2021. As a result, certain costs associated with operating physical locations and facilitating employee travel will remain reduced in the first half of 2021, but we anticipate that we will see a gradual increase in such costs in the second half of 2021. As of the filing date of this Form 10-K, we have no firm plans to begin having employees return to onsite work.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of salaries and other personnel-related costs, including commissions, employee benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation. Sales and marketing expenses also include expenses related to advertising, lead generation, promotional event programs, corporate communications, travel and allocated overhead.
Sales and marketing expenses as a percentage of total revenues will change in any given period based on several factors including the addition of newly-hired sales professionals, the number and timing of newly-installed customers and the amount of sales commissions expense amortized related to those customers, including during periods where revenues are lower or implementations are delayed due to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. Commissions are generally capitalized and then amortized over the expected period of customer benefit.
Research and Development
We believe that continuing to improve and enhance our solutions is essential to maintaining our reputation for innovation and growing our customer base and revenues. Research and development expenses include salaries and personnel-related costs, including employee benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation, third-party contractor expenses, software development costs, allocated overhead and other related expenses incurred in developing new solutions and enhancing existing solutions.
Certain research and development costs that are related to our software development, which include salaries and other personnel-related costs, including employee benefits and bonuses attributed to programmers, software engineers and quality control teams working on our software solutions, are capitalized and are included in intangible assets, net on the consolidated balance sheets.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and other personnel-related costs, including employee benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation, of our administrative, finance and accounting, information systems, legal and human resources employees. General and administrative expenses also include consulting and professional fees, insurance and travel. We expect to continue to incur incremental expenses associated with the growth of our business and to meet increased compliance requirements associated with operating as a regulated, public company. These expenses include costs to comply with Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and other regulations governing public companies, increased costs of directors' and officers' liability insurance and investor relations activities.
Acquisition Related Costs
Acquisition related costs include compensation expenses related to milestone provisions and retention agreements with certain former shareholders and employees of acquired businesses, which are recognized as earned, changes in fair value of the contingent consideration related to potential acquisition earnout payments and various legal and professional service expenses incurred in connection with the acquisitions, which are recognized when incurred.
Amortization of Acquired Intangibles
Amortization of acquired intangibles represents the amortization of intangibles recorded in connection with our business acquisitions which are amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the related assets.
Partnership Termination Charges
Partnership termination charges represent the fees paid related to termination of a strategic partnership during the quarter ended June 30, 2020. These charges are non-recurring in nature and would not otherwise have been incurred by us in the normal course of our organic business operations.
Unoccupied Lease Charges
Unoccupied lease charges include costs related to the early vacating of certain facilities, partially offset by anticipated sublease income from the associated facilities.
Total Other Income (Expense), Net
Total other income (expense), net, consists primarily of interest income and expense and loss on disposal of long-lived assets. We earn interest income on our cash, cash equivalents and investments. Interest expense consists primarily of the interest from the amortization of debt discount, issuance costs, and coupon interest attributable to our convertible notes issued in February 2018, or 2023 Notes, our convertible notes issued in June 2019, or 2026 Notes, and our convertible notes issued in November 2020, or 2025 Notes, as well as fees and interest associated with the letter of credit issued to our landlord for the security deposit for our corporate headquarters.
As a result of the convertible debt exchange we completed in November 2020, we also recorded an $8.9 million non-cash loss on early extinguishment of debt as other expense in the consolidated statements of comprehensive loss, reflecting the early extinguishment of a portion of our 2023 Notes. The non-cash loss on the early extinguishment of debt is the difference between the amount paid to exchange the 2023 Notes that we attributed to the liability component and the net carrying balance of the liability component at the time that we completed the debt exchange.
(Benefit from) Provision for Income Taxes
As a result of our current net operating loss position, current income tax expenses and benefits consist primarily of state income taxes, deferred income tax expenses relating to the tax amortization of recently acquired goodwill, and income tax expense from foreign operations. We incurred state and foreign income taxes for each of the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. Our net operating loss carryforwards for federal income tax purposes were $536.5 million and $415.2 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which will expire at various dates beginning in 2026, if not utilized. Federal net operating losses generated during and after the year ended December 31, 2018 will have an indefinite carryforward period. We also held state tax credits of $2.2 million and $2.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and federal R&D tax credits of $8.2 million and $8.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The state tax credits will begin to expire 2026 if not utilized and the federal R&D tax credits will begin to expire in 2036, if not utilized.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management's discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses. In accordance with GAAP, we base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results might differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and we believe that the accounting policies discussed below involve the greatest degree of complexity and exercise of significant judgments and estimates by our management. The methods, estimates and judgments that we use in applying our accounting policies have a significant impact on our results of operations and, accordingly, we believe the policies described below are the most critical for understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Revenue Recognition
Revenues are recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services over the term of the agreement, generally when our solutions are implemented and made available to our customers. The promised consideration may include fixed amounts, variable amounts or both. Revenues are recognized net of sales credits and allowances.
Revenue-generating activities are directly related to the sale, implementation and support of our solutions within a single operating segment. We derive the majority of our revenues from subscription fees for the use of our solutions hosted in either our data centers or cloud-based hosting services, transaction revenue from bill-pay solutions, and revenues for customer support and implementation services related to our solutions. We recognize the corresponding revenues over time on a ratable basis over the customer agreement term.
Subscription Revenues
Our software solutions are available for use as hosted application arrangements under subscription fee agreements without licensing perpetual rights to the software. Subscription fees from these applications, including contractual periodic price increases, are recognized over time on a ratable basis over the customer agreement term beginning on the date our solution is made available to the customer. Amounts that have been invoiced are recorded in accounts receivable and deferred revenues or revenues, depending on whether the revenue recognition criteria have been met. Periodic price increases are estimated at contract inception and result in contract assets as revenue recognition may exceed the amount billed early in the contract. Additional fees for monthly usage above the levels included in the standard subscription fee are recognized as revenue in the month when the usage amounts are determined and reported.
A small portion of our customers host and manage our solutions on-premises or in third-party data centers under term license and maintenance agreements. Term licenses sold with maintenance entitle the customer to technical support, upgrades and updates to the software on a when-and-if-available basis. We recognize software license revenue once the customer obtains control of the license, which generally occurs at the start of each license term. We recognize the remaining arrangement consideration for maintenance revenue over time on a ratable basis over the term of the software license. If the expected length of time between when we transfer the software license to the customer and when the customer pays for it results in a significant financing component, we adjust the promised amount of consideration for the effects of the time value of money, which reflects the price the customer would have paid when the license was transferred. Revenues from term licenses and maintenance agreements and the related financing component were not significant in the periods presented.
Transactional Revenues
We generate the majority of our transactional revenues based on the number of bill-pay transactions that End Users initiate on our digital banking platform. We also generate a smaller portion of our transactional revenues from interchange fees generated when End Users utilize debit cards integrated with our Q2 CorePro API or Q2 Biller Direct products. We recognize revenue for bill-pay transaction services and interchange fees in the month incurred based on actual transactions.
Services and Other Revenues
Implementation services are required for each new digital banking and lending and leasing platform and Centrix standalone contract, and there is a significant level of integration and configuration for each customer. Our revenue for upfront implementation services is billed upfront and recognized over time on a ratable basis over the customer agreement term for our hosted application agreements. Upfront implementation services for on-premises agreements are recognized at commencement date. Under certain circumstances, we partner with third-party professional system integrators to support the installation and configuration process for certain products, and therefore, we have determined that these services qualify as a separate performance obligation in certain markets and geographies, and the implementation services for these agreements are recognized over time as services are performed.
Professional services revenues, which primarily consist of training, advisory services, core conversion services, web design, and other general professional services, are generally billed and recognized when delivered. Certain out-of-pocket expenses billed to customers are recorded as revenues rather than an offset to the related expense.
Significant Judgments
Performance Obligations and Standalone Selling Price
A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer and is the unit of accounting. Determining whether products and services are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately versus together may require significant judgment. We have contracts with customers that often include multiple performance obligations, usually including multiple subscription and implementation services. For these contracts, we account for individual performance obligations that are separately distinct by allocating the contract's total transaction price to each performance obligation in an amount based on the relative standalone selling price, or SSP, of each distinct good or service in the contract. In determining whether implementation services are distinct from subscription services, we considered various factors including the significant level of integration, interdependency, and interrelation between the implementation and subscription service, as well as the inability of the customer's personnel or other service providers to perform significant portions of the services. We have concluded that the implementation services included in contracts with multiple performance obligations in the North American banking market and implementation services for our loan pricing and portfolio management solution are not distinct and, as a result, we defer any arrangement fees for implementation services and recognize such amounts over time on a ratable basis as one performance obligation with the underlying subscription revenue for the initial agreement term of the hosted application agreements. We have concluded that outside the North American banking market, the implementation services for our lending and leasing platform included in contracts with multiple performance obligations are distinct and, as a result, we recognize implementation fees on such arrangements over time as services are performed.
The majority of our revenue recognized at a particular point in time is for usage revenue and on-premise software licenses. These services are performed within a relatively short period of time and are recognized at the point in time in which the customer obtains control of the asset, which is generally upon completion of the service or the point the customer obtained control of the software.
Judgment is required to determine the SSP for each distinct performance obligation. A contract's transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance obligation and recognized as revenue when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied. The primary method used to estimate SSP is the adjusted market assessment approach, which considers its overall pricing objectives, market conditions and other factors, including the value of our contracts, our discounting practices, the size and volume of our transactions, customer characteristics, price lists, go-to-market strategy, historical standalone sales and agreement prices, and the number and types of users within our contracts.
Variable Consideration
We recognize usage revenue related to End Users accessing our products in excess of contracted amounts, bill-pay transactions that End Users initiate on our digital banking platform, and interchange fees that End Users generate using our solutions. Judgment is required to determine the accounting for these types of revenue. We consider various factors including the degree to which usage is interdependent or interrelated to past services, costs to us per user over the contract, contractual price per user changes and their relationship to market terms, forecasted data, and our cost to fulfill the obligation. We have concluded that our usage revenue relates specifically to the transfer of the service to the customer and is consistent with the allocation objective of Topic 606 when considering all of the performance obligations and payment terms in the contract. Therefore, we recognize usage revenue on a monthly or quarterly basis in accordance with the agreement, as determined and reported. This allocation reflects the amount we expect to receive for the services for the given period.
We sometimes provide credits or incentives to our customers. Known and estimable credits and incentives represent a form of variable consideration, which are estimated at contract inception and reduce the revenues recognized for a particular contract. These estimates are updated at the end of each reporting period as additional information becomes available. We believe that there will not be significant changes to our estimates of variable consideration as of December 31, 2020.
Other Considerations
We evaluate whether we are the principal (i.e., report revenues on a gross basis) or agent (i.e., report revenues on a net basis) with respect to the vendor reseller agreements pursuant to which we resell certain third-party solutions along with our solutions. Generally, we report revenues from these types of contracts on a gross basis, meaning the amounts billed to customers are recorded as revenues, and expenses incurred are recorded as cost of revenues. Where we are the principal, we first obtain control of the inputs to the specific good or service and direct their use to create the combined output. Our control is evidenced by our involvement in the integration of the good or service on our platform before it is transferred to our customers and is further supported by us being primarily responsible to our customers and having a level of discretion in establishing pricing. Revenues provided from agreements in which we are an agent are insignificant.
Deferred Revenues
Deferred revenues primarily consist of amounts that have been billed to or received from customers in advance of revenue recognition and prepayments received from customers in advance for implementation, maintenance and other services, as well as initial subscription fees. We recognize deferred revenues as revenues when the services are performed and the corresponding revenue recognition criteria are met. Customer prepayments are generally applied against invoices issued to customers when services are performed and billed.
Our payment terms vary by the type and location of our customer and the products or services offered. The period of time between invoicing and when payment is due is not significant. For certain products or services and customer types, we require payment before the products or services are delivered to the customer.
Deferred Implementation Costs
We capitalize certain personnel and other costs, such as employee salaries, benefits and the associated payroll taxes that are direct and incremental to the implementation of our solutions. We analyze implementation costs that may be capitalized to assess their recoverability, and only capitalize costs that we anticipate to be recoverable. We assess the recoverability of our deferred implementation costs based on the amount of the non-cancellable portion of a customer's contract as it relates to the specific implementation costs incurred. We begin amortizing the deferred implementation costs for an implementation once the revenue recognition criteria have been met, and we amortize those deferred implementation costs ratably over the expected period of customer benefit, which has been determined to be the estimated life of the technology, which we estimate to be five to seven years. We determined the period of benefit by considering factors such as historically high renewal rates with similar customers and contracts, initial contract length, an expectation that there will still be a demand for the product at the end of its term, and the significant costs to switch to a competitor's product, all of which are governed by the estimated useful life of the technology.
The portion of deferred implementation costs expected to be amortized during the succeeding twelve-month period is recorded in current assets as deferred implementation costs, current portion, and the remainder is recorded in long-term assets as deferred implementation costs, net of current portion on the consolidated balance sheet.
Deferred Solution and Other Costs
We capitalize sales commissions and other third-party costs such as third-party licenses and maintenance related to our customer agreements. We capitalize sales commissions because the commission charges are considered incremental and recoverable costs of obtaining a contract with a customer. We capitalize commissions and bonuses for those involved in the sale, including direct employees and indirect supervisors, as these are incremental to the sale. Historically, we typically paid commissions in two increments. The initial payment was made after the contract had been executed and the initial deposit had been received from the customer, and the final payment was made upon commencement date. We required that an individual remain employed to collect a commission when it was due. The service period between the first and second payment was considered to be a substantive service period, and as a result, we expensed the final payment when made. Beginning in 2020, commissions were paid in a single payment once the contract had been executed and the initial deposit had been received from the customer. We begin amortizing deferred solution and other costs for a particular customer agreement once the revenue recognition criteria are met and amortize those deferred costs over the expected period of customer benefit, which has been determined to be the estimated life of the technology, which we estimate to be five to seven years. We determined the period of benefit by considering factors such as historically high renewal rates with similar customers and contracts, initial contract length, an expectation that there will still be a demand for the product at the end of its term, and the significant costs to switch to a competitor's product, all of which are governed by the estimated useful life of the technology.
We analyze solution and other costs that may be capitalized to assess their recoverability and only capitalize costs that we anticipate being recoverable. The portion of capitalized costs expected to be amortized during the succeeding twelve-month period is recorded in current assets as deferred solution and other costs, current portion, and the remainder is recorded in long-term assets as deferred solution and other costs, net of current portion.
Contract Balances
The timing of revenue recognition, billings and cash collections can result in billed accounts receivable, unbilled receivables, or contract assets, and deferred revenues, or contract liabilities. Billings scheduled to occur after the performance obligation has been satisfied and revenue recognition has occurred result in contract assets. Contract assets that are expected to be billed during the succeeding twelve-month period are recorded in contract assets, current portion, and the remaining portion is recorded in contract assets, net of current portion on the accompanying consolidated balance sheets at the end of each reporting period. A contract liability results when we receive prepayments or deposits from customers in advance for implementation, maintenance and other services, as well as initial subscription fees. Customer prepayments are generally applied against invoices issued to customers when services are performed and billed. We recognize contract liabilities as revenues when the services are performed, and the corresponding revenue recognition criteria are met. Contract liabilities that are expected to be recognized as revenues during the succeeding twelve-month period are recorded in deferred revenues, current portion, and the remaining portion is recorded in deferred revenues, net of current portion, on the accompanying consolidated balance sheets at the end of each reporting period.
We are exposed to credit losses primarily through sales of products and services. We assess the collectability of outstanding contract assets on an ongoing basis and maintain a reserve which is included in the allowance for credit losses for contract assets deemed uncollectable. Under ASU 2016-13, we analyze the contract asset portfolio for significant risks by considering historical collection experience and forecasting future collectability to determine the amount of revenues that will ultimately be collected from our customers. This estimate is analyzed quarterly and adjusted as necessary. Identified risks pertaining to our contract assets include the customer type. Future collectability is contingent upon current and anticipated macroeconomic conditions that could impact our customers such as unemployment, inflation and regulation matters. Additionally, specific allowance amounts may be established to record the appropriate provision for customers that have a higher probability of default. We have increased our reserve during 2020 due to the anticipated impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. There are no comparable recent events that provide guidance as to the potential impact of the COVID-19 global pandemic. As a result, the potential impact of the pandemic is highly uncertain and subject to change. We do not yet know the full extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business operations or the global economy as a whole, however, the impact will likely have an adverse effect on our customers and inherently the related contract assets.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable are stated at net realizable value, including both billed and unbilled receivables to customers. Unbilled receivable balances arise primarily when we provide services in advance of billing for those services. Generally, billing for revenues related to the number of End Users and the number of transactions processed by our End Users that are included in our minimum subscription fee occurs in the month the revenue is recognized, resulting in accounts receivable. Billing for revenues relating to the number of End Users and the number of transactions processed by our End Users that are in excess of our minimum subscription fees are, generally, billed in the month following the month the revenues were earned, resulting in an unbilled receivable.
We assess the collectability of outstanding accounts receivable on an ongoing basis and maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts for accounts receivable deemed uncollectable. Under ASU 2016-13, we analyze the accounts receivable portfolio for significant risks and consider prior periods and forecast future collectability to determine the amount of revenues that will ultimately be collected from our customers. This estimate is analyzed quarterly and adjusted as necessary. Identified risks pertaining to our accounts receivable balance include the delinquency level and customer type. Future collectability is contingent upon current and anticipated macroeconomic conditions that could impact our customers such as unemployment, inflation and regulation matters. Due to the short-term nature of such receivables, the estimate of the amount of accounts receivable that may not be collected is based on aging of the accounts receivable balances and the financial condition of customers. Historically, our collection experience has not varied significantly, and bad debt expenses have been insignificant. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have increased our reserve. There are no comparable recent events that provide guidance as to the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, the potential impact of the pandemic is highly uncertain and subject to change. We do not yet know the full extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business operations or the global economy as a whole, however the impact will potentially have an adverse effect on our customers and inherently the related receivables.
We maintain a reserve for estimated sales credits issued to customers for billing disputes or other service-related reasons. This allowance is recorded as a reduction against current period revenues and accounts receivable. In estimating this allowance, we analyze prior periods to determine the amounts of sales credits issued to customers compared to the revenues in the period that related to the original customer invoice. This estimate is analyzed quarterly and adjusted as necessary.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock options, restricted stock units, and market stock units awarded to employees, directors, executives and consultants are measured at fair value at each grant date. We do not use a forfeiture rate to recognize compensation expense. Generally, options vest 25% on the one-year anniversary of the grant date with the balance vesting monthly over the following 36 months, and restricted stock unit awards vest in four annual installments of 25% each. Market stock units are performance-based awards that vest based on our stockholder return relative to the total stockholder return of the Russell 2000 Index, or Index, over a three-year period on the anniversary of the date of grant. Generally, up to one-third of the target shares of our common stock subject to each market stock unit award are eligible to be earned after the first and second years of the performance period and up to 200% of the full target number of shares subject to each market stock unit award are eligible to be earned after the completion of the three-year performance period (less any shares earned for years one and two) based on the average price of our common stock relative to the Index during the performance period. From time to time, we may make grants of restricted stock units or market stock units with vesting formulas that vary from those described above.
We value stock options using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which requires the input of subjective assumptions, including the risk-free interest rate, expected life, expected stock price volatility, and dividend yield. The risk-free interest rate assumption is based upon observed interest rates for constant maturity U.S. Treasury securities consistent with the expected term of our employee stock options. The expected life represents the period of time the stock options are expected to be outstanding and is based on the simplified method. Under the simplified method, the expected life of an option is presumed to be the mid-point between the vesting date and end of the contractual term. We use the simplified method due to the lack of sufficient historical exercise data to provide a reasonable basis upon which to otherwise estimate the expected life of the stock options. Expected volatility is based on historical volatilities for publicly traded stock of comparable companies over the estimated expected life of the stock options. We assume no dividend yield because we do not expect to pay dividends in the near future, which is consistent with our history of not paying dividends. We recognize compensation expense ratably over the requisite service period of the stock option award.
We value restricted stock units at the closing market price on the date of grant and recognize compensation expense ratably over the requisite service period of the restricted stock unit award.
We estimate the fair value of market stock units on the date of grant using a Monte Carlo simulation model. The determination of fair value of the market stock units is affected by our stock price and a number of assumptions including the expected volatility and the risk-free interest rate. Our expected volatility at the date of grant was based on the historical volatilities of our stock and peer firms' stocks and the Index over the performance period. We assume no dividend yield and recognize compensation expense ratably over the performance period of the market stock unit award. We recognize compensation expense using the graded attribution method on a straight-line basis over the performance period for each market stock unit award.
Convertible Senior Notes
In February 2018, we issued $230.0 million principal amount of convertible senior notes due in February 2023, or the 2023 Notes. In June 2019, we issued $316.3 million principal amount of convertible senior notes due in June 2026, or the 2026 Notes. In November 2020, we issued $350.0 million principal amount of convertible senior notes due in November 2025, or the 2025 Notes. This was achieved by exchanging $181.9 million principal amount of the 2023 Notes for $210.7 million principal amount of the 2025 Notes and issuing an additional $139.3 million of new notes.
When accounting for the issuance of convertible notes, we typically separate each of the convertible notes into liability and equity components. The carrying amount of the liability component is calculated by measuring the fair value, as of the date of issuance, of a similar debt without the conversion feature. The carrying amount of the equity component representing the conversion feature is determined by deducting the fair value of the liability components from the total initial proceeds. The difference between the par amount of the convertible notes and the carrying amount of the liability component represents debt discounts that are amortized to interest expense over the respective terms of the convertible notes using the effective interest rate method. The equity components are not remeasured as long as they continue to meet the conditions for equity classification. In accounting for the issuance costs related to its convertible notes, we allocate the total amount of issuance costs incurred to liability and equity components based on their relative values. Issuance costs attributable to the liability components are amortized to interest expense over the respective terms of the convertible notes using the effective interest rate method. The issuance costs attributable to the equity components were netted against the respective equity components in additional paid-in capital.
When accounting for an exchange of convertible notes, we evaluate whether the transaction should be evaluated as a modification or extinguishment transaction. The partial exchange of the 2023 Notes and issuance of the 2025 Notes were deemed to have substantially different terms due to the significant difference between the value of the conversion option immediately prior to and after the exchange, and consequently, the 2023 Notes partial exchange was accounted for as a debt extinguishment. In an exchange transaction, we will allocate a portion of the settlement consideration to the reacquisition of the liability component, which is equal to the fair value of that component immediately prior to the extinguishment, and allocate the remaining settlement consideration to the reacquisition of the equity component and recognize that amount as a reduction of additional paid in capital. The difference between the consideration attributed to the liability component and the sum of the net carrying amount of the liability component and any unamortized debt issuance costs is recognized as a gain or loss on debt extinguishment in our consolidated statements of comprehensive loss.
Purchase Price Allocation, Intangible Assets and Goodwill
The purchase price allocation for business combinations and asset acquisitions requires extensive use of accounting estimates and judgments to allocate the purchase price to the identifiable tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their respective fair values. We determine whether substantially all of the fair value of the gross assets acquired is concentrated in a single identifiable asset or a group of similar identifiable assets. If this threshold is met, the single asset or group of assets, as applicable, is not a business. If it is not met, we determine whether the single asset or group of assets, as applicable, meets the definition of a business.
In connection with our acquisitions and asset purchase discussed in Note 3 - Business Combinations, we recorded certain intangible assets, including acquired technology, customer relationships, trademarks, non-compete agreements and assembled workforce. Amounts allocated to the acquired intangible assets are being amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives. We periodically review the estimated useful lives and fair values of our identifiable intangible assets, taking into consideration any events or circumstances which might result in a diminished fair value or revised useful life.
The excess purchase price over the fair value of assets acquired is recorded as goodwill. We test goodwill for impairment annually in October, or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate an impairment may have occurred. Because we operate in a single reporting unit, the impairment test is performed at the consolidated entity level by comparing the estimated fair value of the company to the carrying value of the company. We estimate the fair value of the reporting unit using a "step one" analysis using a fair-value-based approach based on the market capitalization or a discounted cash flow analysis of projected future results to determine if it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. Determining the fair value of goodwill is subjective in nature and often involves the use of estimates and assumptions
including, without limitation, use of estimates of future prices and volumes for our products, capital needs, economic trends and other factors which are inherently difficult to forecast. If actual results, or the plans and estimates used in future impairment analyses are lower than the original estimates used to assess the recoverability of these assets, we could incur impairment charges in a future period. The annual impairment test was performed as of October 31, 2020. No impairment of goodwill was identified during 2020.
Software Development Costs
We capitalize certain software development costs under accounting frameworks that differ based on the nature of the software. Software development costs include salaries and other personnel-related costs, including employee benefits and bonuses attributed to programmers, software engineers, quality control teams working on our software solutions, and third-party development costs. Capitalized software development costs are computed on an individual product basis and products available for market are amortized to cost of revenues over the products' estimated economic lives. The costs related to software development are included in intangible assets, net on the consolidated balance sheets.
We capitalize certain development costs associated with software that is to be sold, leased or otherwise marketed that are incurred between reaching technological feasibility of a solution and the point at which the solution is ready for general release.
We capitalize certain development costs associated with internal use software incurred during the application development stage. We expense costs associated with preliminary project phase activities, training, maintenance and any post-implementation costs as incurred.
Leases
We determine if a contract contains a lease for accounting purposes at the inception of the arrangement. We have elected to apply the practical expedient which allows us to account for lease and non-lease components of a contract as a single leasing arrangement. In addition, we have elected the practical expedients related to lease classification and the short-term lease exemption, whereby leases with initial terms of one year or less are not capitalized and instead expensed generally on a straight-line basis over the lease term. We are primarily a lessee with a lease portfolio comprised mainly of real estate and equipment leases. As of December 31, 2020, we had no finance leases.
Operating lease assets are included on our consolidated balance sheets in non-current assets as a right-of-use, or ROU, asset, and represent our right to use an underlying asset for the lease term. Operating lease liabilities are included on our consolidated balance sheets in lease liabilities, current portion, for the portion that is due within 12 months and in lease liabilities, net of current portion, for the portion that is due beyond 12 months of the financial statement date and represent our obligation to make lease payments.
ROU assets and lease liabilities are recognized at the commencement date of the lease based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term using an appropriate discount rate. If an implicit rate is not readily determined by our leases, we utilize the incremental borrowing rate based on the available information at the commencement date to determine the lease payments. The depreciable lives of the underlying leased assets are generally limited to the expected lease term inclusive of any optional lease renewals where we conclude at the inception of the lease that we are reasonably certain of exercising those options. The ROU asset calculation may also include any initial direct costs paid and is reduced by any lease incentives provided by the lessor. Lease expense for operating lease payments is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
Contingent Consideration
Certain former stockholders of Cloud Lending had the right to receive an earnout payment based upon satisfaction of certain financial milestones. The initial fair value of the contingent consideration related to the earnout payment was calculated utilizing the Monte Carlo simulation method under the option pricing model. Between the time of the purchase price finalization and the final measurement date of March 31, 2020, the fair value of the contingent consideration was estimated on a quarterly basis through a collaborative effort by our sales and finance departments. Changes in the fair value of the contingent consideration subsequent to the purchase price finalization were recorded as acquisition related costs in the consolidated statements of comprehensive loss. As of December 31, 2020 all of the contingent consideration had been paid.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method. We record deferred tax assets and liabilities for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, as well as for operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. We measure deferred tax assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which we expect to recover or settle those temporary differences. We recognize the effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities in the
results of operations in the period that includes the enactment date. We assess the likelihood that deferred tax assets will be realized, and we recognize a valuation allowance if it is more likely than not that some portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. This assessment requires judgment as to the likelihood and amounts of future taxable income by tax jurisdiction. To date, we have provided a valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets as we believe the objective and verifiable evidence of our historical pretax net losses outweighs any positive evidence of our forecasted future results. Although we believe that our tax estimates are reasonable, the ultimate tax determination involves significant judgment. We will continue to monitor the positive and negative evidence and will adjust the valuation allowance as sufficient objective positive evidence becomes available.
We account for uncertain tax positions by recognizing the financial statement effects of a tax position only when, based upon technical merits, it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon examination. We recognize potential accrued interest and penalties associated with unrecognized tax positions within our global operations in income tax expense.
Results of Operations
Consolidated Statements of Operations Data
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data for each of the periods indicated (in thousands):
______________________________________________________________________________
(1) Includes deferred revenue reduction from purchase accounting of $4.4 million, $1.8 million and zero for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
(2) Includes amortization of acquired technology of $21.3 million, $9.9 million and $4.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
(3) Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows (in thousands):
______________________________________________________________________________
(4) Unoccupied lease charges include costs related to the early vacating of various facilities, partially offset by anticipated sublease income from these facilities. In 2020 the charges related to facilities in California, North Carolina and Texas. In 2019 the charges related to facilities in Georgia. In 2018 the charges related to facilities in Texas.
(5) The year ended December 31, 2020 includes an $8.9 million reduction related to the loss on the early extinguishment of a portion of our 2023 Notes.
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data as a percentage of revenues for each of the periods indicated:
_______________________________________________________________________________
(1) Includes deferred revenue reduction from purchase accounting of 1.1%, 0.6% and 0.0% for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
(2) Includes amortization of acquired technology of 5.3%, 3.1% and 1.9% for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
(3) Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
______________________________________________________________________________
(4) Unoccupied lease charges include costs related to the early vacating of various facilities, partially offset by anticipated sublease income from these facilities. In 2020 the charges related to facilities in California, North Carolina and Texas. In 2019 the charges related to facilities in Georgia. In 2018 the charges related to facilities in Texas.
(5) The year ended December 31, 2020 includes a 2.2% reduction related to the loss on the early extinguishment of a portion of our 2023 Notes.
Due to rounding, totals may not equal the sum of the line items in the tables above.
Comparison of Year Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, and the Year Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Revenues
The following table presents our revenues for each of the periods indicated (dollars in thousands):
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019. Revenues increased by $87.3 million, or 27.7%, from $315.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $402.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily attributable to a $59.4 million increase from the sale of additional solutions to new and existing customers and growth in Registered Users from new and existing customers. In addition, $21.5 million of the increase was generated from the business acquired in the fourth quarter of 2019, $7.2 million of the increase was generated from increases in the number of transactions processed using our solutions and $2.0 million of the increase was generated from our "Paycheck Protection Program" solutions as a result of successfully funded applications during the year ended December 31, 2020. These increases were partially offset by a $2.8 million decrease for a contract asset impairment related to the restructuring of a contract with one of our FinTech customers. The number of Registered Users on our online banking platform increased from 14.6 million on December 31, 2019 to 17.8 million on December 31, 2020.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2018. Revenues increased by $74.4 million, or 30.9%, from $241.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $315.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily attributable to a $43.2 million increase from the sale of additional solutions to new and existing customers and growth in Registered Users from new and existing customers. In addition, $19.4 million of the increase was generated from the businesses acquired in the fourth quarter of 2018, $9.2 million of the increase was generated from increases in the number of transactions processed using our solutions, and $2.6 million of the increase was generated from the business acquired in the fourth quarter of 2019. The number of Registered Users on our online banking platform increased from 12.8 million on December 31, 2018 to 14.6 million on December 31, 2019.
Cost of Revenues
The following table presents our cost of revenues for each of the periods indicated (dollars in thousands):
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019. Cost of revenues increased by $65.7 million, or 40.4%, from $162.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $228.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was attributable to a $29.7 million increase in personnel costs due to an increase in the number of personnel who provide implementation and customer support services and maintain our data centers and other technical infrastructure, which included a $5.2 million increase in personnel costs from the business acquired in the fourth quarter of 2019, and a $3.5 million increase in stock-based compensation expense allocated to cost of revenues for the increase in the number of stock-based awards vested during the period and the fair value of the awards granted due to the variance in our stock price. In addition, there was an $11.5 million increase from amortization of acquired customer technology resulting from the business acquired in the fourth quarter of 2019, a $9.8 million increase in co-location facility costs and depreciation for our data center assets resulting from the increased infrastructure necessary to support our growing customer base, a $5.6 million increase in third-party costs related to intellectual property included in our solutions and transaction processing costs incurred as a result of the increase in Registered Users from new and existing customers, as well as implementation and support personnel expenses that are reimbursable from our customers, a $6.8 million increase from amortization of capitalized implementation services as a result of customer go lives during the year ended December 31, 2020, a $2.2 million increase in overhead costs which were allocated to our implementation and support departments, and a $1.4 million increase in other discretionary expenses. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in travel-related expenses of $1.3 million due to significantly reduced travel as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2018. Cost of revenues increased by $40.6 million, or 33.3%, from $121.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $162.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily attributable to a $14.4 million increase in personnel costs due to an increase in the number of personnel who provide implementation and customer support services and maintain our data centers and other technical infrastructure, which includes $1.2 million and $10.8 million in personnel costs from the businesses acquired in the fourth quarter of 2019 and the fourth quarter of 2018, respectively, and a $1.6 million increase in stock-based compensation expense allocated to cost of revenue for the increase in the number of stock-based awards vested during the period and the increased fair value of the awards granted due to the increase in our stock price. In addition, there was a $9.3 million increase in direct costs related to bill-pay transaction processing and other third-party intellectual property included in our solutions which was related to the increase in the number of new Registered Users and transactions processed on our digital banking platform and increases in implementation and support expenses that are reimbursable from our customers, a $5.5 million increase in co-location facility costs and depreciation of our data center assets resulting from the increased infrastructure necessary to support our expanding customer base, a $5.3 million increase in amortization of acquired customer technology from the businesses acquired in the fourth quarter of 2019 and the fourth quarter of 2018, a $3.0 million increase from capitalized services amortization, a $2.4 million increase in facilities and other overhead costs which were allocated to our implementation and support departments, and a $0.6 million increase in travel and other discretionary expenses.
We defer certain personnel and other costs directly related to the implementation of our solutions to the extent those costs are recoverable from future revenues. However, a substantial portion of our implementation costs are not eligible for deferral and, as a result, are expensed in the period incurred. Costs related to implementations that have been deferred are amortized over the expected period of customer benefit. Additionally, we invest in personnel, business processes and systems infrastructure to standardize our business processes and drive future efficiency in our implementations, customer support and data center operations. We expect these investments will increase cost of revenues in absolute dollars as we continue to make investments in capacity, process improvement, and systems infrastructure, and we expect such expenses to decline as a percentage of revenue as our operations continue to scale and revenues grow.
Operating Expenses
The following tables present our operating expenses for each of the periods indicated (dollars in thousands):
Sales and Marketing
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019. Sales and marketing expenses increased by $8.4 million, or 13.1%, from $63.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $72.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily attributable to a $13.4 million increase in personnel costs due to the growth of our sales and marketing organizations, which included an $8.0 million increase in personnel costs from the business acquired in the fourth quarter of 2019, and a $1.0 million increase in stock-based compensation expense allocated to sales and marketing expenses for the increase in the number of stock-based awards vested during the period and the fair value of the awards granted due to the variance in our stock price. In addition, there was a $0.7 million increase in other overhead costs which were allocated to our sales and marketing departments. These increases were partially offset by a $3.5 million decrease in travel-related expenses due to significantly reduced travel as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and a $2.2 million decrease in other discretionary expenses primarily related to reduced trade show activities and other events as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2018. Sales and marketing expenses increased by $15.8 million, or 32.9%, from $48.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $63.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily attributable to a $13.2 million increase in personnel costs due to the growth of our sales and marketing organizations. The increase in personnel costs includes $0.5 million and $9.7 million in personnel costs from the businesses acquired in the fourth quarter of 2019 and the fourth quarter of 2018, respectively, and a $1.9 million increase in stock-based compensation expense allocated to sales and marketing for the increase in the number of stock-based awards vested during the period and the increased fair value of the awards granted due to the increase in our stock price. In addition, there was a $1.1 million increase in facilities and other overhead costs which were allocated to our sales and marketing departments, a $0.9 million increase in travel-related expenses due to increased employee travel to attract new
customers and support our sales and marketing initiatives, and a $0.6 million increase in the growth in our annual customer conference.
We anticipate that sales and marketing expenses will continue to increase in absolute dollars in the future as we add personnel to support our revenue growth and as we increase marketing spend to attract new customers, retain and grow existing customers and build brand awareness. We expect such expenses to decline as a percentage of our revenues over time as our revenues grow.
Research and Development
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019. Research and development expenses increased by $21.1 million, or 27.7%, from $76.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $97.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily attributable to a $21.7 million increase in personnel costs as a result of the growth in our research and development organization to support continued enhancements to our solutions, which included a $10.3 million increase in personnel costs from the business acquired in the fourth quarter of 2019, and a $3.0 million increase in stock-based compensation expense allocated to research and development expenses for the increase in the number of stock-based awards vested during the period and the fair value of the awards granted due to the variance in our stock price. Additionally, there was a $1.2 million increase in facilities and other overhead costs which were allocated to our research and development departments. These increases were partially offset by a $1.2 million decrease in travel-related and other discretionary expenses as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and a $0.6 million decrease as a result of increased capitalized software development costs.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2018. Research and development expenses increased by $24.9 million, or 48.6%, from $51.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $76.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily attributable to a $22.6 million increase in personnel costs as a result of the growth in our research and development organization for continued enhancements to our solutions, which includes $0.3 million and $9.2 million in personnel costs from the businesses acquired in the fourth quarter of 2019 and the fourth quarter of 2018, respectively, and a $3.0 million increase in stock-based compensation expense allocated to research and development expenses for the increase in the number of stock-based awards vested during the period and the increased fair value of the awards granted due to the increase in our stock price. In addition, there was a $2.4 million increase in facilities and other overhead costs, and a $0.1 million increase in travel and other discretionary expenses partially offset by a $0.1 million decrease from capitalized research and development salaries as software development costs during 2019.
We anticipate that research and development expenses will increase in absolute dollars in the future as we continue to support and expand our platform and enhance our existing solutions, as we believe existing customers will have an increased focus on maintaining and improving their digital banking offerings, including functionality such as digital account opening and online lending.
General and Administrative
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019. General and administrative expenses increased by $14.2 million, or 25.0%, from $56.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $70.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily attributable to an $8.6 million increase in personnel costs to support the growth of our business, which included a $3.7 million increase in personnel costs from the business acquired in the fourth quarter of 2019, and a $2.3 million increase in stock-based compensation expense allocated to general and administrative expenses for the increase in the number of stock-based awards vested during the period
and the fair value of the awards granted due to the variance in our stock price. In addition, there was a $2.4 million increase in overhead costs which were allocated to our general and administrative departments, a $1.6 million increase in professional services for legal and compliance fees, a $1.0 million increase in bad debt expense due to additional estimated credit losses from the adoption of ASU 2016-13, a $0.8 million increase in expenses, in which we used savings from decreased office expenses and travel, to assist employees and enhance their remote working experience, a $0.5 million increase for price concessions given to customers related to isolated delivery issues of certain of our solutions and a $0.2 million increase in recruiting expenses. These increases were partially offset by a $0.9 million decrease in travel-related expenses due to significantly reduced travel as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2018. General and administrative expenses increased by $11.7 million, or 26.1%, from $45.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $56.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily attributable to a $8.8 million increase in personnel costs to support the growth of our business which includes a $3.7 million increase in stock-based compensation expense allocated to general and administrative expenses for the increase in the number of stock-based awards vested during the period and the increased fair value of the awards granted due to the increase in our stock price and $1.2 million and $3.4 million in personnel costs from the businesses acquired in the fourth quarter of 2019 and the fourth quarter of 2018, respectively. The remaining increase was attributable to a $1.4 million increase in facilities and other overhead costs, a $0.7 million increase in travel and other discretionary expenses, a $0.5 million increase in external audit fees, and a $0.3 million increase in professional services for legal and consulting fees.
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and other personnel-related costs of our administrative, finance and accounting, information systems, legal and human resources employees. General and administrative expenses also include costs to comply with regulations governing public companies, costs of directors' and officers' liability insurance, investor relations activities and costs to comply with Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, or SOX. Over the long term, we anticipate that general and administrative expenses will continue to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to incur both increased external audit fees as well as additional spending to ensure continued regulatory and SOX compliance. We expect such expenses to decline as a percentage of our revenues over the longer term as our revenues grow.
Acquisition Related Costs
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019. Acquisition related costs decreased by $15.5 million, or 97.0%, from $16.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 included $3.1 million of compensation expense related to the retention bonuses for employees of companies acquired in the fourth quarter of 2018 and the fourth quarter of 2019 and $0.3 million of additional legal, professional services, and other costs, substantially offset by a $2.9 million negative adjustment to the fair value of the contingent consideration related to the acquisition of Cloud Lending based on actual achievement at the final March 31, 2020 measurement date.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2018. Acquisition related costs increased by $11.9 million, or 286.7%, from $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $16.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 included $7.3 million for the changes in fair value of the contingent consideration of Cloud Lending, $6.5 million of legal, professional services and other costs related to the 2019 acquisition of PrecisionLender, and $0.7 million and $1.5 million of compensation expense related to retention bonuses for employees of companies acquired in 2019 and 2018, respectively. The expense for the year ended December 31, 2018 included $3.1 million of legal, professional services and other costs related to the 2018 acquisitions of Cloud Lending and Gro, $0.6 million of compensation expense related to the remaining retention bonuses for employees of companies acquired in 2015, and $0.3 million of compensation expense related to Cloud Lending and Gro.
Amortization of Acquired Intangibles
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019. Amortization of acquired intangibles increased by $11.5 million, or 182.2%, from $6.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $17.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 included the full year of amortization of acquired intangible assets purchased in the fourth quarter of 2019 from PrecisionLender, as well as acquired intangible asset amortization related to our business combinations in 2018 and 2015 and asset purchase in 2017.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2018. Amortization of acquired intangibles increased by $4.5 million, or 243.8%, from $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $6.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 included the amortization of acquired intangible assets purchased in the fourth quarter of 2019 from PrecisionLender, as well as acquired intangible asset amortization related to our business combinations in 2018 and 2015 and asset purchase in 2017. The expense for the year ended December 31, 2018 included the amortization of acquired intangible assets purchased in the fourth quarter of 2018 from Cloud Lending and Gro, as well as acquired intangible asset amortization related to our business combinations in 2015 and asset purchase in 2017.
Unoccupied Lease Charges
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019. Unoccupied lease charges increased by $1.8 million, or 419.3%, from $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the charges included costs related to the early vacating of facilities in California, North Carolina and Texas, partially offset by anticipated sublease income from these facilities. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the charges included costs related to the early vacating of facilities in Georgia, partially offset by anticipated sublease income from these facilities.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2018. Unoccupied lease charges decreased by $0.2 million, or 36.2%, from $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the charges included costs related to the early vacating of facilities in Georgia, partially offset by anticipated sublease income from these facilities. During the year ended December 31, 2018, the charges included costs related to the early vacating of facilities in Texas, partially offset by anticipated sublease income from these facilities.
Total Other Income (Expense), Net
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019. Total other income (expense), net represented a net expense of $36.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a net expense of $16.6 million
for the year ended December 31, 2019. The change was primarily attributable to an $8.9 million loss from the early extinguishment of a portion of our 2023 Notes, a $6.6 million increase in interest expense from the amortization of debt discount and issuance costs attributable to our convertible notes, a $1.7 million increase in interest expense from the amortization of coupon interest attributable to our convertible notes and financing arrangements, and a $2.5 million decrease in interest income from investments.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2018. Total other income (expense), net represented a net expense of $16.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to a net expense of $7.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The change was primarily attributable to a $7.6 million increase in interest expense from the amortization of debt discount, issuance costs, and coupon interest attributable to our 2026 Notes issued in June 2019, a $2.0 million increase in interest expense from the amortization of debt discount, issuance costs, and coupon interest attributable to our 2023 Notes issued in February 2018, a $0.3 million increase in interest expense on various purchases and a loss on disposal of long-lived asset of $0.3 million, partially offset by a $1.0 million increase in interest income earned on cash, cash equivalents, and investments.
Benefit from (provision for) income taxes
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019. Total benefit from (provision for) income taxes decreased by $13.9 million from a benefit of $12.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to an expense of $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in the tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of a reduction of $15.0 million relating to the acquired businesses in the fourth quarter of 2019. Additionally, there was a decrease in tax expense of $1.1 million relating to the operations of the business.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2018. Total benefit from income taxes increased by $8.7 million from a benefit of $3.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to a benefit of $12.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in the tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of a reduction in the valuation allowance of $15.0 million due to the deferred tax liability for the acquired businesses in the fourth quarter of 2019.
Seasonality and Quarterly Results
Our overall operating results fluctuate from quarter to quarter as a result of a variety of factors, including the timing of investments to grow our business. The timing of our implementation activities and corresponding revenues from new customers are subject to fluctuations based on the timing of our sales. Historically, sales have tended to be lower in the first quarter of each year than in subsequent quarters but any resulting impact on our results of operation has been difficult to measure due to the timing of our implementations and overall growth in our business. The timing of our implementations also varies period-to-period based on our implementation capacity, the number of solutions purchased by our customers, the size and unique needs of our customers and the readiness of our customers to implement our solutions.
Given the uncertainty that still surrounds the COVID-19 pandemic, we are expecting sales performance across all our solutions to continue to be slower during the year ending December 31, 2021 than what it otherwise would have been without the pandemic. However, based on feedback we have received from our existing and prospective customers and observations from our sales team after operating since March 2020 in the COVID-19 pandemic, we believe we will begin to see improvements in the predictability of purchasing decisions and implementations by customers, and a corresponding gradual increase in bookings during 2021. However, the duration and impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic continue to be highly unpredictable and may continue to disrupt any seasonality trends that may otherwise typically be inherent in our historical operating results.
Our solutions are often the most frequent point of engagement between our customers and their End Users. As a result, we and our customers are very deliberate and measured in our implementation activities to help ensure a successful roll-out of the solutions to End Users and increase the registration of new End Users. Unusually long or short implementations, for even a small number of customers, may result in short-term quarterly variability in our results of operations.
Our quarterly results of operations may vary significantly in the future and period-to-period comparisons of our operating results may not be meaningful and should not be relied upon as an indication of future results.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
We have financed our operations primarily through the proceeds from the issuance of common stock in our initial public offering in March 2014, and additional registered common stock offerings, including our June 2019 and May 2020 common stock offerings, cash flows from operations, our February 2018 convertible note offering, our June 2019 convertible note offering, and our November 2020 convertible note offering. As of December 31, 2020, our principal sources of liquidity were cash, cash equivalents and investments of $539.1 million. Based upon our current levels of operations, and our current expectations regarding the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations and financial performance, we believe that our cash flow from operations along with our other sources of liquidity are adequate to meet our cash requirements for the next twelve months. However, if we determine the need for additional short-term liquidity, there is no assurance that such financing, if pursued and obtained, would be adequate or on terms acceptable to us.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash provided by (used in) operating activities is primarily influenced by the amount and timing of customer receipts and vendor payments, fair value re-measurement related to contingent earnout payment liabilities and by the amount of cash we invest in personnel and infrastructure to support the anticipated growth of our business and increase in the number of installed customers.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our net cash and cash equivalents used in operating activities was $2.9 million, which consisted of a net loss of $137.6 million and cash outflows from changes in operating assets and liabilities of $26.9 million, partially offset by non-cash adjustments of $161.6 million. Cash outflows are the result of a $32.2 million increase in deferred solution and implementation costs due to our increased customer growth and new and existing customers undergoing implementations during the period, a $14.6 million increase in accounts receivable due to the timing of payments received, a $3.7 million increase in contract assets, a $3.0 million net decrease in accounts payable and accrued liabilities due to timing of payments in support of our expanding customer base and related growth in our technical infrastructure and expanded facilities, and a $2.4 million increase in other prepaid assets. Cash inflows were the result of a $20.4 million increase in deferred revenue due to increased payments and deposits received from customers prior to the recognition of revenue from those related payments, a $5.0 million increase in deferred rents and other long-term liabilities, and a $3.7 million decrease in other long-term assets driven by the amortization of right-of-use assets. Non-cash items consisted primarily of $51.8 million of depreciation and amortization expense, $50.7 million of stock-based compensation expense, $23.3 million in amortization of the 2023 Notes, 2025 Notes and 2026 Notes discount and related debt issuance costs, $22.9 million of amortization of deferred implementation and deferred solution and other costs, $8.9 million related to the early extinguishment of a portion of the 2023 Notes, $2.2 million of unoccupied lease charges and $1.8 million of other non-cash items.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, our net cash and cash equivalents provided by operating activities was $0.6 million, which consisted of a net loss of $70.9 million and cash outflows from changes in operating assets and liabilities of $16.1 million, offset by non-cash adjustments of $87.6 million. Cash outflows are the result of a $37.8 million increase in deferred solution and implementation costs due to our increased customer growth and new and existing customers undergoing implementations during the period, an $8.0 million decrease in deferred rents and other long-term liabilities, a $5.2 million increase in contract assets, and a $0.8 million increase in other prepaid assets. Cash inflows were the result of a $15.8 million net increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities due to timing of payments in support of our expanding customer base and related growth in our technical infrastructure and expanded facilities, a $13.4 million increase in deferred revenue due to increased payments and deposits received from customers prior to the recognition of revenue from those related payments, a
$6.1 million decrease in other long-term assets driven by the amortization of right-of-use assets, and a $0.4 million decrease in accounts receivable due to the timing of payments received. Non-cash items consisted primarily of $40.5 million of stock-based compensation expense, $28.5 million of depreciation and amortization expense, $16.6 million in amortization of the 2023 Notes and 2026 Notes discount and related debt issuance costs, $13.6 million of amortization of deferred implementation and deferred solution and other costs, and $1.1 million of other non-cash items, partially offset by a $12.8 million decrease in deferred income taxes from the acquisition of PrecisionLender and the increase in valuation allowance against state tax credits.
For the year ended December 31, 2018, our net cash and cash equivalents provided by operating activities were $4.6 million, which consisted of non-cash adjustments of $61.8 million, offset by a net loss of $35.4 million and cash outflows from changes in operating assets and liabilities of $21.8 million. Cash outflows are the result of a $15.8 million increase in deferred solution and implementation costs due to our increased customer growth and new and existing customers undergoing implementations during the period, a $5.8 million increase in contract assets due to the adoption of the new revenue standard, a $4.7 million increase in accounts receivable due to the timing of billings at the end of the current year, a $1.4 million increase in other long-term assets from the addition of deferred tax assets, and a $1.1 million decrease in deferred rents and other long-term liabilities. Cash inflows were the result of a $4.5 million increase in deferred revenue due to increased payments and deposits received from customers prior to the recognition of revenue from those related payments, a $1.8 million decrease in other prepaid assets, and a $0.7 million net increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities due to timing of payments in support of our expanding customer base and related growth in our technical infrastructure and expanded facilities. Non-cash items consisted primarily of $29.5 million of stock-based compensation expense, $16.8 million of depreciation and amortization expense, $8.5 million in amortization of the Convertible Notes discount and related debt issuance costs, $8.4 million of amortization of deferred implementation and deferred solution and other costs, a $2.1 million decrease in our deferred income taxes, and $0.6 million of other non-cash items.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Our investing activities have consisted primarily of purchases and maturities of investments, our recent acquisitions, purchases of property and equipment to support our growth, and costs incurred for the development of capitalized software. Purchases of property and equipment may vary period-to-period due to the timing of the expansion of our operations, data center and other technical infrastructure.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $124.2 million, consisting primarily of $131.3 million for the purchase of investments, $23.7 million for the purchase of property and equipment, and $1.0 million in capitalized software development costs. These outflows were partially offset by $31.8 million received from the maturities of investments.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in investing activities was $483.3 million, consisting primarily of $505.6 million for the acquisition of PrecisionLender, $27.3 million for the purchase of investments, $13.9 million for the purchase of property and equipment, $0.3 million from the purchase of intangible assets, and $0.2 million in capitalized software development costs. These outflows were partially offset by $64.0 million received from the maturities of investments.
For the year ended December 31, 2018, net cash used in investing activities was $171.3 million, consisting primarily of $130.7 million for the acquisitions of Cloud Lending and Gro and release of the hold back from the asset acquisition in 2017, $75.7 million for the purchase of investments, and $13.3 million for the purchase of property and equipment. These outflows were partially offset by $48.4 million received from the maturities of investments.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Our recent financing activities have consisted primarily of our June 2019 and May 2020 common stock offerings, our February 2018 offering of the 2023 Notes, our June 2019 offering of the 2026 Notes, our November 2020 offering of the 2025 Notes, net proceeds from exercises of options to purchase our common stock, as well as payments on financing obligations.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $434.7 million, which was primarily due to proceeds from the issuance of common stock of $311.3 million, net of issuance costs, from the May 2020 common stock offering, issuance of $132.6 million principal amount of the 2025 Notes, net of issuance costs, from the November 2020 offering of the 2025 Notes, $34.1 million net proceeds received in connection with the early termination of bond hedges and warrants related to the 2023 Notes, and $13.3 million of cash received from the exercise of stock options, partially offset by the Capped Call transactions of $39.8 million and payment of contingent consideration related to the acquisition of Cloud Lending, of which $16.9 million of the payment was estimated at acquisition date fair value and included in financing activities.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities was $476.1 million, which was primarily due to the issuance of $307.0 million principal amount of the 2026 Notes, net of issuance costs, proceeds from the
issuance of common stock of $195.3 million, net of issuance costs, from the June 2019 common stock offering, and $14.6 million of cash received from the exercise of stock options partially offset by the Capped Call transactions of $40.8 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2018, net cash provided by financing activities was $216.6 million, which was primarily due to the issuance of $223.2 million principal amount of the Convertible Notes, net of issuance costs, and the related sale of Warrants for $22.4 million, offset by the purchase of bond hedges for $41.7 million. In addition, cash flows from financing activities included $12.7 million of cash received from the exercise of stock options.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Our principal commitments consist of the 2023 Notes, 2025 Notes, 2026 Notes, non-cancelable operating leases related to our facilities, minimum purchase commitments for sponsorship obligations, third-party products, co-location fees and other product costs. In February 2018, we issued $230.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 0.75% 2023 Notes due February 15, 2023, unless earlier converted or repurchased in accordance with their terms prior to such date. Interest on the 2023 Notes is payable semi-annually on February 15 and August 15 of each year. In June 2019, we issued $316.3 million in aggregate principal amount of 0.75% 2026 Notes due June 1, 2026, unless earlier converted or repurchased in accordance with their terms prior to such date. Interest on the 2026 Notes is payable semi-annually on June 1 and December 1 of each year, beginning on December 1, 2019. In November 2020, we exchanged $181.9 million of our 2023 Notes for $210.7 million of new 2025 Notes and issued an additional $139.3 million of new 2025 Notes for an aggregate principal amount of $350.0 million of 0.125% 2025 Notes due November 15, 2025, unless earlier converted or repurchased in accordance with their terms prior to such date. Interest on the 2025 Notes is payable semi-annually on May 15 and November 15 of each year.
As of December 31, 2020, our total lease payment obligations were $82.1 million, of which $36.7 million was included in lease liabilities, net of current portion in our consolidated balance sheets.
We are also party to several purchase commitments related to sponsorship obligations and also third-party products that contain both a contractual minimum obligation and a variable obligation based upon usage or other factors which can change on a monthly basis. The estimated amounts for usage and other factors are not included within the table below.
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations and commitments at December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of SEC Regulation S-K, such as the use of unconsolidated subsidiaries, structured finance, special purpose entities or variable interest entities.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-13, "Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326)" which modifies the measurement of expected credit losses of certain financial instruments. The new guidance is effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2019, with early adoption permitted. We adopted the standard effective January 1, 2020. The standard impacted our accounting for allowances for credit losses, available-for-sale debt securities and other assets subject to credit risk. Credit losses on trade and other receivables, contract assets, available-for-sale debt securities, and other instruments reflect our current estimate of the expected credit losses and generally result in the earlier recognition of allowance for losses. Adoption of the new standard resulted in the recording of a cumulative-effect adjustment to accumulated deficit of $0.3 million on January 1, 2020. We will continue to actively monitor the impact of the recent COVID-19 pandemic on expected credit losses.
In January 2017, the FASB issued ASU No. 2017-04, "Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (Topic 350): Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment" which simplifies the accounting for goodwill impairment by removing Step 2 of the goodwill impairment test and requires an entity to write down the carrying value of goodwill up to the amount by which the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value. The standard is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019, and interim periods within those fiscal years and early adoption is permitted for interim or annual goodwill impairment tests
performed on testing dates after January 1, 2017. We adopted the standard effective January 1, 2020. There was no material impact on our financial position and results of operations based on the adoption of ASU 2017-04.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, "Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity's Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40)" which simplifies the accounting for convertible debt instruments by eliminating the requirement to separate embedded conversion features from the host contract when the conversion features are not required to be accounted for as derivatives under Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging, or that do not result in substantial premiums accounted for as paid-in capital. In addition, the guidance eliminates the treasury stock method to calculate diluted earnings per share for convertible instruments and requires the use of the if-converted method. The standard is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within those fiscal years. We may adopt the guidance through either a modified retrospective method of transition or a fully retrospective method of transition. We are currently evaluating the potential effects of this guidance on our consolidated financial statements.