Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes to consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, beliefs and expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this prospectus, particularly in “Risk Factors” and “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
Quotient Technology Inc. is an industry leading digital media and promotions technology company that creates cohesive omnichannel brand-building and sales-driving marketing campaigns for CPGs companies and retailers throughout the path to purchase. These programs are delivered across our platforms across our broad network of digital properties to drive measurable sales results and customer loyalty. Our network includes the digital properties of our retail partners and CPG customers, social media platforms, third-party properties, our flagship consumer brand Coupons.com properties and DOOH properties. This network provides Quotient with proprietary and licensed data, including retailers’ in-store POS shopper data, purchase intent and online behavior, location intelligence, and, to deliver more valuable outcomes for CPGs, retailers, and consumers. Customers and partners use Quotient to leverage shopper data, and insights, consumers via digital channels, integrate marketing and merchandising programs, and leverage consumer data and insights to drive measurable sales results.
For our retail partners, we provide Quotient Retailer Promotions Platform, formerly known as Quotient Retailer iQ, and Quotient Retailer Performance Media Platform, to directly engage with shoppers across their websites, mobile, eCommerce, and social channels. These platforms are generally co-branded or white-labeled through retailers’ savings or loyalty programs and use shopper data to deliver relevant digital media and promotions solutions from brand marketers and retailers to consumers. By partnering with Quotient, retailers can leverage their proprietary sales data and digital properties to build new alternative revenue streams and offer effective marketing opportunities for their brand partners to engage consumers, all while measuring the impact of every partnership.
Our network is made up of three constituencies: over 2,000 brands from approximately 800 CPGs; retail partners across multiple classes of trade such as grocery retailers, drug, mass merchant, dollar, club, and convenience merchandise channels; and consumers who visit our websites, mobile properties, social channels, as well as those of our CPGs and retailer partners.
We primarily generate revenue by using our technology platforms to create, target, deliver, analyze and measure digital media and/or promotional programs for our CPG customers, retail partners and advertising agencies. Using shopper data from our retail partners and our proprietary data and audience segments, we deliver targeted and/or personalized digital media and promotions to shoppers through our network, including our websites and mobile applications, as well as those of our publishers, retail partners and other third-party properties. As our customers and partners shift more of their marketing spend to digital channels, our solutions help them optimize the performance of such digital channels. Our solutions’ performance is measured by attribution of digital ad campaigns to retail purchases in near real time, demonstrating return on spend for our customers and partners.
Our promotional products include digital paperless coupons, digital print coupons, in lane on receipt promotions, digital rebates and loyalty offers. Our media solutions include display, social, DOOH, Retailer.com display and sponsored search, shoppable brand pages, and audiences. A growing number of campaigns our customers purchase are purchased as an integrated campaign which combines a mix of digital media and/or promotions solutions in a single campaign. The revenue we earn from these programs is generally based on cost-per-click, cost-per-impression, or cost-per-acquisition.
We also generate revenues from our Specialty Retail business, in which specialty stores including clothing, electronics, home improvement and many others offer coupon codes that we distribute digitally.
We generally pay a distribution fee or revenue share to retailers and publishers for activation or redemption of a digital promotion, for media campaigns, and for use of data for targeting or measurement. We also pay a fee to third-party publishers for traffic acquisition, which consists of delivering campaigns on certain networks or sites. These distribution, revenue share, and third-party service fees are included in our cost of revenues. See Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - “Non-GAAP Financial Measure and Key Operating Metrics” for more information.
Our operating expenses may increase in the future as we continue to (1) invest in (i) research and development to enhance our platforms and investments in newer product offerings; (ii) sales and marketing to acquire new CPG and retailer customers and increase revenues from our existing customers; and; (iii) corporate infrastructure; (2) amortize expenses related to intangibles assets associated with acquisitions and other strategic acquisitions and partnerships; and (3) remeasure contingent consideration related to acquisitions.
For 2020, 2019 and 2018, our revenues were $445.9 million, $436.2 million, and $387.0 million, respectively. Our net loss for 2020, 2019 and 2018 was $65.4 million, $37.1 million, and $28.3 million, respectively.
Seasonality
Some of the Company’s products experience seasonal sales and buying patterns mirroring those in the CPG, retail, advertising, and eCommerce markets, including back-to-school and holiday campaigns, where demand increases during the second half of the Company’s fiscal year. Seasonality may also be affected by CPG annual budget cycles, as some large CPGs have fiscal years ending in June. We believe that this seasonality pattern has affected, and will continue to affect, our business and the associated revenues during the first half and second half of our fiscal year. We recognized 59%, 54% and 54% of our annual revenue during the second half of 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. We believe the first half of 2020 results were negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic resulting in a higher percentage of revenues in our second half of the year than we have experienced in the past.
Impact of COVID-19
We are cognizant of the rapid expansion of the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting global implications. In an effort to protect the health and safety of our employees, our workforce has had, and continues in most instances, to spend a significant amount of time working remotely and travel has been severely curtailed. In an effort to contain COVID-19 or slow its spread, governments around the world have also enacted various measures, some of which have been subsequently rescinded or modified, including orders to close all businesses not deemed “essential,” isolate residents to their homes or places of residence, and practice social distancing when engaging in essential activities. We anticipate that these actions and the global health crisis caused by the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to negatively impact business activity across the globe. While we observed a significant increase in revenue growth during the second half compared to the first half of our fiscal year, we cannot estimate the impact COVID-19 will have in the future as government entities and businesses make decisions about whether and when to open businesses and what impact these decisions will have on consumer activity across the globe.
We will continue to actively monitor the situation and may take further actions that alter our business operations as may be required by federal, state, local or foreign authorities, or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers, partners and stockholders. If CPGs, retailers and brands pause, delay, or cancel campaigns due to the uncertainty, supply-chain disruption, and consumer purchasing behavior changes caused by COVID-19, such as we experienced during the first half of the year, there may be an adverse impact on our promotion and media revenues and associated growth. The full extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, operations and financial results will depend on numerous evolving factors that we may not be able to accurately predict. See Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors, for an additional discussion of risks related to COVID-19.
Non-GAAP Financial Measure and Key Operating Metrics
Adjusted Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization (“Adjusted EBITDA”), a non-GAAP financial measure, is a key metric used by our management and our Board of Directors to understand and evaluate our core operating performance and trends, to prepare and approve our annual budget, to develop short and long-term operational plans, and to determine bonus payouts. In particular, we believe that the exclusion of certain income and expenses in calculating Adjusted EBITDA can provide a useful measure for period-to-period comparisons of our core business. Additionally, Adjusted EBITDA is a key financial metric used by the compensation
committee of our Board of Directors in connection with the determination of compensation for our executive officers. Accordingly, we believe that Adjusted EBITDA provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results in the same manner as our management and Board of Directors.
Adjusted EBITDA excludes non-cash charges, such as depreciation, amortization and stock-based compensation, because such non-cash expenses in any specific period may not directly correlate to the underlying performance of our business operations and can vary significantly between periods. Additionally, it excludes the effects of interest expense, income taxes, other (income) expense net, change in fair value of escrowed shares and contingent consideration, net, impairment charges for capitalized software development costs, charges related to Enterprise Resource Planning (“ERP”) software implementation costs, certain acquisition related costs, restructuring charges and a loss contingency/settlement related to a contract dispute. We exclude certain items because we believe that these costs (benefits) do not reflect expected future operating expenses. Additionally, certain items are inconsistent in amounts and frequency, making it difficult to contribute to a meaningful evaluation of our current or past operating performance.
Net loss and Adjusted EBITDA for each of the periods presented were as follows:
Our use of Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
•although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect cash capital expenditure requirements for such replacements or for new capital expenditure requirements;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect interest and tax payments that may represent a reduction in cash available to us;
•Adjusted EBITDA also does not include the effects of stock-based compensation, amortization of acquired intangible assets, impairment charges for capitalized software development costs, charges related to ERP software implementation costs, net change in fair value of escrowed shares and contingent consideration, interest expense, other (income) expense, net, provision for income taxes, certain acquisition related costs, restructuring charges and a loss contingency/settlement related to a contract dispute; and
•other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently, which reduces its usefulness as a comparative measure.
A reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net loss, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, for each of the periods presented is as follows:
(1)For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, Other includes restructuring charges of $1.5 million, $4.3 million, and $4.4 million, respectively, and a $8.8 million loss contingency/settlement related to a contract dispute for the year ended December 31, 2020. Restructuring charges relate to impairment charges for capitalized software development costs, and severance for certain executive management changes and impacted employees. Acquisition related costs primarily include certain bonuses contingent upon the acquired company meeting certain financial metrics over the contingent consideration period and diligence, accounting, and legal expenses incurred related to certain acquisitions.
This non-GAAP financial measure is not intended to be considered in isolation from, as substitute for, or as superior to, the corresponding financial measure prepared in accordance with GAAP. Because of these and other limitations, Adjusted EBITDA should be considered along with GAAP based financial performance measures, including various cash flow metrics, net loss, and our other GAAP financial results.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
Obtaining high quality promotions and increasing the number of brand-authorized activations. Our ability to grow revenue will depend upon our ability to shift more dollars to our platforms from our brand customers, continue to obtain high quality promotions and increase the number of brand-authorized activations available through our platform. If we are unable to do any of these, growth in our revenue will be adversely affected.
Increasing revenue from advertisers on our platform. Our ability to grow our revenue in the future depends upon our ability to continue to increase revenues from existing and new advertisers on our platforms through national brand coupons, targeted media and measurement, and increasing the number of brands that are using our platforms within each advertiser.
Variability in promotional and media spend by advertisers or brands. Our revenues may fluctuate due to changes in promotional or media spending budgets of advertisers and the timing of their promotional and media spending. Decisions by major advertisers to delay or reduce their promotional and media spending, move campaigns, or divert spending away from digital promotions or media could slow our revenue growth or reduce our revenues.
Ability to scale Quotient Retail Performance Media Platform and further integrate with additional Retailers. Our ability to grow our revenues will depend upon on our ability to continue to successfully implement and scale Quotient Retailer Promotion Platform and Quotient Retail Performance Media Platform among retailers. If we are unable to continue to successfully maintain our Quotient Retailer Promotion Platform and Quotient Retail Performance Media Platform partners, or if our retail partners do not provide sufficient support to our platforms, the growth in our revenues will be adversely affected. Our ability to grow our revenue in the future is also dependent
upon our ability to further integrate digital media and promotions into retailers’ loyalty or POS systems and other channels so that advertisers and retailers can more effectively engage consumers and drive their own sales.
Growth of our consumer selection and digital offerings. Our ability to grow our revenue in the future will depend on our ability to innovate and invest in promotion and media solutions, including Quotient Retailer Promotion Platform, Quotient Retail Performance Media Platform, sponsored search, mobile solutions for consumers, including digital print, mobile solutions and digital promotion offerings for specialty/franchise retail together with cash-back offers, leverage our reach to consumers and the strength of our platforms to broaden the selection and consumers use of digital coupons and rebates as well as in-lane targeted promotions, manage the transition from digital print coupons to digital paperless coupons as well as the transition from desktop to mobile platforms, and invest in solutions around our data and analytic capabilities, referred to as Quotient Analytics and Audiences, for advertisers and retailers.
International Growth and Acquisitions. Our ability to grow our revenues will also depend on our ability to grow our operations and offerings in existing international markets and expand our business through selective acquisitions, similar to our acquisitions of Ahalogy, Crisp, Elevaate, SavingStar, Shopmium and Ubimo and their integration with the core business of the Company.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenues
We generate revenues by delivering digital promotions, including coupons, rebates and coupon codes, and digital media through our platforms. Advertisers (CPGs) choose one or more of our offerings and are charged a fee for each selected offering. Our customers generally submit insertion orders that outline the terms and conditions of a campaign, including the channels through which the campaign will be run, the offerings for each selected channel, the type of content to be delivered, the timeframe of the campaign, the number of authorized coupon activations or media impressions and the pricing of the campaign. Substantially all of our revenues are generated from sales within the United States.
Coupons. We generate revenues, as consumers select, activate, or redeem a coupon or rebate offer through our platform by either saving it to a retailer loyalty account for automatic digital redemption, or printing it for physical redemption at a retailer. Coupon setup fees relates to the creation of digital coupons and set up of the underlying campaign on our proprietary platforms for tracking of related activations or redemptions. We recognize revenues related to coupon setup fees over time, proportionally, on a per transaction basis, using the number of authorized transactions per insertion order, commencing on the date of the first coupon transaction. Coupon transaction fees are generally determined on a per unit activation or per redemption basis, and are generally billed monthly. Insertion orders generally include a limit on the number of activations, or times consumers may select a coupon.
Coupon Codes. We generally generate revenues when a consumer makes a purchase using a coupon code from our platform and completion of the order is reported to us. This leads to a transaction, and a distribution fee is generally paid to us. In the same period that we recognize revenues for the delivery of coupon codes, we also estimate and record a reserve, based upon historical experience, to provide for end-user cancellations or product returns which may not be reported until a subsequent date.
Digital Media. Our media services enable advertisers (CPGs) and retailers to distribute digital media to promote their brands and products on our websites, and mobile applications, and through a network of affiliate publishers and non-publisher third parties that display our media offerings on their websites or mobile applications. Revenue is generally recognized each time a digital media ad is displayed or each time a user clicks on the media ad displayed on the Company’s websites, mobile applications or on third party websites. Media pricing is generally determined on a per campaign, impression or per click basis and are generally billed monthly. Changes to the way we process and deliver media could affect whether revenue is recognized on a gross or net basis.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues includes the costs resulting from distribution fees or revenue share. If we deliver a digital promotion or media on a retailer’s website or mobile applications or through its loyalty program, or the website or mobile applications of a publisher, we generally pay a distribution fee or revenue share to the retailers or publisher
which is included in our cost of revenues. These costs are expensed as incurred. We generally do not pay a distribution fee for a coupon, rebate or code which is offered through the website of the CPG or retailer that is offering the coupon, rebate or coupon code. From time to time, we have entered into arrangements pursuant to which we have agreed to the payment of minimum distribution or other service fees that are included in our cost of revenues.
Cost of revenues also includes personnel compensation costs, depreciation and amortization expense of equipment, software and acquired intangible assets associated with revenue producing technologies, amortization of certain exclusivity rights acquired under strategic partnerships, data center costs and third-party service fees including traffic acquisition costs which consists of payments related to delivering campaigns on certain networks or sites, and purchase of third-party data. Personnel costs related to costs of revenues include salaries, bonuses, stock-based compensation and employee benefits. These costs are primarily attributable to individuals maintaining our data centers and members of our network operations group, which initiates, sets up and delivers digital promotion and media campaigns. We capitalize costs related to software that is developed or obtained for internal use. Costs incurred in connection with internal software development for revenue producing technologies are capitalized and are amortized in cost of revenues over the internal use software’s useful life. The amortization of these costs begins when the internally developed software is ready for its intended use.
Operating Expenses
We classify our operating expenses primarily into three categories: sales and marketing, research and development and general and administrative. Our operating expenses consist primarily of personnel compensation costs and, to a lesser extent, professional fees and facilities expense. Personnel costs for each category of operating expenses generally include salaries, bonuses, stock-based compensation and employee benefits.
Sales and marketing. Our sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel compensation costs (including salaries and benefits, sales commissions, and stock-based compensation) provided to our sales and marketing personnel, brand marketing, amortization of acquired intangible assets, professional services, travel, trade shows and marketing materials. We expect to continue to invest in sales and marketing in order to support our growth and business objectives, while continuing to optimize our investment in promotional and advertising activities.
Research and development. Our research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel compensation costs (including salaries and benefits, bonuses, and stock-based compensation) provided to our engineering personnel, costs of professional services associated with the ongoing development of new products and the enhancement of existing products; fees for design, testing, consulting, and other related services.
We believe that continued investment in technology, as well as business process and automation, is critical to attaining our strategic objectives. Our investment in research and development will be balanced with our continued operational and cost optimization efforts including headcount shift to low cost locations, as it provides us with the ability to invest in strategic areas, while managing growth in future periods.
General and administrative. Our general and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel compensation costs (including salaries and benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation) provided to our executives, finance, legal, human resources, compliance and other administrative personnel, as well as facility costs and other related overhead; accounting, tax and legal professional services fees and other corporate expenses.
We expect to continue to incur additional general and administrative expenses in future periods as we continue to invest in corporate infrastructure to support our expected growth as well as additional compliance costs associated with being a public Company.
Change in fair value of escrowed shares and contingent consideration, net. The change in fair value of escrowed shares relates to the acquisition of certain exclusivity rights under a services and data agreement whereby a certain amount of shares were issued and placed in escrow. Those shares are subject to re-measurement until they are released from escrow. The change in fair value of contingent consideration is due to the re-measurement contingent consideration liabilities resulting from acquisitions based on the expected achievement of certain financial metrics over each acquisition’s respective contingent consideration period.
Interest expense
Interest expense consists of cash coupon interest, accretion of debt discounts and issuance costs and primarily relates to our debt obligations under our convertible senior notes issued during the fourth quarter of 2017.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net, includes interest income on U.S. Treasury Bills held as cash equivalents and foreign currency exchange gains and losses.
Provision for Income Taxes
We recorded a provision for income taxes of $0.7 million, $0.7 million, and $0.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The provision for income taxes for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 was primarily the impact of the indefinite lived deferred tax liabilities related to tax deductible goodwill, change in the geographical mix of earnings in foreign jurisdictions and state taxes.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our consolidated results of operations and our consolidated results of operations as a percentage of revenues for the periods presented.
Disaggregated Revenue
The following table presents the Company’s revenues disaggregated by type of services. The majority of the Company’s revenue is generated from sales within the United States.
Revenues
Revenues increased by $9.7 million, or 2%, during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019. The increase was primarily due to growth in media revenue as a result of an increase in our media product offerings, partially offset by a decrease in revenues from digital promotion due to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as a decrease in media revenues related to a portion of the media business we exited during the year. During 2020, revenues from digital promotion and media campaigns were 53% and 47% of total revenues, respectively, as compared to 57% and 43% of total revenues, respectively, for 2019.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Profit
Cost of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $14.3 million, or 5%, as compared to the same period in 2019. The increase was primarily due to a $8.8 million settlement related to a contract dispute resulting from a retailer's failure to perform certain obligations related to a guaranteed distribution fee arrangement, an increase in amortization expense of $3.5 million related to acquired intangible assets as well as certain exclusivity rights acquired under strategic partnerships, an increase in data center expenses of $1.5 million, and an increase in compensation costs, including stock-based compensation of $1.4 million. The increases were partially offset by a decrease in overhead expenses of $1.0 million related to facilities and infrastructure support and a net decrease of $0.3 million in data and traffic acquisition costs for offsite media on non-owned-and-operated properties, offset by an increase in distribution fees paid to our partners for media and promotions revenues delivered through their platforms.
Gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased to 38% from 40%, as compared to the same period in 2019. The decrease was primarily due to an increase in amortization expense related to acquired intangible assets and a $8.8 million settlement related to a contract dispute, partially offset by the benefit of the change of performing certain media services under the specific direction of our customers resulting in recognizing revenue net of certain costs. During the third quarter of 2020, we exited the portion of media business that had gone through a delivery change resulting in recognizing revenues net of certain costs from gross.
We expect the costs associated with distribution and third-party service fees to continue to increase in absolute dollars in the future as we continue to expand and scale our distribution network and reach.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $3.3 million, or 3%, during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019. The increase was primarily the result of an increase in intangible asset amortization expense of $2.0 million related to our acquisitions, an increase in compensation costs of $2.0 million related to acquisitions and hiring additional employees to support our growth and business objectives, an increase in restructuring charges of $0.5 million related to severance for impacted employees and an increase in facilities expense of $0.2 million, partially offset by reduced spending in travel and entertainment costs of $1.4 million.
We expect to invest in sales and marketing in order to support our growth and business objectives.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased by $1.2 million, or 3%, during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increase in compensation costs of $2.4 million related to acquisitions and hiring additional employees to support our growth and business objectives, an increase in restructuring charges of $0.3 million related to severance for impacted employees, offset by an increase in capitalization of internal use software development costs of $1.5 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we capitalized internal use software development costs of $5.7 million, as compared to $4.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. As we continue to invest in our products and customer offerings to develop new product functionality, the higher capitalization of costs will result in lower research and development expenses.
We believe that continued investment in technology is critical to attaining our strategic objectives and we intend to balance our investment in research and development with our continued operational and cost optimization efforts. We expect to incur additional research and development expenses in future periods to expand our tools and products that will enable our business to scale and provide more offerings and platform capabilities to our customers.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses decreased by $4.2 million, or 7%, during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in restructuring charges of $3.6 million due to the benefit of the non-recurring restructuring costs recorded in the third quarter of 2019 related to the impairment of capitalized software development costs associated with a non-strategic product and severance for certain executive management changes, a decrease in acquisition related charges of $1.4 million, a decrease in other administrative expenses of $0.8 million and a decrease in compensation costs of $0.1 million, partially offset by an increase in professional service fees of $1.7 million.
We expect to continue to incur additional general and administrative expenses in future periods as we continue to invest in corporate infrastructure and we intend to balance our investment in corporate infrastructure with our continued operational and cost optimization efforts.
Change in Fair Value of Escrowed Shares and Contingent Consideration, Net
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a charge of $20.2 million related to the change in fair value of contingent consideration resulting from the re-measurement of Ubimo and Elevaate contingent consideration of $15.2 million and $5.0 million, respectively, as discussed in Note 3 (Fair Value Measurements) to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Interest Expense and Other Income, Net
Interest expense is related to the convertible senior notes issued during the fourth quarter of 2017, promissory note and finance lease obligations.
Other income, net consists primarily of interest income on U.S. Treasury Bills held as cash equivalents. The decrease in other income, net during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019, was due to lower interest income earned on U.S. Treasury Bills held as cash equivalents, net of the effect of re-measuring balances in foreign currency due to exchange rate fluctuations.
Provision for Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes of $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily the impact of the indefinite lived deferred tax liabilities related to tax deductible goodwill, change in the geographical mix of earnings in foreign jurisdictions and state taxes.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have financed our operations and capital expenditures primarily through cash flows from operation and the issuance of convertible senior notes. As of December 31, 2020, our principal source of liquidity were cash and cash equivalents of $222.8 million, which were held for working capital purposes. Our cash equivalents are comprised primarily of money market funds.
We have incurred and expect to continue to incur legal, accounting, regulatory compliance and other costs in future periods as we continue to invest in corporate infrastructure. In addition, we may use cash to fund acquisitions or invest in other businesses, or incur capital expenditures including leasehold improvements or technologies. We intend to continue to manage our operating expenses in line with our existing cash and available financial resources, and we anticipate we will incur increased spending in future periods in order to execute our long-term business plan and to support our growth to fund our operating expenses.
Our Board of Directors previously approved programs for us to repurchase shares of our common stock. In August 2019, our Board of Directors authorized a one-year share repurchase program (the “August 2019 Program”) for us to repurchase up to $50.0 million of our common stock from August 2019 through August 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we did not repurchase any shares of our common stock and the August 2019 Program expired in August 2020.
In February 2021, the Company’s Board of Directors authorized the 2021 Program for the Company to repurchase up to $50.0 million of its common stock from February 2021 through February 2022. Stock repurchases may be made from time to time in open market transactions or privately negotiated transactions, and the Company may use a plan that is intended to meet the requirements of SEC Rule 10b5-1 to enable stock repurchases to occur
during periods when the trading window would otherwise be closed. The Company may suspend, modify or terminate the 2021 Program at any time without prior notice.
We believe our existing cash, cash equivalents and cash flow from operations will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure needs for at least the next 12 months. To the extent that current and anticipated future sources of liquidity are insufficient to fund our future business activities and requirements, we may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. During the period of uncertainty of volatility related to the COVID-19 pandemic, we will continue to monitor our liquidity. See Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors, for an additional discussion of risks related to COVID-19.
In November 2017, we issued $200.0 million aggregate principal amount of 1.75% convertible senior notes due 2022 in a private placement to qualified institutional buyers pursuant to Rule 144A under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, (the “notes”). The notes are unsecured obligations of the company and bear interest at a fixed rate of 1.75% per annum, payable semi-annually in arrears on June 1 and December 1 of each year, commencing on June 1, 2018. The notes will mature on December 1, 2022, unless earlier repurchased, redeemed, or converted in accordance with their terms.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities is a result of our net income or loss for the period adjusted for net non-cash income or expenses and changes in our operating assets and liabilities.
During 2020, net cash provided by operating activities of $26.5 million reflects our net loss of $65.4 million, adjusted for net non-cash expenses of $100.9 million, and cash used as a result of changes in working capital of $9.0 million. Non-cash expenses included depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, amortization of debt discount and issuance costs, allowance for credit losses, deferred income taxes, change in fair value of contingent consideration, and other non-cash expenses, including amortization of right-of-use asset and loss on disposal of property and equipment. The primary uses of cash from working capital items included payment for Ahalogy contingent consideration of $15.4 million, an increase in accounts receivable of $13.2 million, and a decrease in accrued compensation and benefits of $0.2 million, partially offset by an increase in accounts payable and other current liabilities of $24.3 million, a decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $3.2 million, and an increase in deferred revenues of $1.1 million. During 2020, we made a payment of $8.8 million for settlement related to a contract dispute resulting from a retailer's failure to perform certain obligations related to a guaranteed distribution fee arrangement.
Investing Activities
Purchases of property and equipment which may vary from period-to-period due to the timing of the expansion of our operations, the addition of headcount and the development activities related to our future offerings. We expect to continue to invest in property and equipment and in the further development and enhancement of our software platforms for the foreseeable future. In addition, from time to time, we may consider potential acquisitions that would complement our existing service offerings, enhance our technical capabilities or expand our marketing and sales presence. Any future transaction of this nature could require potentially significant amounts of capital or could require us to issue our stock and dilute existing stockholders.
During 2020, net cash used in investing activities of $11.4 million reflects purchase of property and equipment of $8.4 million, which includes capitalized software development costs, and technology hardware and software to support our growth and payment of $3.0 million to acquire certain exclusive rights pursuant to a strategic partnership agreement.
Financing Activities
Our financing activities have consisted primarily of repurchases of common stock, payments made for shares withheld to cover payroll withholding taxes and the issuance of shares of common stock upon the exercise of stock options.
During 2020, net cash used in financing activities of $17.2 million reflects payments for Ahalogy contingent consideration of $14.6 million (initially measured and included as part of purchase consideration on the date of acquisition), payments made for shares withheld to cover the required payroll withholding taxes of $7.2 million, and payments on promissory note and finance lease obligations of $0.4 million, partially offset by proceeds received from exercises of stock options under equity incentive plans, ESPP, and other, net of $5.0 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our future minimum payments under contractual commitments as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
(1)Represents aggregate principal amount of the convertible senior notes due 2022, without the effect of associated discounts.
(2)Represents the estimated interest obligation for our outstanding convertible senior notes that is payable in cash.
(3)We lease various office facilities, including our corporate headquarters in Mountain View, California and various sales offices, under operating lease agreements that expire through January 2031. The terms of the lease agreements provide for rental payments on a graduated basis.
(4)We have an unconditional purchase commitment for the years 2020 to 2034 in the amount of $5.4 million for marketing arrangements relating to the purchase of a 20-year suite license for a professional sports team which we use for sales and marketing purposes. We have unconditional purchase commitments, primarily related to distribution fees, ongoing software license fees and marketing services, of $37.8 million.
The contractual commitment amounts in the table above are associated with agreements that are enforceable and legally binding. Obligations under contracts that we can cancel without a significant penalty are not included in the table above.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and related disclosures. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our estimates are based on historical experience
and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ from these estimates.
We believe that the assumptions and estimates associated with business combinations, goodwill and intangible assets, convertible senior notes, revenue recognition, stock-based compensation and income taxes have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements. Therefore, we consider these to be our critical accounting policies and estimates. For further information on all of our significant accounting policies, see the notes to our consolidated financial statements.
Business Combinations
We account for acquisitions of entities that include inputs and processes and have the ability to create outputs as business combinations. Under the acquisition method of accounting, the total consideration is allocated to the tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values at the acquisition dates. The excess of the consideration transferred over those fair values is recorded as goodwill. During the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed with the corresponding offset to goodwill.
In determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination, we use recognized valuation methods, including the income approach, market approach and cost approach, and apply present value modeling. Our significant estimates in the income, market or cost approach include identifying business factors such as size, growth, profitability, risk and return on investment and assessing comparable net revenues and operating income multiples in estimating the fair value. We also make certain assumptions specific to present value modeling valuation techniques which include risk-adjusted discount rates, rates of increase in operating expenses, weighted-average cost of capital, long-term growth rate assumptions and the future effective income tax rates.
The valuations of our acquired businesses have been performed by valuation specialists under our management’s supervision. We believe that the estimated fair value assigned to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed are based on reasonable assumptions and estimates that marketplace participants would use. However, such assumptions are inherently uncertain and actual results could differ from those estimates. Future changes in our assumptions or the interrelationship of those assumptions may negatively impact future valuations. In future measurements of fair value, adverse changes in discounted cash flow assumptions could result in an impairment of goodwill or intangible assets that would require a non-cash charge to the consolidated statements of operations and may have a material effect on our financial condition and operating results.
Acquisition related costs are not considered part of the consideration, and are expensed as general and administrative expense as incurred. Contingent consideration, if any is measured at fair value initially on the acquisition date as well as subsequently at the end of each reporting period, typically based on the expected achievement of certain financial metrics, until settlement at the end of the assessment period.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill is tested for impairment at least annually, and more frequently upon the occurrence of certain events that may indicate that the carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable. Events or circumstances that could trigger an impairment test include, but are not limited to, a significant adverse change in the business climate or in legal factors, an adverse action or assessment by a regulator, a loss of key personnel, significant changes in our use of the acquired assets or the strategy for our overall business, significant negative industry or economic trends, significant underperformance relative to operating performance indicators, a significant decline in market capitalization and significant changes in competition. We complete our annual impairment test during the fourth quarter of each year, at the reporting unit level, which is at the company level as a whole, since we operate in one single reporting segment.
Intangible assets with a finite life are amortized over their estimated useful lives. Intangible assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of intangible assets may not be recoverable.
We evaluate the need for an impairment charge relating to long-lived assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. The estimated future undiscounted cash flows associated with the asset are compared to the asset’s carrying amount to determine if a write down to a new depreciable basis is required. If required, an impairment charge is recorded based on an estimate of future discounted cash flows.
We evaluate our intangible assets for potential impairment indicators at least quarterly and more frequently upon the occurrence of events that could impact prior conclusions. Judgment regarding the existence of impairment indicators is based on market conditions as well as the operational performance of our businesses. Additionally, future events could cause us to conclude that impairment indicators exist, and therefore long-lived assets could be impaired.
We consider the following to be some examples of indicators that may trigger an impairment review: (i) actual undiscounted cash flows significantly below historical or projected future undiscounted cash flows for the associated assets; (ii) significant changes in the manner or use of the assets or in our overall strategy with respect to the manner or use of the acquired assets or changes in our overall business strategy; (iii) significant negative industry or economic trends; (iv) increased competitive pressures; and (v) a significant decline in our stock price for a sustained period of time.
Once we determine that a potential impairment indicator exists, we perform the test for recoverability by comparing the estimated future undiscounted cash flows associated with the intangible assets with the intangible asset’s carrying amount. Where the carrying value of the intangible asset exceeds the future undiscounted cash flows associated with the intangible assets, it is determined that the value of those intangible assets cannot be recovered. For an intangible asset failing the recoverability test, an impairment charge is recorded for the difference between the carrying value and the estimated fair value.
The key assumptions used in our estimates of projected cash flow of our intangible assets deal largely with forecasts of sales levels, gross margins, and operating costs. These forecasts are typically based on historical trends and take into account recent developments as well as our plans and intentions. Any material change in our assumptions could significantly impact projected future cash flows of the intangible assets and these factors are considered in evaluating impairment. Other factors, such as increased competition or a decrease in the desirability of our products, could lead to lower projected sales levels, which would adversely impact cash flows. A significant decrease in cash flows in the future could result in an impairment of long-lived assets.
Convertible Senior Notes
In accounting for the issuance of the notes, we separated the notes into liability and equity components. The carrying amount of the liability component was calculated by measuring the fair value of a similar liability that does not have an associated convertible feature. The carrying amount of the equity component representing the conversion option was determined by deducting the fair value of the liability component from the par value of the notes as a whole. This difference represents a debt discount that is amortized to interest expense over the terms of the notes. The equity component is not remeasured as long as it continues to meet the conditions for equity classification. In accounting for the issuance costs related to the notes, we allocated the total amount incurred to the liability and equity components. Issuance costs attributable to the liability components are being amortized to expense over the contractual term of the notes, and issuance costs attributable to the equity component were netted with the equity component in additional paid-in capital.
Revenue Recognition
We primarily generate revenue by providing digital media and promotions solutions to our customers and partners. Revenues are recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services.
We determine revenue recognition through the following steps:
•Identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer
•Identification of the performance obligations in the contract
•Determination of the transaction price
•Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
•Recognition of revenue when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation
We provide digital promotions, including digital coupons, and/or media programs to our customers which consists of CPG customers, retail partners and advertising agencies whereby we use our proprietary technology platforms to create, target, deliver and analyze these programs. We typically generate revenue from our customers through the use of these programs on a cost-per-click, cost-per-impression, or cost-per-acquisition basis. Programs usually include a limit on the number of clicks and/or impressions and are billed monthly.
The pricing of digital promotions programs typically includes both promotion setup fees and promotion campaign fees. Promotion setup fees are related to the creation of digital promotions and set up of the underlying campaign on our proprietary platforms for tracking of the related clicks. We recognize revenues related to promotion setup fees over time, proportionally, on a per click basis, using the number of authorized clicks, per insertion order, commencing on the date of the first click. A click refers to the consumers action of activating a digital promotion through our proprietary technology platform by either saving it to a retailer’s loyalty account for automatic digital redemption, or printing it for physical redemption at a retailer. Promotion campaign fees are usually determined on a per click basis. We typically recognize revenues for digital promotion campaign fees as clicks occur.
We generate revenue from promotions, in which consumer packaged goods brands, or CPGs, pay us to deliver coupons to consumers through our network of publishers and retail partners. We generate revenues, as consumers select, activate, or redeem a coupon through our platform by either saving it to a retailer loyalty account for automatic digital redemption, or printing it for physical redemption at a retailer. The pricing for promotion arrangements generally includes both coupon setup fees and coupon transaction fees. Coupon setup fees are related to the creation of digital coupons and set up of the underlying campaign on our proprietary platforms for tracking of related activations or redemptions. We recognize revenues related to coupon setup fees over time, proportionally, on a per transaction basis, using the number of authorized transactions per insertion order, commencing on the date of the first coupon transaction. Coupon transaction fees are generally determined on a per unit activation or per redemption basis, and are generally billed monthly. Insertion orders generally include a limit on the number of activations, or times consumers may select a coupon.
Digital promotion programs also include our Specialty Retail business, in which specialty stores including clothing, electronics, home improvement and others, offer coupon codes that we distribute. Each time a consumer makes a purchase using a coupon code, a fee is typically paid to us. We usually generate revenues when a consumer makes a purchase using a coupon code from our platform and completion of the order is reported to us. In the same period that we recognize revenues for the delivery of coupon codes, we also estimate and record a reserve, based upon historical experience, to provide for end-user cancellations or product returns which may not be reported until a subsequent date.
Our media services enable CPGs and retailers to distribute digital media ads to promote their brands and products on our retailers' websites, and mobile applications, and through a network of affiliate publishers and non-publisher third parties that display our media offerings on their websites or mobile applications. Pricing for media campaigns is usually determined on a cost-per-impression, cost-per-click or cost-per-acquisition basis. We recognize revenue each time a digital media ad is displayed or each time a user clicks on the media ad displayed on our websites, mobile applications or on third-party websites.
Gross versus Net Revenue Reporting
In the normal course of business and through our distribution network, we deliver digital media and promotions on retailers’ websites through retailers’ loyalty programs, and on the websites of digital publishers. In these situations, we evaluate whether we are the principal (i.e., report revenues on a gross basis) or agent (i.e., report revenues on a net basis). Generally, we report digital promotion and media advertising revenues for campaigns placed on third-party owned properties on a gross basis, that is, the amounts billed to our customers are recorded as revenues, and distribution fees paid to retailers or digital publishers are recorded as cost of revenues. We are the principal because we control the digital promotion and media advertising inventory before it is transferred to our customers. Our control is evidenced by our sole ability to monetize the digital coupon and media advertising inventory, being primarily responsible to our customers, having discretion in establishing pricing for the delivery of the digital media and promotions, or a combination of these.
In other cases, we report certain digital media advertising revenues on a net basis, that is, the costs for digital advertising inventory and third-party data paid to suppliers are deducted from gross revenues to arrive at net revenues. Our performance obligation in these arrangements is to provide the use of our platforms that enables customers to bid on digital advertising inventory, which is determined based on real-time bidding, use of data and
other add-on features in designing and executing our campaigns. We charge our customers a platform fee based on a percentage of the digital advertising inventory and data costs purchased through the use of our platforms. The platform fee is not contingent on the results of a digital media advertising campaign. We have determined that we are an agent in these arrangements because we does not have control of the digital advertising inventory before it is transferred to the customer and does not set prices agreed upon within the auction marketplace.
Arrangements with Multiple Performance Obligations
Our contracts with customers may include multiple performance obligations. For these contracts, we account for individual performance obligations separately if they are distinct. The transaction price is allocated to the separate performance obligations on a relative standalone selling price basis. We determine the best estimate of the standalone selling prices based on our overall pricing objectives, taking into consideration market conditions and other factors, including the value of our contracts and characteristics of targeted customers.
Stock-based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation using the fair value method, which requires us to measure the stock-based compensation based on the grant-date fair value of the awards and recognize the compensation expense over the requisite service period. We account for forfeitures as they occur.
The fair value of each stock option award is estimated on the grant date using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The fair value of RSUs equals the market value of our common stock on the date of grant. Our option-pricing model requires the input of highly subjective assumptions, the expected term of the option, the expected volatility of the price of our common stock, risk-free interest rates, and the expected dividend yield of our common stock.
Income Taxes
We account for our income taxes using the liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected tax consequences of temporary differences between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts using enacted tax rates in effect for the year the differences are expected to reverse. In evaluating our ability to recover our deferred tax assets we consider all available positive and negative evidence including our past operating results, the existence of cumulative losses in past fiscal years, and our forecast of future taxable income in the jurisdictions.
We have placed a valuation allowance on the U.S. deferred tax assets and certain non-U.S. deferred tax assets, because realization of these tax benefits through future taxable income does not meet the more-likely-than-not threshold.
We account for uncertainty in income taxes using a two-step approach to recognize and measure uncertain tax positions. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon settlement.
Tax laws are dynamic and subject to change as new laws are passed and new interpretations of the law are issued or applied. The U.S. recently enacted significant tax reform, and certain provisions of the new law may adversely affect us. In addition, governmental tax authorities are increasingly scrutinizing the tax positions of companies. Many countries in the European Union, as well as a number of other countries and organizations such as the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, are actively considering changes to existing tax laws that, if enacted, could increase our tax obligations in countries where we do business. If U.S. or other foreign tax authorities change applicable tax laws, our overall taxes could increase, and our business, financial condition or results of operations may be adversely impacted.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Part II, Item 8. Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for a full description of recent accounting pronouncements, including the actual and expected dates of adoption and
estimated effects on our consolidated results of operations and financial condition, which is incorporated herein by reference.