Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Continuing Operations
Overview
We are a healthcare company with a retail footprint, providing our customers and communities with a high level of care and service through various programs we offer through our two reportable business segments, our Retail Pharmacy segment and our Pharmacy Services segment. We accomplish our goal of delivering comprehensive care to our customers through our retail drugstores and our PBM, Elixir. We also offer fully integrated mail-order and specialty pharmacy services through Elixir Pharmacy. Additionally through Elixir Insurance, Elixir also serves one of the fastest-growing demographics in healthcare: seniors enrolled in Medicare Part D. When combined with our retail platform, this comprehensive suite of services allows us to provide value and choice to customers, patients and payors and allows us to compete in today’s evolving healthcare marketplace.
Retail Pharmacy Segment
Our Retail Pharmacy segment sells brand and generic prescription drugs and various other pharmacy services, as well as an assortment of front-end products including health and beauty aids, personal care products, seasonal merchandise, and a large private brand product line. Our Retail Pharmacy segment generates the majority of its revenue through the sale of prescription drugs and front-end products at our over 2,500 retail pharmacy locations across 17 states. We replenish our retail stores through a combination of direct store delivery of pharmaceutical products facilitated through our pharmaceutical Purchasing and Delivery Agreement with McKesson, and the majority of our front-end products through our network of distribution centers.
Pharmacy Services Segment
Our Pharmacy Services segment provides a fully integrated suite of PBM offerings including technology solutions, mail delivery services, specialty pharmacy, network and rebate administration, claims adjudication and pharmacy discount programs. Elixir also provides prescription discount programs and Medicare Part D insurance offerings for individuals and groups. Elixir provides services to various clients across its different lines of business, including major health plans, commercial employers, labor groups and state and local governments, representing approximately 3.25 million covered lives, including approximately 1 million covered lives through our Medicare Part D insurance offerings. Elixir continues to focus its efforts and offerings to its target market of small to mid-market employers, labor unions and regional health plans, including provider-led health plans and government sponsored Medicaid and Medicare plans.
Restructuring
Beginning in Fiscal 2019, we initiated a series of restructuring plans designed to reorganize our executive management team, reduce managerial layers, and consolidate roles. In March 2020, we announced the details of our RxEvolution strategy, which includes building tools to work with regional health plans to improve patient health outcomes, rationalizing SKU’s in our front-end offering to free up working capital and update our merchandise assortment, assessing our pricing and promotional strategy, rebranding our retail pharmacy and pharmacy services business, launching our Store of the Future format and further reducing SG&A and headcount, including integrating certain back office functions in the Pharmacy Services segment both within the segment and across Rite Aid.
As a result of the restructuring that we announced in March 2019, we achieved annual cost savings of approximately $55.0 million. These savings offset the reduction in TSA fees that we experienced in fiscal 2020. We have implemented further restructuring activities in support of our RxEvolution and other initiatives, which resulted in additional restructuring charges due to further reductions in corporate staffing levels, charges associated with rationalizing SKU’s in our front-end offering and other operational changes. These and future restructuring activities are expected to provide future growth and expense efficiency benefits. There can be no assurance that our current and future restructuring charges will achieve the cost savings and remerchandising benefits in the amounts or time anticipated.
Asset Sale to WBA
On September 18, 2017, we entered into the Amended and Restated Asset Purchase Agreement with WBA and Buyer, which amended and restated in its entirety the previously disclosed Original Asset Purchase Agreement. Pursuant to the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in the Amended and Restated Asset Purchase Agreement, Buyer purchased from Rite Aid 1,932 Acquired Stores, three distribution centers, related inventory and other specified assets and liabilities related thereto for a purchase price of approximately $4.375 billion, on a cash-free, debt-free basis, in the Sale. We completed the store transfer process in March of 2018, which resulted in the transfer of all 1,932 stores and related assets to WBA and received cash proceeds of $4.157 billion.
During fiscal 2019, we completed the sale of one of our distribution centers and related assets to WBA for proceeds of $61.2 million. The impact of the sale of the distribution center and related assets resulted in a pre-tax gain of $14.2 million, which has been included in the results of operations and cash flows of discontinued operations during the fifty-two week period ended March 2, 2019. During fiscal 2020, we completed the sale of the second distribution center and related assets to WBA for proceeds of $62.8 million. The impact of the sale of the distribution center and related assets resulted in a pre-tax gain of $19.3 million, which has been included in the results of operations and cash flows of discontinued operations during the fifty-two week period ended February 29, 2020. During the first quarter of fiscal 2021, we completed the sale of the final distribution center and related assets to WBA for proceeds of $94.3 million. The impact of the sale of the distribution center and related assets resulted in a pre-tax gain of $12.7 million, which has been included in the results of operations and cash flows of discontinued operations during the thirteen week period ended May 30, 2020. The transfer of the final distribution center and related assets constitutes the final closing under the Amended and Restated Asset Purchase Agreement.
We had agreed to provide transition services to Buyer for up to three years after the initial closing of the Sale. Under the terms of the TSA, we provided various services on behalf of WBA, including but not limited to the purchase and distribution of inventory and virtually all selling, general and administrative activities. The term of the TSA had been extended to October 17, 2020, unless earlier terminated. In connection with these services, we purchased the related inventory and incurred cash payments for the selling, general and administrative activities, which, we billed on a cash neutral basis to WBA in accordance with terms as outlined in the TSA. Total billings for these items during the fifty-two week periods ended February 27, 2021 and February 29, 2020 were $35.2 million and $3.0 billion, respectively, of which $0.0 million and $38.7 million is included in Accounts receivable, net. We charged WBA TSA fees of $1.5 million, $37.9 million and $80.2 million during the fifty-two week periods ended February 27, 2021, February 29, 2020 and March 2, 2019, which are reflected as a reduction to selling, general and administrative expenses. In conjunction with the transfer of the final distribution center during the quarter ended May 30, 2020, we have substantially completed our obligations under the TSA. On July 14, 2020, we entered into a letter agreement with WBA to terminate the services under the TSA, other than certain specified services relating to real estate, accounting, tax, and accounts receivable systems that continued until October 17, 2020 and certain specified services relating to human resources to be performed after October 17, 2020.
Based on its magnitude and because we exited certain markets, the Sale represented a significant strategic shift that had a material effect on our operations and financial results. Accordingly, we have applied discontinued operations treatment for the Sale as required by GAAP.
Impact of COVID-19
In March 2020, the outbreak of COVID-19 caused by a novel strain of the coronavirus was recognized as a pandemic by the World Health Organization. The COVID-19 pandemic has severely impacted the economies of the United States and other countries around the world.
Since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, Rite Aid has been on the front lines of providing communities with essential care, services and products, including the administration of COVID-19 testing and vaccines. We have taken numerous steps to ensure that Rite Aid can continue providing these vital services during this time of great need, including hiring additional full and part-time associates to support our stores and distribution center teams, providing our front line associates with our Hero Pay and Hero Bonus programs and instituted a Pandemic Pay policy that ensures
associates are compensated if diagnosed with the virus or quarantined due to exposure. We also implemented safety protocols to keep our associates and customers safe, and transitioned our office-based associates to a remote work environment. Our strong local presence and scale in communities in our markets enables us to play a central role in the response to COVID-19, as well as provide seamless support for our customers wherever they need it; at our stores and at their homes through our delivery services.
The COVID-19 pandemic had a significant impact on our operating results for the fiscal year ended February 27, 2021, and will continue to have an impact on several factors underlying our operating results in fiscal 2022. Those factors include the number of individuals that receive a COVID-19 vaccine; the availability, rollout and supply of COVID-19 vaccines; demand for COVID-19 testing; the timing and extent to which elective procedures return to pre-pandemic levels; the demand for flu and other immunizations and the length and severity of the upcoming cough, cold flu season.
Overview of Financial Results from Continuing Operations
The following information summarizes our financial results from continuing operations for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. For discussion of our financial results from continuing operations for fiscal 2020 to fiscal 2019, see “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Continuing Operations” included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended February 29, 2020, which we filed with the SEC on April 27, 2020.
Net Loss: Our net loss from continuing operations for fiscal 2021 was $100.1 million or $1.87 per basic and diluted share compared to net loss from continuing operations for fiscal 2020 of $469.2 million or $8.82 per basic and diluted share. The reduction in net loss is due to lower income tax expense, a gain on sale of assets compared to a loss on sale of assets in the prior year, and a gain on the acquisition of Bartell Drugs. These items were partially offset by incremental SG&A expenses associated with the COVID-19 pandemic and a reduction in gross profit resulting from a restructuring charge relating our rebranding initiatives and a lower LIFO credit, a lower gain on debt modifications and retirements and higher intangible asset impairment charges.
Adjusted EBITDA: Our Adjusted EBITDA from continuing operations for fiscal 2021 was $437.7 million or 1.8 percent of revenues, compared to $538.2 million or 2.5 percent of revenues for fiscal year 2020. The decrease in Adjusted EBITDA from continuing operations was due primarily to a decrease of $90.5 million in the Retail Pharmacy segment and a decrease of $10.0 million in the Pharmacy Services segment. The decrease in the Retail Pharmacy Segment Adjusted EBITDA was driven by higher SG&A expenses partially offset by increased Adjusted EBITDA gross profit. SG&A expenses were negatively impacted by incremental costs associated with the COVID-19 pandemic and the completion of services provided under the Transition Services Agreement with Walgreens. The improvement in Adjusted EBITDA gross profit relates to improvements in both pharmacy and front-end. Pharmacy gross profit benefited from an increase in maintenance prescription counts, partially offset by lower acute prescriptions resulting from the pandemic and continued reimbursement rate pressures. Front-end gross profit benefited from increased sales volume during the first quarter relating to the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by a nearly 37% decline in cough, cold and flu related categories during the fourth quarter. The decrease in the Pharmacy Services Segment Adjusted EBITDA was due to increased drug costs within Medicare Part D, a decrease in gross profit within the segment’s small group business and SG&A spend related to an increase in Medicare Part D members. Please see the sections entitled “Segment Analysis” and Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income (Loss) per Diluted Share and Other Non-GAAP Measures” below for additional details.
Consolidated Results of Operations-Continuing Operations
Revenue and Other Operating Data
(a) Revenues for the fiscal years ended February 27, 2021, February 29, 2020 and March 2, 2019 exclude $292,157, $247,353 and $211,283, respectively, of inter-segment activity that is eliminated in consolidation.
(b) See “Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income (Loss), Adjusted Net Income (Loss) per Diluted Share and Other Non-GAAP Measures” for additional details.
Revenues
Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020: The 9.6% increase in revenues was due primarily to a $1,410.6 million increase in Pharmacy Services segment revenues and a $749.1 million increase in Retail Pharmacy segment revenues. Same store sales trends for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 are described in the “Segment Analysis” section below.
Please see the section entitled “Segment Analysis” below for additional details regarding revenues.
Costs and Expenses
(a) Cost of revenues for the fiscal years ended February 27, 2021, February 29, 2020 and March 2, 2019 exclude $292,157, $247,353 and $211,283, respectively, of inter-segment activity that is eliminated in consolidation.
Gross Profit and Cost of Revenues
Gross profit decreased by $22.4 million in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. Gross profit for fiscal 2021 includes a decrease of $19.0 million in our Retail Pharmacy segment and a decrease in gross profit of $3.4 million relating to our Pharmacy Services segment. Gross margin was 19.6% for fiscal 2021 compared to 21.6% in fiscal 2020. Please see the section entitled “Segment Analysis” for a more detailed description of gross profit and gross margin results by segment.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
SG&A increased by $69.8 million in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. The increase in SG&A includes an increase of $78.3 million relating to our Retail Pharmacy segment, partially offset by a decrease of $8.5 million relating to our Pharmacy Services segment. Please see the section entitled “Segment Analysis” below for additional details regarding SG&A.
Lease Termination and Impairment Charges
Impairment Charges:
We evaluate long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that an asset group has a carrying value that may not be recoverable. The individual operating store is the lowest level for which cash flows are identifiable. As such, we evaluate individual stores for recoverability of assets. To determine if a store needs to be tested for recoverability, we consider items such as decreases in market prices, changes in the manner in which the store is being used or physical condition, changes in legal factors or business climate, an accumulation of losses significantly in excess of budget, a current period operating or cash flow loss combined with a history of operating or cash flow losses or a projection of continuing losses, or an expectation that the store will be closed or sold.
We monitor new and recently relocated stores against operational projections and other strategic factors such as regional economics, new competitive entries and other local market considerations to determine if an impairment evaluation is required. For other stores, we perform a recoverability analysis if they have experienced current-period and historical cash flow losses.
In performing the recoverability test, we compare the expected future cash flows of a store to the carrying amount of its assets. Significant judgment is used to estimate future cash flows. Major assumptions that contribute to our future cash flow projections include expected sales, gross profit and distribution expenses; expected costs such as payroll, occupancy costs and advertising expenses; and estimates for other significant selling, and general and administrative expenses. Additionally, we take into consideration that certain operating stores are executing specific improvement plans which are monitored quarterly to recoup recent capital investments, such as an acquisition of an independent pharmacy, which we have made to respond to specific competitive or local market conditions, or have specific programs tailored towards a specific geography or market.
We recorded impairment charges of $46.3 million in fiscal 2021, $39.9 million in fiscal 2020 and $63.5 million in fiscal 2019. Our methodology for recording impairment charges has been consistently applied in the periods presented.
At February 27, 2021, approximately $850.5 million of our long-lived assets, including intangible assets, were associated with 2,510 active operating stores. Additionally, in connection with the adoption of ASU 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842), we have approximately $2.8 billion of operating lease right-of-use assets associated with the active stores.
If an operating store’s estimated future undiscounted cash flows are not sufficient to cover its carrying value, its carrying value is reduced to fair value based on its estimated future discounted cash flows. The discount rate is commensurate with the risks associated with the recovery of a similar asset. Beginning in fiscal year 2020, operating lease right-of-use assets are included within the stores’ asset groups. We obtain fair values of these right-of-use assets based on real estate market data.
An impairment charge is recorded in the period that the store does not meet its original return on investment and/or has an operating loss for the last two years and its projected cash flows do not exceed its current asset carrying value. The amount of the impairment charge is the entire difference between the current carrying asset value and the estimated fair value of the assets using discounted future cash flows.
We recorded impairment charges for active stores of $29.8 million in fiscal 2021, $34.8 million in fiscal 2020 and $46.4 million in fiscal 2019.
We review key performance results for active stores on a quarterly basis and approve certain stores for closure. Impairment for closed stores, if any (many stores are closed on lease expiration), are recorded in the quarter the closure decision is approved. Closure decisions are made on an individual store or regional basis considering all of the macro-economic, industry and other factors, in addition to, the operating store’s individual operating results. We recorded impairment charges for closed facilities of $16.5 million in fiscal 2021, $5.1 million in fiscal 2020 and $2.8 million in fiscal 2019.
The following table summarizes the impairment charges and number of locations, segregated by closed facilities and active stores that have been recorded in fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019:
(1) These charges are related to stores that were impaired for the first time in prior periods. In an effort to improve the operating results or to meet geographical competition, we will often make additional capital additions in stores that were impaired in prior periods. These additions will be impaired in future periods if they are deemed to be unrecoverable. In connection with our March 3, 2019 adoption of ASU 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842), under the alternative transition method, and the recording of our corresponding right-of-use asset (“ROU”), we include the ROU in our recoverability assessment. Our fiscal 2021 impairment charge includes $15,459 of impairment relating to our ROU and $5,913 of capital additions. Our fiscal 2020 impairment charge includes $6,594 of impairment relating to our ROU and $4,855 of capital additions.
(2) These charges are related to new stores (open at least three years) and relocated stores (relocated in the last two years) and significant strategic remodels (remodeled in the last year) that did not meet their recoverability test during the current period. These stores have not met our original return on investment projections and have a historical loss of at least two years. Their future cash flow projections do not recover their current carrying value. Our fiscal 2021 impairment charge includes $347 of impairment relating to our ROU and $1,172 of capital assets. Our fiscal 2020 impairment charge includes $5,625 of impairment relating to our ROU and $5,603 of capital assets.
(3) These charges are related to the remaining active stores that did not meet the recoverability test during the current period. These stores have a historical loss of at least two years. Their future cash flow projections do not recover their current carrying value. Our fiscal 2021 impairment charge includes $3,177 of impairment relating to our ROU and $3,677 of capital assets. Our fiscal 2020 impairment charge includes $2,228 of impairment relating to our ROU and $9,920 of capital assets.
(4) These fiscal 2019 charges were due to the impairment of assets related to the termination of a project to replace the point of sale software used in our stores.
The primary drivers of our impairment charges are each store’s current and historical operating performance and the assumptions that we make about each store’s operating performance in future periods. Projected cash flows are updated based on the next year’s operating budget which includes the qualitative factors noted above. We are unable to predict with any degree of certainty which individual stores will fall short or exceed future operating plans. Accordingly, we are unable to describe future trends that would affect our impairment charges, including the likely stores and their related asset values that may fail their recoverability test in future periods.
To the extent that actual future cash flows may differ from our projections materially certain stores that are either not impaired or partially impaired in the current period may be further impaired in future periods. A 50 and 100 basis point decrease in our future sales assumptions as of February 27, 2021 would have resulted in 17 and 36, respectively, additional stores being subjected to our impairment analysis.
Lease Termination Charges: Upon adoption of ASU 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842), we recorded a future lease liability for every real estate lease and therefore, we no longer record a lease termination charge. Post adoption, we record ancillary costs in connection with store closings. Prior to the adoption of ASU 2016-02, charges to close a store, which principally consist of continuing lease obligations associated with ancillary costs, are recorded at the time the store is closed and all inventory is liquidated, pursuant to the guidance set forth in ASC 420, “Exit or Disposal Cost Obligations.” We calculate our liability for closed stores on a store-by-store basis. The calculation for stores where remaining lease term exceeds one year includes the ancillary costs from the date of closure to the end of the remaining lease term. We evaluate these assumptions each quarter and adjust the liability accordingly. As part of our ongoing business activities, we assess stores and distribution centers for potential closure and relocation. Decisions to close or relocate stores or distribution centers in future periods would result in lease exit costs and inventory liquidation charges, as well as impairment of assets at these locations.
In fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, we recorded lease termination charges of $12.1 million, $2.9 million, and $44.5 million, respectively.
Goodwill and intangible asset impairment charges
In connection with the RxEvolution initiatives previously announced on March 16, 2020, the Company rebranded its EnvisionRxOptions and MedTrak subsidiaries to its new brand name, Elixir. These trademarks qualify as Level 3 within the fair value hierarchy. Upon the implementation of the rebranding initiatives during the first quarter of fiscal 2021, the Company has determined that the carrying value exceeded the fair value and consequently the Company incurred an impairment charge of $29,852 for these trademarks, which is included within goodwill and intangible asset impairment charges within the condensed consolidated statement of operations.
In the fiscal fourth quarter of fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, we completed a quantitative goodwill impairment assessment and determined after evaluating the results, events and circumstances, that sufficient evidence existed to assert that it is more likely than not that the fair values of the reporting units exceeded their carrying values. Therefore, no goodwill impairment charge was assessed for the fiscal years ended February 27, 2021 and February 29, 2020.
In the fiscal second quarter of fiscal 2019 we completed a qualitative goodwill impairment assessment, at which time it was determined after evaluating results, events and circumstances that a quantitative assessment was necessary for the Pharmacy Services segment. The quantitative assessment concluded that the carrying amount of the Pharmacy Services segment exceeded its fair value principally due to a decrease in Adjusted EBITDA that was driven by commercial business compression and an increase in SG&A expenses. This resulted in a goodwill impairment charge of $313.0 million ($235.7 million net of the related income tax benefit) for the fiscal year ended March 2, 2019.
In the fiscal second quarter of fiscal 2019, due to the loss of access to a fertility drug for a direct to consumer program that the Pharmacy Services segment administered, we recorded an impairment charge to reduce the book value of customer relationships by $48.2 million (gross carrying amount of $77.0 million less accumulated amortization of $28.8 million), and indefinite lived trademarks by $14.0 million both of which charges are included within Goodwill and intangible asset impairment charges within the consolidated statement of operations.
Interest Expense
In fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, interest expense was $201.4 million, $229.7 million and $227.7 million, respectively.
The annual weighted average interest rates on our indebtedness in fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019 were 5.4%, 5.7% and 5.6%, respectively.
Income Taxes-Continuing Operations
Income tax benefit of $20.2 million and income tax expense of $387.6 million and $77.5 million, has been recorded for fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Net loss for fiscal 2021 included a provision for income tax based on an overall tax rate of 16.8%, which was net of adjustments to maintain a full valuation allowance for federal deferred tax assets as well as the majority of our state deferred tax assets. These assets may not be realized based on our most recent assessment that it is more likely than not that sufficient taxable income may not be generated to realize the tax benefits of our net deferred tax assets. Additionally, the overall tax rate includes a permanent tax benefit related to our bargain purchase gain on the Bartell acquisition resulting in an impact of 8.3%.
Net loss for fiscal 2020 included a provision for income tax based on an overall tax rate of (476.2)% which included a (427.0)% impact for an increase related to establishing a full valuation allowance for federal deferred tax assets and an increase to the valuation allowance for state net deferred tax assets that may not be realized based on our most recent assessment that it is more likely than not that sufficient taxable income may not be generated to realize the tax benefits of the majority of our net deferred tax assets.
We recognized tax expense of $4.3 million, $7.0 million and $91.1 million within Net income from discontinued operations, net of tax, in the Statement of Operations in fiscal 2021, fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019, respectively. Our effective income tax rate from discontinued operations included adjustments to the valuation allowance of $0.0 million, $0.0 million and $(2.4) million for fiscal 2021, fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019, respectively.
ASC 740, “Income Taxes” requires a company to evaluate its deferred tax assets on a regular basis to determine if a valuation allowance against the net deferred tax assets is required. We take into account all available positive and negative evidence with regard to the recognition of a deferred tax asset including our past earnings history, expected future earnings, the character and jurisdiction of such earnings, unsettled circumstances that, if unfavorably resolved, would adversely affect recognition of a deferred tax asset, carryback and carryforward periods and tax planning strategies that could potentially enhance the likelihood of realization of a deferred tax asset. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the existence of sufficient taxable income generated in the carryforward periods. Accordingly, changes in the valuation allowance from period to period are included in the tax provision in the period of change.
We maintained a valuation allowance of $1,657.6 million, $1,673.1 million and $1,091.4 million against remaining net deferred tax assets at fiscal year-end 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Our ability to utilize the losses and credits to offset future taxable income may be deferred or limited significantly if we were to experience an “ownership change” as defined in section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”). In general, an ownership change will occur if there is a cumulative change in ownership of the Company’s stock by “5-percent shareholders” (as defined in the Code) that exceeds 50 percentage points over a rolling three-year period. The Company determined that no ownership change has occurred for purposes of Section 382 for the period ended February 27, 2021. It is important to note, that the limitation that would be created upon an ownership change would only apply to income earned after the event that caused the ownership change.
The CARES Act, enacted on March 27, 2020, includes changes to certain tax law related to net operating losses, the deductibility of interest expense, and the acceleration of refunds for certain federal tax credits. ASC 740, “Income Taxes,” requires the effects of changes in tax rates and laws on deferred tax balances to be recognized in the period in which the legislation is enacted. The provisions enacted under the CARES Act related to net operating losses and deductibility of interest expense had a favorable $0.4 million and $2.6 million impact on our fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 current state income tax, respectively, and no net impact to our deferred income tax provisions. Additionally, we
recorded a current income tax benefit of $6.7 million for fiscal 2021 related to refundable alternative minimum tax credits that were accelerated under the CARES Act.
Dilutive Equity Issuances
On February 27, 2021, 55.1 million shares of common stock, which includes unvested restricted shares, were outstanding and an additional 0.8 million shares of common stock were issuable related to outstanding stock options.
On February 27, 2021, our 0.8 million shares of potentially issuable common stock consisted of the following (shares in thousands):
(a) The exercise of these options would provide cash of $14.5 million.
Segment Analysis
We evaluate the Retail Pharmacy and Pharmacy Services segments’ performance based on revenue, gross profit, and Adjusted EBITDA. The following is a reconciliation of our segments to the consolidated financial statements:
(1) Intersegment eliminations include intersegment revenues and corresponding cost of revenues that occur when Pharmacy Services segment customers use Retail Pharmacy segment stores to purchase covered products. When this occurs, both the Retail Pharmacy and Pharmacy Services segments record the revenue on a stand-alone basis.
(*)
See the section entitled “Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income (Loss), Adjusted Net Income (Loss) per Diluted Share and Other Non-GAAP Measures” below for additional details.
Retail Pharmacy Segment Results of Continuing Operations
Revenues and Other Operating Data
(*)
See the section entitled “Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income (Loss), Adjusted Net Income (Loss) per Diluted Share and Other Non-GAAP Measures” below for additional details.
Revenues
Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020: The 4.8% increase in revenue was primarily the result of an increase in same store sales. Same store sales trends for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 are described in the following paragraphs. We include in same store sales all stores that have been open at least one year except stores in liquidation, which are not included. Relocation stores are not included in same store sales until they have been open for one year.
Pharmacy same store sales increased 3.2%. Pharmacy same store sales were positively impacted by an increase of 1.3% in same store prescription count compared to the prior year driven by increases in maintenance prescriptions, supported by personalized Medication Therapy Management interventions and home deliveries, partially offset by a pandemic influenced reduction in acute prescriptions of 9.0%.
Front-end same store sales increased 3.1%. Front-end same stores sales, excluding cigarettes and tobacco products, increased 4.2% driven by increases in immunity, first aid and paper products, offset by decreases in over-the-counter products related to cough, cold and flu.
Costs and Expenses
(*)
See the section entitled “Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income (Loss), Adjusted Net Income (Loss) per Diluted Share and Other Non-GAAP Measures” below for additional details.
Gross Profit and Cost of Revenues
Gross profit decreased by $19.0 million in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. Gross profit was negatively impacted by a restructuring charge of $20.9 million relating to product lines that we exited and no longer carry as part of our rebranding initiative and a lower LIFO credit in the current year, partially offset by an increase in both pharmacy and front-end gross profit. Pharmacy gross profit benefited from an increase in maintenance prescription counts, partially offset by lower acute prescriptions resulting from the pandemic and continued reimbursement rate pressures. Front-end gross profit benefited from increased sales volume during the first quarter relating to the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by a nearly 37% decline in cough, cold and flu related categories during the fourth quarter.
Overall gross margin was 26.0% for fiscal 2021 compared to 27.4% in fiscal 2020. The decline in gross margin is due to the $20.9 million restructuring charge as noted above and reductions in both pharmacy and front-end gross margin. The decline in pharmacy gross margin was driven primarily by continued reimbursement rate pressures. The decline in front-end gross margin was driven by higher markdowns and associate discounts related to the COVID-19 pandemic sales increases and the fourth quarter decline in cough, cold and flu sales as these categories are generally comprised of higher margin products.
We use the LIFO method of inventory valuation, which is determined annually when inflation rates and inventory levels are finalized. Therefore, LIFO costs for interim period financial statements are estimated. The LIFO credit for fiscal 2021 was $51.7 million compared to a LIFO credit of $64.8 million in fiscal 2020. The LIFO credit for fiscal 2021 is due to the reduction in front-end inventory resulting from our rebranding initiative and lower pharmacy inflation.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
SG&A increased $78.3 million. Increased costs for hero pay and bonus, pandemic paid time off and costs for cleaning supplies due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the inclusion of $37.9 million in income related to services provided under the Walgreens TSA in prior year’s SG&A were partially offset by a one-time benefit of $40 million due to a change in the paid time off (“PTO”) plan, reductions in medical expense and the impact of cost control initiatives. SG&A as a percentage of revenue was 26.3% in fiscal 2021 compared to 27.0% in fiscal 2020 due to the associate PTO plan change and the impact of cost control initiatives, partially offset by higher COVID-19 related expenses.
Pharmacy Services Segment Results of Operations
Revenues and Other Operating Data
(*)
See the section entitled “Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income (Loss), Adjusted Net Income (Loss) per Diluted Share and Other Non-GAAP Measures” below for additional details.
Revenues
Pharmacy Services segment revenue was $7,970.1 million and $6,559.6 million, respectively, for fiscal 2021 and 2020. The increase in the fiscal 2021 revenue for the segment is due to the increase in Medicare Part D membership.
Costs and Expenses
Gross Profit and Cost of Revenues
Gross profit decreased by $3.4 million in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. The decrease in gross profit was due to an increase in Medicare Part D drug costs, costs associated with contract renewals on our small group business and a charge related to a change in a rebate aggregation contract, offset by improvements in network management.
Gross margin was 5.6% in fiscal 2021 compared to 6.9% in fiscal 2020. The decline in gross margin is due primarily to an increase in Medicare Part D membership at EI and the factors noted above.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Pharmacy Services segment selling, general and administrative expenses for fiscal 2021 was $358.0 million or 4.5% of revenues as compared to $366.5 million or 5.6% of revenues for fiscal 2020. The decrease in SG&A is primarily the result of reductions in payroll and indirect spend cost reduction initiatives, partially offset by higher costs associated with supporting the increased Medicare Part D membership.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
We have disclosed debt and interest expense on a continuing operations and discontinued operations basis on our consolidated balance sheets and consolidated statements of operations. However, the following discussion regarding liquidity and capital resources is at the total enterprise level, as we are contractually obligated for the payment of all outstanding debt instruments and related interest under our various indentures, including borrowings under the Existing Facilities.
We have two primary sources of liquidity: (i) cash provided by operating activities and (ii) borrowings under our Existing Facilities. Our principal uses of cash are to provide working capital for operations, to service our obligations to pay interest and principal on debt and to fund capital expenditures. Total liquidity as of February 27, 2021 was $1,706.0 million, which consisted of revolver borrowing capacity of $1,643.1 million and invested cash of $62.9 million.
Credit Facilities
On December 20, 2018, we entered into a senior secured credit agreement (as amended by the First Amendment to Credit Agreement, dated as of January 6, 2020, the “Credit Agreement”), consisting of a $2.7 billion senior secured asset-based revolving credit facility (“Senior Secured Revolving Credit Facility”) and a $450.0 million “first-in, last out” senior secured term loan facility (“Senior Secured Term Loan,” and together with the Senior Secured Revolving Credit Facility, collectively, the “Existing Facilities”). We used proceeds from the Existing Facilities to refinance our prior $2.7 billion existing credit agreement (the “Old Facility”). The Existing Facilities extend our debt maturity profile and provide additional liquidity. Borrowings under the Senior Secured Revolving Credit Facility bear interest at a rate per annum between LIBOR plus 1.25% and LIBOR plus 1.75% based upon the Average ABL Availability (as defined in the Credit Agreement). Borrowings under the Senior Secured Term Loan bear interest at a rate per annum of LIBOR plus 3.00%. We are required to pay fees between 0.250% and 0.375% per annum on the daily unused amount of the commitments under the Senior Secured Revolving Credit Facility, depending on Average ABL Availability. The Existing Facilities mature on December 20, 2023, subject to an earlier maturity on December 31, 2022 if we have not repaid or refinanced our existing 6.125% Notes due 2023 prior to such date. We intend to repay the remaining balance due under the 6.125% Notes due 2023 prior to the early maturity becoming effective.
Our borrowing capacity under the Senior Secured Revolving Credit Facility is based upon a specified borrowing base consisting of accounts receivable, inventory and prescription files. At February 27, 2021, we had approximately $1,300.0 million of borrowings outstanding under the Existing Facilities and had letters of credit outstanding against the Senior Secured Revolving Credit Facility of approximately $122.0 million, which resulted in additional borrowing capacity under the Senior Secured Revolving Credit Facility of $1,643.1 million. If at any time the total credit exposure outstanding under the Existing Facilities and the principal amount of our other senior obligations exceed the borrowing base, we will be required to make certain other mandatory prepayments to eliminate such shortfall.
The Credit Agreement restricts us and all of our subsidiaries, including the subsidiaries that guarantee our obligations under the Existing Facilities, the secured guaranteed notes and unsecured guaranteed notes (collectively, the “Subsidiary Guarantors”) from accumulating cash on hand in excess of $200.0 million at any time when revolving loans are outstanding (not including cash located in our store and lockbox deposit accounts and cash necessary to cover our current liabilities). The Credit Agreement also states that if at any time (other than following the exercise of remedies or acceleration of any senior obligations or second priority debt and receipt of a triggering notice by the senior collateral agent from a representative of the senior obligations or the second priority debt) either (i) an event of default exists under the Existing Facilities or (ii) the sum of our borrowing capacity under our Senior Secured Revolving Credit Facility and certain amounts held on deposit with the senior collateral agent in a concentration account is less than $275.0 million for three consecutive business days or less than or equal to $200.0 million on any day (a “cash sweep period”), the funds in our deposit accounts will be swept to a concentration account with the senior collateral agent and will be applied first to repay outstanding revolving loans under the Existing Facilities, and then held as collateral for the senior obligations until such cash sweep period is rescinded pursuant to the terms of the Existing Facilities.
Our obligations under the Existing Facilities and the Subsidiary Guarantors’ obligations under the related guarantees are secured by (i) a first-priority lien on all of the Subsidiary Guarantors’ cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, inventory, prescription files (including eligible script lists), intellectual property (prior to the repayment of the Senior Secured Term Loan) and certain other assets arising therefrom or related thereto (including substantially all of their deposit accounts, collectively, the “ABL priority collateral”) and (ii) a second-priority lien on all of the Subsidiary Guarantors’ equipment, fixtures, investment property (other than equity interests in subsidiaries), intellectual property (following the repayment of the Senior Secured Term Loan) and all other assets that do not constitute ABL priority collateral, in each case, subject to customary exceptions and limitations.
The Credit Agreement allows us to have outstanding, at any time, up to an aggregate principal amount of $1.5 billion in secured second priority debt, split-priority debt, unsecured debt and disqualified preferred stock in addition to borrowings under the Existing Facilities and other existing indebtedness, provided that not in excess of $750.0 million of such secured second priority debt, split-priority debt, unsecured debt and disqualified preferred stock shall mature or require scheduled payments of principal prior to 90 days after the latest of (i) the fifth anniversary of the effectiveness of the Existing Facilities and (ii) the latest maturity date of any Term Loan or Other Revolving Commitment (each as defined in the Credit Agreement) (excluding bridge facilities allowing extensions on customary terms to at least the date that is 90 days after such date). Subject to the limitations described in clauses (i) and (ii) of the immediately preceding sentence, the Credit Agreement additionally allows us to issue or incur an unlimited amount of unsecured debt and disqualified preferred stock so long as a Financial Covenant Effectiveness Period (as defined in the Credit Agreement) is not in effect; provided, however, that certain of our other outstanding indebtedness limits the amount of unsecured debt that can be incurred if certain interest coverage levels are not met at the time of incurrence or other exemptions are not available. The Credit Agreement also contains certain restrictions on the amount of secured first priority debt we are able to incur. The Credit Agreement also allows for the voluntary repurchase of any debt or other convertible debt, so long as the Existing Facilities are not in default and we maintain availability under our revolver of more than $365.0 million.
The Credit Agreement has a financial covenant that requires us to maintain a minimum fixed charge coverage ratio of 1.00 to 1.00 (i) on any date on which availability under the Senior Secured Revolving Credit Facility is less than $200.0 million, or (ii) on the third consecutive business day on which availability under the Senior Secured Revolving Credit Facility is less than $250.0 million and, in each case, ending on and excluding the first day thereafter, if any, which is the 30th consecutive calendar day on which availability under the revolver is equal to or greater than $250.0 million. As of February 27, 2021, our fixed charge coverage ratio was greater than 1.00 to 1.00 and we were in compliance with the Credit Agreement’s financial covenant. The Credit Agreement also contains covenants which place restrictions on the incurrence of debt, the payments of dividends, the making of investments, sale of assets, mergers and acquisitions and the granting of liens.
The Credit Agreement provides for customary events of default including nonpayment, misrepresentation, breach of covenants and bankruptcy. It is also an event of default if we fail to make any required payment on debt having a principal amount in excess of $50.0 million or any event occurs that enables, or which with the giving of notice or the lapse of time would enable, the holder of such debt to accelerate the maturity or require the repayment repurchase, redemption or defeasance of such debt.
The indentures that govern our guaranteed unsecured notes and our guaranteed secured notes contain restrictions on the amount of additional secured and unsecured debt that we may incur. As of February 27, 2021, we had the ability to (i) draw the full amount under our revolving credit facility, or (ii) incur additional secured debt. In addition, we have the ability to enter into certain sale and leaseback transactions. The ability to issue additional unsecured debt under the indenture is generally governed by an interest coverage ratio test. As of February 27, 2021, we had the ability to issue additional secured and unsecured debt under the indentures governing our unguaranteed unsecured notes.
Fiscal 2019, 2020 and 2021 Transactions
On March 13, 2018, we issued a notice of redemption for all of the 9.25% Notes that were outstanding on April 12, 2018, pursuant to the terms of the indenture of the 9.25% Notes. On April 12, 2018, we redeemed 100% of the remaining outstanding 9.25% Notes. In connection therewith, we recorded a loss on debt retirement of $3.4 million
which included unamortized debt issuance costs, partially offset by unamortized discount. The debt repayment and related loss on debt retirement is included in the results of operations and cash flows of discontinued operations.
On April 19, 2018, we announced that we had commenced an offer to purchase up to $700.0 million of the outstanding 6.75% Notes and the 6.125% Notes pursuant to the asset sale provisions of such indentures. On May 21, 2018, we accepted for payment, pursuant to the offer to purchase, $1.4 million aggregate principal amount of the 6.75% Notes and $4.8 million aggregate principal amount of the 6.125% Notes. The debt repayment and related loss on debt retirement of $0.01 million for the 6.75% Notes is included in the results of operations and cash flows of discontinued operations. The debt repayment and related loss on debt retirement of $0.06 million for the 6.125% Notes is included in the results of operations and cash flows of continuing operations.
On April 29, 2018, we further reduced the borrowing capacity on our Old Facility from $3.0 billion to $2.7 billion. In connection therewith, we recorded a loss on debt retirement of $1.1 million, which included unamortized debt issuance costs. The loss on debt retirement is included in the results of operations and cash flows of discontinued operations.
On June 25, 2018, we redeemed the remaining $805.2 million of the 6.75% Notes, which resulted in a loss on debt retirement of $18.1 million. The loss on debt retirement is included in the results of operations and cash flows of discontinued operations.
On October 11, 2019, we completed a privately negotiated purchase from a noteholder and its affiliated funds of $84.1 million aggregate principal amount of the 7.70% Notes and 6.875% Notes for $51.3 million. In connection therewith, we recorded a gain on debt retirement of $32.4 million, which included unamortized debt issuance costs. The debt repayment and related gain on debt retirement is included in the results of operations and cash flows of continuing operations.
On October 15, 2019, we commenced an offer to purchase up to $100.0 million of the outstanding 7.70% Notes and the 6.875% Notes. In November 2019, we accepted for payment $18.1 million aggregate principal amount of the 7.70% Notes and $39.4 million aggregate principal amount of the 6.875% Notes for $38.4 million. In connection therewith, we recorded a gain on debt retirement of $18.5 million, which included unamortized debt issuance costs. The debt repayment and related gain on debt retirement is included in the results of operations and cash flows of continuing operations.
During November 2019, we made additional purchases of $15.0 million aggregate principal amount of the 7.70% Notes for $10.0 million. In connection therewith, we recorded a gain on debt retirement of $4.8 million, which included unamortized debt issuance costs. The debt repayment and related gain on debt retirement is included in the results of operations and cash flows of continuing operations.
On January 6, 2020, we commenced an offer to exchange up to $600.0 million aggregate principal amount of the outstanding 6.125% Senior Notes due 2023 for newly issued 7.500% Senior Secured Notes due 2025. On February 5, 2020, we announced that the exchange offer was oversubscribed and accepted for payment $600.0 million aggregate principal amount of the 6.125% Senior Notes due 2023 in exchange for newly issued 7.500% Senior Secured Notes due 2025. We accounted for the exchange as a debt modification and accordingly did not record a loss on debt retirement.
The 7.500% Senior Secured Notes due 2025 mature on July 1, 2025, and are guaranteed on a senior secured basis by the same Subsidiary Guarantors that guarantee the Existing Facilities and the 6.125% Senior Notes due 2023. The 7.500% Senior Secured Notes due 2025 and the obligations under the related guarantees are secured by (i) a first-priority lien on all of the Subsidiary Guarantors’ equipment, fixtures, investment property (other than equity interests in subsidiaries), intellectual property (following the repayment of the Senior Secured Term Loan) and other collateral to the extent it does not constitute ABL priority collateral (as defined below), and (ii) a second-priority lien on all of the Subsidiary Guarantors’ cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivables, payment intangibles, inventory, prescription files (including eligible script lists) and, intellectual property (prior to the repayment of the Senior Secured Term Loan) (collectively, the “ABL priority collateral”), which, in each case, also secure the Existing Facilities.
On June 25, 2020, we commenced an offer to exchange (the “June 25, 2020 Exchange Offer”) up to $750.0 million aggregate principal amount of the outstanding 6.125% Notes for a combination of $600.0 million newly issued 8.0% Senior Secured Notes due 2026 (the “8.0% Notes”) and $145.5 million cash. On July 10, 2020, we increased the maximum amount of 6.125% Notes that may be accepted for exchange from $750.0 million to $1,125.0 million and, on July 24, 2020, we announced that we accepted for payment $1,062.7 million aggregate principal amount of the 6.125% Notes in exchange for $849.9 million aggregate principal amount of newly issued 8.0% Notes and $206.4 million in cash. In connection therewith, we recorded a gain on debt modification of $5.3 million which is included in the results of operations and cash flows of continuing operations. The 8.0% Notes are secured on an equal and ratable basis by the same assets that secure the 7.500% Notes. The 8.0% Notes are guaranteed on a senior secured basis by the same subsidiaries that guarantee the 7.500% Notes. In conjunction with the June 25, 2020 Exchange Offer, we also commenced a solicitation of consents from the holders of outstanding 6.125% Notes to certain proposed amendments to the indenture governing the 6.125% Notes. On July 9, 2020, following the receipt of the requisite number of consents, we entered into a supplemental indenture, which modified certain limitations in the debt covenant to allow for the creation of the 8.0% Notes.
Guarantor Summarized Financial Information
Certain of our subsidiaries, which are listed on Exhibit 22 to this Annual Report on Form 10-K, have guaranteed our obligations under the 6.125% Notes and the 7.500% Notes (collectively, the "Guaranteed Notes"). As discussed in Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements, the Guaranteed Notes were issued by us, as the parent company, and are guaranteed by substantially all of the parent company’s consolidated subsidiaries (the “guarantors” or “Subsidiary Guarantors”) except for EI (the “non-guarantor”). The parent company and guarantors are referred to as the “obligor group”. The Subsidiary Guarantors fully and unconditionally and jointly and severally guarantee the Guaranteed Notes. The 6.125% Notes and the obligations under the related guarantees are unsecured. The 7.500% Notes and the obligations under the related guarantees are secured by (i) a first-priority lien on all of the Subsidiary Guarantors’ equipment, fixtures, investment property (other than equity interests in subsidiaries), intellectual property (following the repayment of the Senior Secured Term Loan) and other collateral to the extent it does not constitute ABL priority collateral (as defined below), and (ii) a second-priority lien on all of the Subsidiary Guarantors’ cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivables, payment intangibles, inventory, prescription files (including eligible script lists) and, intellectual property (prior to the repayment of the Senior Secured Term Loan) (collectively, the “ABL priority collateral”), which, in each case, also secure the Existing Facilities.
Under certain circumstances, subsidiaries may be released from their guarantees without consent of the note holders. Our subsidiaries conduct substantially all of our operations and have significant liabilities, including trade payables. If the subsidiary guarantees are invalid or unenforceable or are limited by fraudulent conveyance or other laws, the registered debt will be structurally subordinated to the substantial liabilities of our subsidiaries.
Condensed Combined Financial Information
The following tables include summarized financial information of the obligor group. Investments in and the equity in the earnings of EI, which is not a member of the obligor group, have been excluded. The summarized financial information of the obligor group is presented on a combined basis with intercompany balances and transactions between entities in the obligor group eliminated. The obligor group’s amounts due to/from and transactions with EI have been presented in separate line items, if material.
(a) Includes $45.6 million of revenues generated from the non-guarantor for the fifty-two week period ended February 27, 2021.
(b) Includes $45.2 million of cost of revenues incurred in transactions with the non-guarantor for the fifty-two week period ended February 27, 2021.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of February 27, 2021, we had no material off balance sheet arrangements.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table details the maturities of our indebtedness and lease financing obligations as of February 27, 2021, as well as other contractual cash obligations and commitments.
(1) Includes principal and interest payments for all outstanding debt instruments. Interest was calculated on variable rate instruments using rates as of February 27, 2021.
(2) Represents the minimum lease payments on non-cancelable leases, including interest, net of sublease income on a continuing operations basis as the minimum lease payments on non-cancelable leases, including interest, net of sublease income is being assumed by WBA as part of the Sale.
(3) Includes the undiscounted payments for self-insured medical coverage, actuarially determined undiscounted payments for self-insured workers’ compensation and general liability, and actuarially determined obligations for defined benefit pension and nonqualified executive retirement plans.
(4) Represents commitments to purchase products and licensing fees from certain vendors.
(5) Represents lease guarantee obligations for 6 former stores related to certain business dispositions. The respective purchasers assume the obligations and are, therefore, primarily liable for these obligations.
(6) Represents lease guarantee obligations for 1,125 former stores related to the Asset Sale. WBA assumed the obligations and are, therefore, primarily liable for these obligations.
Obligations for income tax uncertainties pursuant to ASC 740, “Income Taxes” of approximately $20.9 million are not included in the table above as we are uncertain as to if or when such amounts may be settled.
Net Cash Provided By (Used In) Operating, Investing and Financing Activities from Continuing Operations
Cash flow provided by operating activities was $105.2 million in fiscal 2021. Operating cash flow was positively impacted by the sale of our calendar 2020 Medicare Part D receivable from CMS, management initiatives to reduce inventory levels and benefit from the employer payroll tax payment deferral under the CARES act of $102.0
million. These amounts were partially offset by the timing of Medicare Part D capitation payments from CMS, increases in manufacturer rebates receivable and reductions in payroll related accruals and revenue deferrals resulting from the changes made to our wellness+ loyalty program.
Cash flow provided by operating activities was $510.9 million in fiscal 2020. Operating cash flow was positively impacted by the sale of our calendar 2019 Medicare Part D receivable from CMS, lower WBA TSA receivables due to fewer stores being serviced and a reduction in customer receivables at our Pharmacy Services segment. These amounts were partially offset by a reduction in accounts payable correlating to the reduced WBA TSA stores being serviced and a reduction in payroll related accruals.
Cash used in investing activities was $109.3 million in fiscal 2021. Cash used for the purchase of property, plant and equipment was higher than in the prior year resulting from investments in our stores in connection with our RxEvolution strategy. Cash used in investing activities also includes the net outlay of $86.2 million for the acquisition of Bartell during the fourth quarter. These amounts are partially offset by proceeds from sale leaseback transactions, including the sale leaseback of our Woodland and Lancaster CA distribution centers in the fourth quarter fiscal 2021, and our Perryman MD distribution center in the third quarter fiscal 2021.
Cash used in investing activities was $149.8 million in fiscal 2020. Cash used for the purchase of property, plant and equipment was lower than in the prior year due primarily to a slowdown in our store remodeling program while we developed our RxEvolution strategy. Proceeds from the disposition of assets and investments includes cash proceeds associated with the monetization of company-owned life insurance.
Cash used in financing activities was $65.2 million in fiscal 2021. Cash used by financing activities reflects net revolver borrowings offset by principal payments to facilitate the June 25, 2020 Exchange Offer.
Cash used by financing activities was $326.7 million in fiscal 2020, which reflects net revolver repayments and the repayment of a portion of our 6.875% notes and 7.7% notes.
Capital Expenditures
During the fiscal years ended February 27, 2021, February 29, 2020 and March 2, 2019 capital expenditures were as follows:
Future Liquidity
We are highly leveraged. Our high level of indebtedness could: (i) limit our ability to obtain additional financing; (ii) limit our flexibility in planning for, or reacting to, changes in our business and the industry; (iii) place us at a competitive disadvantage relative to our competitors with less debt; (iv) render us more vulnerable to general adverse economic and industry conditions, including those resulting from COVID-19; and (v) require us to dedicate a substantial portion of our cash flow to service our debt. Based upon our current levels of operations, we believe that cash flow from operations together with available borrowings under the revolver and other sources of liquidity will be adequate to meet our requirements for working capital, debt service, capital expenditures and other strategic investments at least for the next twelve months. Based on our liquidity position, which we expect to remain strong, we do not expect to be subject to the minimum fixed charge covenant in the Existing Facilities in the next twelve months. We will continue to assess our liquidity position and potential sources of supplemental liquidity in light of our operating
performance, and other relevant circumstances, and we may evaluate alternative sources of liquidity, including further opportunities related to any receivable due to us from CMS, sale and leaseback transactions, and other transactions to optimize our asset base. From time to time, we may seek additional deleveraging or refinancing transactions, including entering into transactions to exchange debt for shares of common stock or other debt securities (including additional secured debt), issuance of equity (including preferred stock and convertible securities), repurchase or redemption of outstanding indebtedness, or seek to refinance our outstanding debt (including the Existing Facilities) or may otherwise seek transactions to reduce interest expense and extend debt maturities. We may also look to make additional investments in our business to further our strategic objectives, including targeted acquisitions. Any of these transactions could impact our financial results.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to inventory shrink, goodwill impairment, impairment of long-lived assets, revenue recognition, vendor discounts and purchase discounts, self-insurance liabilities, lease termination charges, income taxes and litigation. Additionally, we have critical accounting policies regarding revenue recognition and vendor allowances and purchase discounts for our Pharmacy Services segment. We base our estimates on historical experience, current and anticipated business conditions, the condition of the financial markets and various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under existing conditions. Variability reflected in the sensitivity analyses presented below is based on our recent historical experience. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates and sensitivity analyses.
The following critical accounting policies require the use of significant judgments and estimates by management:
Inventory shrink: The carrying value of our inventory is reduced by a reserve for estimated shrink losses that occur between physical inventory dates. When estimating these losses, we consider historical loss results at specific locations. Shrink expense is recognized by applying the estimated shrink rate to sales since the last physical inventory. Although possible, we do not expect a significant change to our shrink rate in future periods. A 10 basis point difference in our estimated shrink rate for the year ended February 27, 2021, would have affected pre-tax income by approximately $4.0 million.
Goodwill Impairment: Our policy is to perform an impairment test of goodwill at least annually, and more frequently if events or circumstances occurred that would indicate a reduced fair value in our reporting units could exist. In our quantitative impairment test, fair value estimates are calculated using an average of the income and market approaches. The income approach is based on the present value of future cash flows of each reporting unit, while the market approach is based on certain multiples of selected guideline public companies or selected guideline transactions. The approaches incorporate a number of market participant assumptions including future growth rates, discount rates, income tax rates and market activity in assessing fair value and are reporting unit specific. If the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value, we recognize an impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value. In addition, we consider the income tax effect of any tax deductible goodwill when measuring a goodwill impairment loss. Our Pharmacy Services reporting unit has goodwill of $1.06 billion at February 27, 2021 and the fair value of the reporting unit is approximately 25% higher than the carrying value.
Impairment of long-lived assets: We evaluate long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that an asset group has a carrying value that may not be recoverable. The individual operating store is the lowest level for which cash flows are identifiable. As such, we evaluate individual stores for recoverability. To determine if a store needs to be tested for recoverability, we consider items such as decreases in market prices, changes in the manner in which the store is being used or physical condition, changes in legal factors or business climate, an accumulation of losses significantly in excess of budget, a current period operating or cash flow loss
combined with a history of operating or cash flow losses or a projection of continuing losses, or an expectation that the store will be closed or sold.
We monitor new and recently relocated stores against operational projections and other strategic factors such as regional economics, new competitive entries and other local market considerations to determine if an impairment evaluation is required. For other stores, we perform a recoverability analysis if they have experienced current-period and historical cash flow losses.
In performing the recoverability test, we compare the expected future cash flows of a store to the carrying amount of its assets. Significant judgment is used to estimate future cash flows. Major assumptions that contribute to our future cash flow projections include: expected sales and gross profit, pharmacy reimbursement rates, expected costs such as payroll, and estimates for other significant selling, general and administrative expenses.
If an operating store’s estimated future undiscounted cash flows are not sufficient to cover its carrying value, its carrying value is reduced to fair value which is its estimated future discounted cash flows. The discount rate is commensurate with the risks associated with the recovery of a similar asset. Beginning in fiscal year 2020, operating lease right-of-use assets are included within the stores’ asset groups. We obtain fair values of these right-of-use assets based on real estate market data.
We regularly approve certain stores for closure. Impairment charges for closed stores, if any, are evaluated and recorded in the quarter the closure decision is approved.
We also evaluate assets to be disposed of on a quarterly basis to determine if an additional impairment charge is required. Fair value estimates are provided by independent brokers who operate in the local markets where the assets are located.
If our actual future cash flows differ from our projections materially, certain stores that are either not impaired or partially impaired in the current period may be further impaired in future periods. A 50 and 100 basis point decrease in our future sales assumptions as of February 27, 2021 would have resulted in 17 and 36, respectively, additional stores being subjected to our impairment analysis.
Revenue recognition for our loyalty program: We offer a chain-wide customer loyalty program, “wellness+ Rewards”. Members participating in our wellness+ Rewards loyalty card program earned points on a calendar year basis for eligible front-end merchandise purchases and qualifying prescriptions. The existing wellness+ program was terminated as of July 1, 2020, with benefits earned as of that date available to be used through the end of calendar 2020. In December 2020, the Company granted a temporary extension of benefits to previous members that were eligible for a discount as of December 31, 2020 such that those prior members will be eligible to continue to receive that discount on purchases made through June 30, 2021 with no additional purchase requirement. New and existing customers who were not already eligible for “Gold” benefits will still have the opportunity to earn additional discounts on purchases made through June 30, 2021.
Prior to the wellness+ program termination, effective January 1, 2020, members reached specific wellness+ tiers based on points accumulated during the six calendar month periods between January 1st and June 30th, and July 1st through December 31st, which entitled such customers to certain future discounts and other benefits upon reaching that tier. For example, any customer that reaches 500 points during the six calendar month period between January 1st and June 30th achieves the “Gold” tier, enabling him or her to receive a 20% discount on qualifying purchases of front-end merchandise for the remaining portion of that six calendar month period and for the following six calendar months. There is also a similar “Silver” level with a lower threshold and benefit level. Prior to January 1, 2020, the wellness+ tiers were based on points accumulated for a full calendar year, and entitled such customers to wellness+ benefits for the remainder of that calendar year and also the next calendar year.
Points earned pursuant to the wellness+ program represent a performance obligation and we allocate revenue between the merchandise purchased and the wellness+ points based on the relative stand-alone selling price of each performance obligation. The relative value of the wellness+ points is initially deferred as a contract liability (included in
other current and noncurrent liabilities). As members receive discounted front-end merchandise or when the benefit period expires, the Retail Pharmacy segment recognizes an allocable portion of the deferred contract liability into revenue.
Self-insurance liabilities: We expense claims for self-insured workers’ compensation and general liability insurance coverage as incurred including an estimate for claims incurred but not paid. The expense for self-insured workers’ compensation and general liability claims incurred but not paid is determined using several factors, including historical claims experience and development, severity of claims, medical costs and the time needed to settle claims. We discount the estimated expense for workers’ compensation to present value as the time period from incurrence of the claim to final settlement can be several years. We base our estimates for such timing on previous settlement activity. The discount rate is based on the current market rates for Treasury bills that approximate the average time to settle the workers’ compensation claims. These assumptions are updated on an annual basis. A 30 basis point difference in the discount rate for the year ended February 27, 2021, would have affected pretax income by approximately $1.8 million.
Income taxes: We currently have net operating loss (“NOL”) carryforwards that can be utilized to offset future income for federal and state tax purposes. These NOLs generate significant deferred tax assets. Realization is dependent on generating sufficient taxable income prior to the expiration of the loss carryforwards.
Our ability to utilize the losses and credits to offset future taxable income may be deferred or limited significantly if the Company were to experience an “ownership change” as defined in section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”). In general, an ownership change will occur if there is a cumulative change in ownership of the Company’s stock by “5-percent shareholders” (as defined in the Code) that exceeds 50 percentage points over a rolling three-year period. The Company determined that no ownership change has occurred for purposes of Section 382 for the period ended February 27, 2021. It is important to note that the limitation that would be created upon an ownership change would only apply to income earned after the event that caused the ownership change.
We regularly review the deferred tax assets for recoverability considering the relative impact of negative and positive evidence including our historical profitability, projected taxable income, the expected timing of the reversals of existing temporary differences and tax planning strategies. The weight given to the potential effect of the negative and positive evidence is commensurate with the extent to which it can be objectively verified. In evaluating the objective evidence that historical results provide, we consider three years of cumulative pretax book income (loss).
We establish a valuation allowance against deferred tax assets when we determine that it is more likely than not that some portion of our deferred tax assets will not be realized. Valuation allowances are based on evidence of our ability to generate sufficient taxable income by jurisdiction. On a quarterly basis, management evaluates the likelihood that we will realize the deferred tax assets and adjusts the valuation allowances, if appropriate. If we determine that we would be able to realize our deferred tax assets in the future in excess of their net recorded amount, we would make an adjustment to the deferred tax asset valuation allowance, which would impact the provision for income taxes.
We recognize tax liabilities in accordance with ASC 740, “Income Taxes” and we adjust these liabilities when our judgment changes as a result of the evaluation of new information not previously available. Due to the complexity of some of these uncertainties, the ultimate resolution may result in a payment that is materially different from our current estimate of the tax liabilities.
Litigation reserves: We are involved in litigation on an on-going basis. We accrue our best estimate of the probable loss related to legal claims. Such estimates are based upon a combination of litigation and settlement strategies. These estimates are updated as the facts and circumstances of the cases develop and/or change. To the extent additional information arises or our strategies change, it is possible that our best estimate of the probable liability may also change. Changes to these reserves during the last three fiscal years were not material.
Revenue recognition for our Pharmacy Services segment:
The Pharmacy Services segment sells prescription drugs indirectly through its retail pharmacy network and directly through its mail service dispensing pharmacy. The Pharmacy Services segment recognizes revenue from prescription drugs sold by (i) its mail service dispensing pharmacy and (ii) under retail pharmacy network contracts where it is the principal at the contract prices negotiated with its clients, primarily employers, insurance companies, unions, government employee groups, health plans, Managed Medicaid plans, Medicare plans, and other sponsors of health benefit plans, and individuals throughout the United States. Revenues include: (i) the portion of the price the client pays directly to the Pharmacy Services segment, net of any volume-related or other discounts paid back to the client (see “Drug Discounts” below), (ii) the price paid to the Pharmacy Services segment by client plan members for mail order prescriptions (“Mail Co-Payments”), (iii) client plan member copayments made directly to the retail pharmacy network and (iv) administrative fees. Revenue is recognized when the Pharmacy Services segment meets its performance obligations relative to each transaction type. The following revenue recognition policies have been established for the Pharmacy Services segment:
● Revenues generated from prescription drugs sold by third party pharmacies in the Pharmacy Services segment’s retail pharmacy network and associated administrative fees are recognized at the Pharmacy Services segment’s point-of-sale, which is when the claim is adjudicated by the Pharmacy Services segment’s online claims processing system. At this point, we have performed across all of our performance obligations.
● Revenues generated from prescription drugs sold by the Pharmacy Services segment’s mail service dispensing pharmacy are recognized when the prescription is shipped. At the time of shipment, the Pharmacy Services segment has performed all of its performance obligations under its client contracts, as control of and title to the product has passed to the client plan members. The Pharmacy Services segment does not experience a significant level of returns or reshipments.
● Revenues generated from administrative fees based on membership or claims volume are recognized monthly based on the terms within the individual contracts, either a monthly member based fee, or a claims volume based fee.
In the majority of its contracts, the Pharmacy Services segment is the principal because its client contracts give clients the right to obtain access to its pharmacy contracts under which the Pharmacy Services segment directs its pharmacy network to provide the services (drug dispensing, consultation, etc.) and goods (prescription drugs) to the clients’ members at its negotiated pricing. The Pharmacy Services segment’s obligations under its client contracts are separate and distinct from its obligations to the third party pharmacies included in its retail pharmacy network contracts. In the majority of these contracts, the Pharmacy Services segment is contractually required to pay the third party pharmacies in its retail pharmacy network for products sold after payment is received from its clients. The Pharmacy Services segment has control over these transactions until the prescription is transferred to the member and, thus, that it is acting as a principal. As such, the Pharmacy Services segment records the total prescription price contracted with clients in revenues.
Amounts paid to pharmacies and amounts charged to clients are exclusive of the applicable co-payment under Pharmacy Services segment contracts. Retail pharmacy co-payments, which we instruct retail pharmacies to collect from members, are included in our revenues and our cost of revenues.
For contracts under which the Pharmacy Services segment acts as an agent or does not control the prescription drugs prior to transfer to the client, no revenue is recognized.
We deduct from our revenues that are generated from prescription drugs sold by third party pharmacies the manufacturers’ rebates that are earned by our clients based on their members’ utilization of brand-name formulary drugs. For the majority of our clients, we pass these rebates to clients at point-of-sale based on actual claims data and our estimates of the manufacturers’ rebates earned by our clients. We base our estimates on the best available data and recent history for the various factors that can affect the amount of rebates earned by the client. We also deduct from our
revenues pricing guarantees and guarantees regarding the level of service we will provide to the client or member as well as other payments made to our clients. Because the inputs to most of these estimates are not subject to a high degree of subjectivity or volatility, the effect of adjustments between estimated and actual amounts have not been material to our results of operations or financial condition.
We participate in the federal government’s Medicare Part D program as a Prescription Drug Plan (“PDP”) through our EI subsidiary. Our net revenues include insurance premiums earned by the PDP, which are determined based on the PDP’s annual bid and related contractual arrangements with CMS. The insurance premiums include a beneficiary premium, which is the responsibility of the PDP member, but is subsidized by CMS in the case of low-income members, and a direct premium paid by CMS. Premiums collected in advance are initially deferred as accrued expenses and are then recognized ratably as revenue over the period in which members are entitled to receive benefits.
We have recorded estimates of various assets and liabilities arising from our participation in the Medicare Part D program based on information in our claims management and enrollment systems. Significant estimates arising from our participation in the Medicare Part D program include: (i) estimates of low-income cost subsidy, reinsurance amounts and coverage gap discount amounts ultimately payable to or receivable from CMS based on a detailed claims reconciliation, (ii) an estimate of amounts receivable from CMS under a risk-sharing feature of the Medicare Part D program design, referred to as the risk corridor (iii) estimates for claims that have been reported and are in the process of being paid or contested and (iv) our estimate of claims that have been incurred but have not yet been reported. Actual amounts of Medicare Part D-related assets and liabilities could differ significantly from amounts recorded. Historically, the effect of these adjustments has not been material to our results of operations or financial position.
Vendor allowances and purchase discounts for our Pharmacy Services segment: Our Pharmacy Services segment receives purchase discounts on products purchased. Contractual arrangements with vendors, including manufacturers, wholesalers and retail pharmacies, normally provide for the Pharmacy Services segment to receive purchase discounts from established list prices in one, or a combination, of the following forms: (i) a direct discount at the time of purchase or (ii) a discount (or rebate) paid subsequent to dispensing when products are purchased indirectly from a manufacturer (e.g., through a wholesaler or retail pharmacy). These rebates are recognized based on estimates when prescriptions are dispensed and are generally calculated and billed to manufacturers within 30 days of the end of each completed quarter. Historically, the effect of adjustments resulting from the reconciliation of rebates recognized to the amounts billed and collected has not been material to the results of operations. We account for the effect of any such differences as a change in accounting estimate in the period the reconciliation is completed. The Pharmacy Services segment also receives additional discounts under its wholesaler contract. In addition, the Pharmacy Services segment receives fees from pharmaceutical manufacturers for administrative services. Purchase discounts and administrative service fees are recorded as a reduction of cost of revenues.
Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income (Loss), Adjusted Net Income (Loss) per Diluted Share and Other Non-GAAP Measures
In addition to net income (loss) determined in accordance with GAAP, we use certain non-GAAP measures, such as “Adjusted EBITDA”, in assessing our operating performance. We believe the non-GAAP measures serve as an appropriate measure in evaluating the performance of our business. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) excluding the impact of income taxes, interest expense, depreciation and amortization, LIFO adjustments (which removes the entire impact of LIFO, and effectively reflects the results as if we were on a FIFO inventory basis), charges or credits for facility closing and impairment, goodwill and intangible asset impairment charges, inventory write-downs related to store closings, gains or losses on debt modifications and retirements, the WBA merger termination fee, and other items (including stock-based compensation expense, merger and acquisition-related costs, a non-recurring litigation settlement (as further discussed below), severance, restructuring-related costs and costs related to facility closures, gain on Bartell Drugs acquisition and gain or loss on sale of assets). We reference this particular non-GAAP financial measure frequently in our decision-making because it provides supplemental information that facilitates internal comparisons to the historical periods and external comparisons to competitors. In addition, incentive compensation is primarily based on Adjusted EBITDA and we base certain of our forward-looking estimates on Adjusted EBITDA to facilitate quantification of planned business activities and enhance subsequent follow-up with comparisons of actual to planned Adjusted EBITDA.
The following is a reconciliation of our net loss to Adjusted EBITDA for fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019:
The following is a reconciliation of our net loss from continuing operations to Adjusted Net Income (Loss) and Adjusted Net Income (Loss) per Diluted Share for fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019. Adjusted Net Income (Loss) is defined as net income (loss) excluding the impact of amortization expense, merger and acquisition-related costs, a non-recurring litigation settlement (as further discussed below), gains or losses on debt modifications and retirements, LIFO adjustments (which removes the entire impact of LIFO, and effectively reflects the results as if we were on a FIFO inventory basis), goodwill and intangible asset impairment charges, restructuring-related costs, gain on Bartell Drugs acquisition and the WBA merger termination fee. We calculate Adjusted Net Income (Loss) per Diluted Share using our above-referenced definition of Adjusted Net Income (Loss). We believe Adjusted Net Income (Loss) and Adjusted Net
Income (Loss) per Diluted Share are useful indicators of our operating performance over multiple periods. Adjusted Net Income (Loss) per Diluted Share is calculated using our above-referenced definition of Adjusted Net Income (Loss):
(a) The fiscal year 2021, 2020 and 2019 annual effective tax rates, calculated using a federal rate plus a net state rate that excluded the impact of state NOLs, state credits and valuation allowance, was used for the fifty-two weeks ended February 27, 2021, the fifty-two weeks ended February 29, 2020 and the fifty-two weeks ended March 2, 2019, respectively.
We have in the past and may in the future be involved in litigation, claims and proceedings that result in legal settlements or similar payments. We have historically not made adjustments for amounts related to these matters when calculating Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income (Loss). Given the nature of a material legal settlement incurred in the second quarter of fiscal 2019, for comparability purposes we have added the amount of this settlement back to net income when calculating Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income (Loss) for the fifty-two week period ended March 2, 2019 to help investors better compare our operating performance over multiple periods. For additional information regarding the settlement see Note 22 to the consolidated financial statements.
In addition to Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net (Loss) Income and Adjusted Net (Loss) Income per Diluted Share, we occasionally refer to several other Non-GAAP measures, on a less frequent basis, in order to describe certain components of our business and how we utilize them to describe our results. These measures include but are not limited to Adjusted EBITDA Gross Margin and Gross Profit (gross margin/gross profit excluding non-Adjusted EBITDA items), Adjusted EBITDA SG&A (SG&A expenses excluding non-Adjusted EBITDA items), FIFO Gross Margin and FIFO Gross Profit (gross margin/gross profit before LIFO charges), and Free Cash Flow (Adjusted EBITDA less cash paid for interest, rent on closed stores, capital expenditures, restructuring-related costs and the change in working capital).
We include these non-GAAP financial measures in our earnings announcements in order to provide transparency to our investors and enable investors to better compare our operating performance with the operating performance of our competitors including with those of our competitors having different capital structures. Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income (Loss), Adjusted Net Income (Loss) per Diluted Share or other non-GAAP measures should not be considered in isolation from, and are not intended to represent an alternative measure of, operating results
or of cash flows from operating activities, as determined in accordance with GAAP. Our definition of these non-GAAP measures may not be comparable to similarly titled measurements reported by other companies.