Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations describes the principal factors affecting the results of our operations, financial condition, and changes in financial condition for the year ended December 31, 2020. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements, and the notes thereto set forth in Part I, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a holding company with no material assets other than our limited liability company interests in APW OpCo, the indirect parent of AP WIP Investments and its consolidated subsidiaries (the “APW Group”). We were incorporated as Landscape Acquisition Holdings Limited (“Landscape”) under the laws of the British Virgin Islands on November 1, 2017 and were formed to undertake an acquisition of a target company or business. On November 20, 2017, Landscape raised approximately $500 million before expenses and its ordinary shares (“Ordinary Shares”) and warrants (“Warrants”) were listed on the London Stock Exchange (“LSE”).
On February 10, 2020 (the “Closing Date”), Landscape completed the acquisition of AP WIP Investments Holdings, LP (“AP Wireless”), the direct parent of AP WIP Investments, LLC (“AP WIP Investments”), pursuant to a merger agreement entered into on November 19, 2019. Effective as of the Closing Date, we changed our name to Digital Landscape Group, Inc. The acquisition, together with the other transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, are referred to as the “APW Acquisition.” Except as the context otherwise requires, for all dates and periods ending on or before the Closing Date, the historical financial results discussed below with respect to such periods reflect the results of the APW Group, which is considered to be our predecessor for financial reporting purposes (“Predecessor”). We did not own the APW Group during any such periods, and such historical financial results may not be indicative of the results we would expect to recognize for periods after the Closing Date, or that we would have recognized had we owned the APW Group during such periods.
On October 2, 2020, we effected a discontinuance under Section 184 of the BVI Business Companies Act, 2004, as amended, and a domestication under Section 388 of the General Corporation Law of the State of Delaware, pursuant to which the Company’s jurisdiction of incorporation was changed from the British Virgin Islands to the State of Delaware (the “Domestication”). Effective upon the Domestication, we were renamed “Radius Global Infrastructure, Inc.”
On October 2, 2020, in connection with the Domestication, we delisted the Ordinary Shares and Warrants from trading on the LSE and on October 5, 2020, began trading its Class A Common Shares on the Nasdaq Global Market under the symbol “RADI”.
Except as the context otherwise requires, references in the following discussion to the “Company”, “Radius”, “we”, “our” or “us” with respect to periods prior to the Closing Date are to our Predecessor and its operations prior to the Closing Date; such references with respect to periods after the Closing Date are to our successor, Radius and its subsidiaries (including the APW Group) (“Successor”), and their operations after the Closing Date. AP Wireless and its subsidiaries (including AP WIP Investments) continue to exist as separate subsidiaries of Radius and those entities are separately financed, with each having debt obligations that are not obligations of Radius. See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Debt Obligations” below.
The APW Group
The APW Group is one of the largest international aggregators of rental streams underlying wireless sites through the acquisition of wireless telecom real property interests and contractual rights. The APW Group purchases, primarily for a lump sum, the right to receive future rental payments generated pursuant to an existing ground lease or rooftop lease (and any subsequent lease or extension or amendment thereof) between a property owner and an owner of a wireless tower or antennae (each such lease, a “Tenant Lease”) (and any subsequent lease or extension or amendment thereof). Typically, the APW Group acquires the rental stream by way of a purchase of a real property interest in the land underlying the wireless tower or antennae, most commonly easements, usufructs, leasehold and sub-leasehold interests, or fee simple interests, each of which provides the APW Group the right to receive the rents from the Tenant Lease. In addition, the APW Group purchases contractual interests, such as an assignment of rents, either in
conjunction with the property interest or as a stand-alone right. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had interests in 7,189 and 6,046 leases that generate rents for us, respectively. These leases related to properties that were situated on 5,427 and 4,586 different communications sites, respectively, throughout the United States and 18 other countries. As of December 31, 2020, annualized in-place rents were approximately $84.1 million, whereas revenue was $62.9 million and $6.8 million for the Successor period from February 10 to December 31, 2020 and the Predecessor period from January 1 to February 9, 2020, respectively. For a definition of annualized in-place rents and a comparison to revenue, the most directly comparable financial measure recorded in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the U.S. (“GAAP”), see “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below.
The APW Group’s primary objectives are to continuously acquire, aggregate and hold underlying real property interests and revenue streams critical for wireless communications. The APW Group purchases the right to receive future rental payments generated pursuant to an existing Tenant Lease between a property owner and an owner of a wireless tower or antennae either through an up-front payment or on an installment basis from landowners who have leased their property to companies that own telecommunications infrastructure assets. The real property interests (other than fee simple interests which are perpetual) typically have stated terms of 30 to 99 years, although some are shorter, and provide the APW Group with the right to receive the future income from the future Tenant Lease rental payments over a specified duration. In most cases, the stated term of the real property interest is longer than the remaining term of the Tenant Lease, which provides the APW Group with the right and opportunity for renewals and extensions. In addition to real property rights, the APW Group acquires contractual rights by way of an assignment of rents. The rent assignment is a contractual obligation pursuant to which the property owner assigns its right to receive all communications rents relating to the property, including rents arising under the Tenant Lease, to the APW Group. A rent assignment relates only to an existing Tenant Lease and therefore would not provide the APW Group the ability automatically to benefit from lease renewals beyond those provided for in the existing Tenant Lease. However, in these cases, the APW Group either limits the purchase price of the asset to the term of the current Tenant Lease or obtains the ability to negotiate future leases and a contractual obligation from the property owner to assign rental streams from future Tenant Lease renewals.
The APW Group’s primary long-term objective is to continue to grow its business organically, through annual rent escalators, the addition of new tenants and/or lease modifications, and acquisitively, as it has done in recent years, and fully take advantage of the established asset management platform it has created.
APW Acquisition Transactions
APW Acquisition
On November 19, 2019, we announced our entry into a definitive agreement to acquire AP Wireless and its subsidiaries from Associated Partners, L.P. (“Associated Partners”). Upon completion of the APW Acquisition on the Closing Date, we acquired a 91.8% interest in APW OpCo LLC (“APW OpCo”), the parent of AP Wireless and the indirect parent of the APW Group, for consideration of approximately $860 million less (i) debt as of June 30, 2019 of approximately $539 million, (ii) approximately $65 million to redeem a minority investor in the AP Wireless business and (iii) allocable transaction expenses of approximately $10.7 million plus (iv) cash as of June 30, 2019 of approximately $66.5 million (subject to certain limited adjustments). The acquisition was completed through a merger of one of Landscape’s subsidiaries with and into APW OpCo, with APW OpCo surviving such merger as a majority owned subsidiary of ours. Following the APW Acquisition, we own 91.8% of APW OpCo, with certain former partners of Associated Partners who were members of APW OpCo immediately prior to the Closing Date and who elected to roll over their investment in APW OpCo in connection with the APW Acquisition (the “Continuing OpCo Members”) owning the remaining 8.2% interest in APW OpCo. As a result, the AP Wireless business is 100% owned by Radius and the Continuing OpCo Members.
Certain securities of APW OpCo issued and outstanding upon completion of the APW Acquisition are subject to time and performance vesting conditions. In addition, all securities of APW OpCo held by persons other than the Company are exchangeable for Class A Common Shares. If all APW OpCo securities have vested and no securities have been exchanged for Class A Common Shares, the Company will own approximately 82% of APW OpCo as of December 31, 2020. On February 1, 2021, the Board of Directors (“Board”) of the Company declared a stock dividend payment of 2,474,421 shares of the Company’s Class A Shares that was paid on February 4, 2021 to the sole holder of record of all the issued and outstanding shares of Series A Founder Preferred Stock as of the close of business on February 1, 2021. The stock dividend was declared pursuant to the terms of the Series A Founder Preferred Stock, under which
the holders became entitled to receive a cumulative annual dividend when, as and if declared by the Board after the volume weighted average price of the Class A Common Stock was at or above $11.50 for ten consecutive trading days. This dividend on the Series A Founder Preferred Stock is payable in cash or in shares of Class A Common Stock in the sole discretion of the Board.
The APW Acquisition constituted a “Reverse Takeover” under United Kingdom listing rules, causing the listing on the LSE of the Ordinary Shares and Warrants to be suspended on November 20, 2019 pending the Company publishing an Annual Report in relation to admission of the Ordinary Shares and Warrants to listing. The United Kingdom Financial Conduct Authority accepted the Company’s application for listing on March 27, 2020 and trading of the Ordinary Shares and Warrants on the LSE recommenced on April 1, 2020.
On October 2, 2020, in connection with the Domestication, the Company delisted the Ordinary Shares and Warrants from trading on the LSE and on October 5, 2020 began trading its Class A Common Shares on the Nasdaq Global Market under the symbol “RADI”.
Centerbridge Subscription
In connection with the APW Acquisition, the Company entered into the Centerbridge Subscription Agreement with the Centerbridge Entities, pursuant to which the Centerbridge Entities subscribed for $100 million of Ordinary Shares, at a price of $10 per Ordinary Share, on the Closing Date. The cash proceeds from the Centerbridge Subscription are available for general working capital purposes, including the acquisition of real property interests and revenue streams critical for wireless communications.
Basis of Presentation
As a result of the APW Acquisition, for accounting purposes, Radius was the acquirer and the APW Group was the acquiree and, effective as of the Closing Date, the accounting Predecessor to Radius, as Radius had no operations prior to the APW Acquisition. Accordingly, the financial statement presentation set forth herein includes the financial statements of the APW Group as “Predecessor” for periods prior to the Closing Date and Radius as “Successor” for periods on and after the Closing Date, including the consolidation of the APW Group. The APW Acquisition was accounted for as a business combination under the scope of the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s Accounting Standards Codification Topic 805, Business Combinations.
Except as the context otherwise requires, for all dates and periods ending on or before the Closing Date, the historical financial results discussed below with respect to such periods reflect the results of our Predecessor, the APW Group. We did not own the APW Group during any such periods, and such historical financial results may not be indicative of the results we would expect to recognize for periods after the Closing Date, or that we would have recognized had we owned the APW Group during such periods.
For the Successor period from February 10, 2020 through December 31, 2020, Radius consolidated the financial position and results of operations of AP WIP Investments and its subsidiaries. For the Predecessor periods prior to February 10, 2020, the consolidated financial statements presented and discussed below include the accounts of AP WIP Investments and its wholly owned subsidiaries, as well as a variable interest entity (“VIE”) for which a subsidiary of AP WIP Investments was considered the primary beneficiary. Such consolidated financial statements were prepared in accordance with GAAP, which requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from these estimates. All intercompany transactions and account balances have been eliminated.
Key Factors Affecting Financial Condition and Results of Operations
We operate in a complex environment with several factors affecting our operations in addition to those described above. The following discussion describes key factors and events that may affect our financial condition and results of operations.
Impact of the COVID-19 global pandemic
The recent outbreak of COVID-19 (commonly referred to as coronavirus) and the response thereto has had an impact in each of the jurisdictions in which we operate and has had a negative impact on economic conditions globally. At the end of the first quarter of 2020, particularly during the last two weeks of March 2020, many of the markets and countries in which we operate saw the imposition of stay at home orders and other lock down measures in response to COVID-19. Accordingly, beginning in March 2020, we took measures to mitigate the broader public health risks associated with COVID-19 to our business and employees, including through office closures and self-isolation of employees (including by holding virtual meetings) where possible in line with the recommendations of relevant health authorities. While in the second quarter of 2020 we began to lift certain of these restrictions in line with such evolving recommendations, we continue to monitor developments related to the pandemic, and our decisions will continue to be driven by the health and well-being of our employees, business partners and communities.
Beginning in March 2020, government-imposed restrictions on the opening of offices and/or self-isolation measures have had an impact on our operations. In particular, our offices globally were largely shut down beginning in the middle of March 2020, although in all cases our operations have continued with employees working remotely from their homes. In addition, as a result of the COVID-19 outbreak, there have been and may continue to be short-term impacts on our ability to acquire new rental streams. For example, leasing transactions in certain civil law jurisdictions, such as Brazil, Chile and Colombia, often require the notarization of legal documents in person as part of the closing procedure. Government-imposed restrictions on the opening of offices and/or self-isolation measures, particularly in Latin American countries, have had, and may continue to have an adverse impact on the availability of notaries or other legal service providers. Further, global macro-economic conditions resulted in declines in foreign currency exchange rates and heightened volatility in foreign currency exchange rates across multiple currencies.
Despite the foregoing effects, our revenue and results of operations more generally have not been significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. To date, COVID-19 has had a limited impact on our underlying assets and revenue streams. We attribute this in part to the gaining importance of telecom and digital infrastructure usage while stay at home orders have been in place. We also experienced no material interruption in rent payment and collections and no material changes in the rate of lease terminations or non-renewals as a result of the effects of COVID-19 on our tenants and business partners. In addition, we believe the fact that substantially all of our essential cash functions are processed electronically has helped to minimize the incidence of operational disruptions due to lock-downs. However, there can be no assurance that we will not experience disruptions or negative impacts to our revenues and results of operations as the pandemic continues.
We believe we have sufficient liquidity to operate our business and that we have the ability to continue investing in our business and acquiring assets during the current phase of the pandemic. As of December 31, 2020, we had $215.4 million in total cash and cash equivalents and restricted cash.
Nevertheless, the extent to which COVID-19 will ultimately impact our results of operations and financial condition as well as the financial condition of our tenants will depend on numerous evolving factors that we cannot predict, including the duration and scope of the pandemic; governmental, business and individuals’ actions that have been and continue to be taken in response to the outbreak; the availability, distribution and efficacy of vaccines; new or mutated strains of COVID-19 or a similar virus (including vaccine-resistant strains); the impact of the outbreak on global economic activity and financial markets, including the possibility of a global recession and volatility in the global capital markets which, among other things, may increase the cost of capital and adversely impact our access to capital. For example, global macro-economic conditions have resulted in declines in foreign currency exchange rates and heightened volatility in foreign currency exchange rates across multiple currencies. These impacts, individually or collectively, could have a material adverse impact on our results of operations and financial condition as the pandemic continues.
Foreign Currency Translation
Our business operates in eleven different functional currencies. The reporting currency of the Company is U.S. dollars. Our results are affected by fluctuations in currency exchange rates that give rise to translational exchange rate risks. The extent of such fluctuations is determined in part by global economic conditions and macro-economic trends.
Movement in exchange rates have a direct impact on our reported revenues. Generally, the impact on operating income or loss associated with exchange rate changes on reported revenues is partially offset from exchange rate impacts on operating expenses denominated in the same functional currencies.
Additionally, we have debt facilities denominated in Euro and Pound Sterling. Movement to the exchange rates for the Euro and Pound Sterling will impact the amount of interest expense reported by the Company.
Interest Rate Fluctuations
Changes in global interest rates may have an impact on the acquisition price of real property interests. Changes to the acquisition price can impact our ability to deploy capital at company targeted returns. Historically, we have limited interest rate risk on debt instruments through long term debt with fixed interest rates.
Competition
We face varying levels of competition in the acquisition of assets in each operating country. Some competitors are larger and include public companies with greater access to capital and scale of operations than we do. Competition can drive up the acquisition price of real property interests, which would have an impact on the amount of revenue acquired on an annual basis.
Network Consolidation
Virtually all Tenant Leases associated with our assets permit the tenant to cancel the lease at any time with limited prior notices. Generally, a lease termination is permitted with only 30-180 days’ notice from the tenant. The risk of termination is greater upon a network consolidation and merger between two wireless carriers.
Key Statement of Operations Items
Revenue
We generate revenue by acquiring the right to receive future rental payments at operating wireless communications sites generated pursuant to existing Tenant Leases between a property owner and companies that own and operate cellular communication towers and other telecommunications infrastructure. Revenue is generated on in-place existing Tenant Leases, amendments and extensions on in-place existing Tenant Leases, and additional Tenant Leases at the operating wireless communications site.
Revenue is recorded as earned over the period in which the lessee is given control over the use of the wireless communication sites and recorded over the term of the lease, not including renewal terms, since the lease arrangements are cancellable by both parties. Rent received in advance is recorded when we receive advance rental payments from the in-place tenants. Contractually owed lease prepayments are typically paid one month to one year in advance.
Selling, general, and administrative expense
Selling, general, and administrative expense predominantly relates to activities associated with the acquisition of wireless communications assets and consists primarily of sales and related compensation expense, marketing expense, data accumulation cost, underwriting costs and other legal and professional fees, travel and facilities costs.
Share-based compensation expense
Share-based compensation expense is recorded for equity awards granted to employees and nonemployees over the requisite service period associated with the award, based on the grant-date fair value of the award.
Realized and unrealized gain (loss) on foreign currency debt
Our debt facilities are denominated in Euros, Pound Sterling and U.S. dollars, with U.S. dollars being our functional currency. The borrowings under the Facility Agreement (as defined below) are denominated in Euros and Pound Sterling and the borrowings under the Subscription Agreement (as defined below) are denominated in Euros. The obligation balances of both agreements are translated to U.S. dollars in the balance sheet date and any resulting translation adjustments are reported in our statement of operations as a gain (loss) on foreign currency debt.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense primarily includes interest due under our debt agreements and amortization of deferred financing costs and debt discounts, net of interest earned on invested cash.
Key Performance Indicators
Leases
Leases is an operating metric that represents each lease acquired by the Company. Each site purchased by us consists of at least one revenue producing lease stream, and many of these sites contain multiple lease streams. We had 7,189 and 6,046 leases as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Sites
Sites is an operating metric that represents each individual physical location where we have acquired a real property interest or a contractual right that generates revenue. We had 5,427 and 4,586 sites as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We identify certain additional financial measures not defined by GAAP that provide supplemental information we believe is useful to analysts and investors to evaluate our financial performance and ongoing results of operations, when considered alongside other GAAP measures such as net income, operating income, gross profit and net cash provided by operating activities. These non-GAAP measures exclude the financial impact of items management does not consider in assessing our ongoing operating performance, and thereby facilitate review of our operating performance on a period-to-period basis.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are non-GAAP measures. EBITDA is defined as net income (loss) before net interest expense, income tax expense, and depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA is calculated by taking EBITDA and further adjusting for management incentive plan expense, non-cash impairment-decommission of cell sites expense, realized and unrealized gains and losses on foreign currency debt, unrealized foreign exchange gains/losses associated with intercompany account balances denominated in a currency other than the functional currency, nonrecurring expenses incurred in connection with the Domestication, costs recorded in selling, general and administrative expenses incurred for incremental acquisition pursuit (successful and unsuccessful) and integration, and nonrecurring severance costs included in selling, general and administrative expenses. Management believes the presentation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA provides valuable additional information for users of the financial statements in assessing our financial condition and results of operations. Each of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA has important limitations as analytical tools because they exclude some, but not all, items that affect net income, therefore the calculation of these financial measures may be different from the calculations used by other companies and comparability may therefore be limited. You should not consider EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA or any of our other non-GAAP financial measures as an alternative or substitute for our results.
The following are reconciliations of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to net income (loss), the most comparable GAAP measure:
Acquisition Capex
Acquisition Capex is a non-GAAP financial measure. The Company’s payments for its acquisitions of real property interests consist of either a one-time payment upon the acquisition or up-front payments with contractually committed payments made over a period of time, pursuant to each real property interest agreement. In all cases, the Company contractually acquires all rights associated with the underlying revenue-producing assets upon entering into the agreement to purchase the real property interest and records the related assets in the period of acquisition. Acquisition Capex therefore represents the total cash spent and committed to be spent for the Company’s acquisitions of revenue-producing assets during the period measured. Management believes the presentation of Acquisition Capex provides valuable additional information for users of the financial statements in assessing our financial performance and growth, as it is a comprehensive measure of our investments in the revenue-producing assets that we acquire in a given period. Acquisition Capex has important limitations as an analytical tool, because it excludes certain fixed and variable costs related to our selling, marketing and underwriting activities included in selling, general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statements of operations, including corporate overhead expenses. Further, this financial measure may be different from calculations used by other companies and comparability may therefore be limited. You should not consider Acquisition Capex or any of the other non-GAAP measures we utilize as an alternative or substitute for our results.
The following is a reconciliation of Acquisition Capex to the amounts included as an investing cash flow in our consolidated statements of cash flows for investments in real property interests and related intangible assets, the most comparable GAAP measure, which generally represents up-front payments made in connection the acquisition of these assets during the period. The primary adjustment to the comparable GAAP measure is “committed contractual payments for investments in real property interests and intangible assets”, which represents the total amount of future payments that we were contractually committed to make in connection with our acquisitions of real property interests and intangible assets that occurred during the period. Additionally, foreign exchange translation adjustments impact the determination of Acquisition Capex.
Annualized In-Place Rents
Annualized in-place rents is a non-GAAP measure that measures performance based on annualized contractual revenue from the rents expected to be collected on leases owned and acquired (“in place”) as of the measurement date. Annualized in-place rents is calculated using the implied monthly revenue from all revenue producing leases that are in place as of the measurement date multiplied by twelve. Implied monthly revenue for each lease is calculated based on the most recent rental payment made under such lease. Management believes the presentation of annualized in-place rents provides valuable additional information for users of the financial statements in assessing our financial performance and growth. In particular, management believes the presentation of annualized in-place rents provides a measurement at the applicable point of time as opposed to revenue, which is recorded in the applicable period on revenue-producing assets in place as they are acquired. Annualized in-place rents has important limitations as an analytical tool because it is calculated at a particular moment in time, the measurement date, but implies an annualized amount of contractual revenue. As a result, following the measurement date, among other things, the underlying leases used in calculating the annualized in-place rents financial measure may be terminated, new leases may be acquired, or the contractual rents payable under such leases may not be collected. In these respects, among others, annualized in-place rents differs from “revenue”, which is the closest comparable GAAP measure and which represents all revenues (contractual or otherwise) earned over the applicable period. Revenue is recorded as earned over the period in which the lessee is given control over the use of the wireless communication sites and recorded over the term of the lease. You should not consider annualized in-place rents or any of the other non-GAAP measures we utilize as an alternative or substitute for our results. The following is a comparison of annualized in-place rents to revenue, the most comparable GAAP measure:
Results of Operations
Comparison of the results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
The selected financial information of the Company for the periods from and including February 10, 2020 to December 31, 2020 (Successor) and from and including January 1, 2020 to February 9, 2020 (Predecessor) set out below has been extracted without material adjustment from the consolidated financial information of the Successor included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. The selected financial information of the Predecessor for the year ended December 31, 2019 set out below has been extracted without material adjustment from the consolidated financial information of the Predecessor included elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Revenue
Revenue was $62.9 million and $6.8 million for the Successor period from February 10 to December 31, 2020 and the Predecessor period from January 1 to February 9, 2020, respectively, compared to $55.7 million for the Predecessor year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in revenue was primarily attributable to the additional revenue streams from investments in real property interests, as the number of leases acquired by us increased by 19% during the twelve-month period subsequent to December 31, 2019.
Cost of service
Cost of service was $619 thousand and $34 thousand for the Successor period from February 10 to December 31, 2020 and the Predecessor period from January 1 to February 9, 2020, respectively, compared to $326 thousand for the Predecessor year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in cost of service was driven primarily by recurring expenses associated with fee simple interests acquired during the twelve months subsequent to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Selling, general, and administrative expense
Selling, general and administrative expense was $60.6 million and $4.3 million for the Successor period from February 10 to December 31, 2020 and the Predecessor period from January 1 to February 9, 2020, respectively, compared to $36.8 million for the Predecessor year ended December 31, 2019. General and administrative expenses associated with servicing our real property interest assets was $5.7 million and $0.6 million for the Successor period from February 10 to December 31, 2020 and the Predecessor period from January 1 to February 9, 2020, respectively, compared to $5.7 million for the Predecessor year ended December 31, 2019. Selling, general and administrative expense for the Successor period from February 10 to December 31, 2020 included expenses not incurred in the previous periods for our Domestication activities of approximately $8.4 million, compensation and facilities-related costs associated with the Radius management team and staff totaling $8.6 million, professional fees and other expense associated with being a U.S. public company of approximately $2.4 million, transaction-related costs of approximately $1.9 million, transfer taxes resulting from the APW Acquisition of $1.7 million and approximately $4.2 million related to the recording of one-time compensation payments for the benefit of certain APW Group employees . Included in selling, general and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 was an expense for severance costs of $2.3 million. The remaining $3.2 million increase was due primarily to higher expenses of the APW Group as a result of an increase in headcount associated with the growth of our investments in real property interests.
Share-based compensation
Share-based compensation expense totaling $83.4 million was recognized in the Successor period from February 10 to December 31, 2020. In November 2017, Landscape issued 1,600,000 Series A Founder Preferred Shares to certain of its founders in connection with Landscape’s initial placement of Ordinary Shares and Warrants. The Series A Founder Preferred Shares were structured to provide a return based on the future appreciation of the market value of the Ordinary Shares and provided for an annual dividend amount to be payable subsequent to an acquisition by Landscape, based on the market price of the Ordinary Shares. This dividend feature was deemed to be compensatory to the Landscape founders receiving the Series A Founder Preferred Shares and classified as a market condition share-based compensation award. As the right to the annual dividend amount was triggered only upon an acquisition event, which was not considered probable until an acquisition had been consummated, the fair value of the annual dividend amount measured on the date of issuance of the BVI Series A Founder Preferred Shares, which approximated $69.5 million, was then recognized upon the consummation of the APW Acquisition as share-based compensation expense in the Successor period from February 10 to December 31, 2020. In addition, share-based compensation expense totaling approximately $0.4 million was recognized in the Successor period and was associated with 125,000 stock options that were issued to non-founder directors of Landscape in November 2017 and that vested upon the consummation of the APW Acquisition.
In the Successor period from February 10 to December 31, 2020, the Company granted each executive officer of the Company an initial award of LTIP Units and, in tandem with the LTIP Units an equal number of Class B Shares and/or Series B Founder Preferred Shares (collectively, the “Tandem Shares”), subject to the terms and conditions of the Company’s 2020 Equity Incentive Plan (the “Equity Plan”). The Tandem Shares are subject to the same vesting and forfeiture condition as the related LTIP Units. The total number of LTIP Units granted was 6,786,033 and had a weighted-average grant date fair value of approximately $7.88. Also, in the Successor period, restricted stock and stock options were granted under the Equity Plan in respect of a total of 283,492 and 3,014,000 Class A Common Shares, respectively. Share-based compensation expense recognized in the Successor period from February 10 to December 31, 2020 for LTIP Units was approximately $11.4 million and for the restricted stock and stock option awards was approximately $2.2 million.
Amortization and depreciation
Amortization and depreciation expense was $43.0 million and $2.6 million for the Successor period from February 10 to December 31, 2020 and the Predecessor period from January 1 to February 9, 2020, respectively, compared to $19.1 million for the Predecessor year ended December 31, 2019. In connection with the recording of fair value adjustments in the accounting for the APW Acquisition, the increase in the carrying amount of our real property interests and intangible assets resulted in additional amortization expense in the Successor period from February 10 to December 31, 2020 of approximately $22.1 million. The remaining increase was due primarily due to amortization on the real property interests acquired during the twelve months subsequent to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Impairment-decommission of cell sites
Impairment-decommission of cell sites was $2.0 million and $0.5 million for the Successor period from February 10 to December 31, 2020 and the Predecessor period from January 1 to February 9, 2020, respectively, compared to $2.6 million for the Predecessor year ended December 31, 2019. Tenant decommissions of cell sites in the Successor period from February 10 to December 31, 2020 and the Predecessor period from January 1 to February 9, 2020 were comparable to the Predecessor year ended December 31, 2019.
Realized and unrealized gain (loss) on foreign currency debt
Realized and unrealized gain (loss) on foreign currency debt was a loss of $40.4 million and a gain of $11.5 million for the Successor period from February 10 to December 31, 2020 and the Predecessor period from January 1 to February 9, 2020, respectively, compared to a $6.1 million loss for the Predecessor year ended December 31, 2019. A large portion of the Company’s debt is denominated in Euro and Pound Sterling, and the respective gains and losses were due to foreign exchange movements in the Euro and Pound Sterling relative to the U.S. dollar. In the Successor period from February 10 to December 31, 2020, the Euro and the Pound Sterling increased significantly relative to the U.S. dollar and in the Predecessor period from January 1 to February 9, 2020, the Pound Sterling decreased significantly relative to the U.S. dollar. In the year ended December 31, 2019, the Pound Sterling increased relative to the U.S. dollar.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense, net was $25.2 million and $3.6 million for the Successor period from February 10 to December 31, 2020 and the Predecessor period from January 1 to February 9, 2020, respectively, compared to $32.0 million for the Predecessor year ended December 31, 2019. As compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, interest expense, net was lower for the Successor period from February 10 to December 31, 2020 and the Predecessor period from January 1 to February 9, 2020, as a result of a decrease in amortization of debt discount and deferred financing costs of approximately $2.4 million and lower interest expense of approximately $2.9 million resulting from the April 2020 repayment of the DWIP II Loan (as defined below), net of additional interest expense incurred of approximately $1.8 million as a result of borrowings under the Facility Agreement in August 2020.
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense), net was income of $1.9 million and expense of $0.3 million for the Successor period from February 10 to December 31, 2020 and the Predecessor period from January 1 to February 9, 2020, respectively, compared to income of $0.2 million for the Predecessor year ended December 31, 2019. The change in other income (expense), net was due primarily to receipts from tenants of incremental lease charges owed for periods prior to our acquisitions of the related real property interests for which we are contractually entitled to recover.
Gain on debt extinguishment
Gain on debt extinguishment was recognized in the period from February 10 to December 31, 2020 (Successor) as a result of the repayment of the DWIP II Loan (as defined below) at an amount that was $1.3 million less than its carrying amount.
Income tax expense
Income tax expense was $2.8 million and $0.8 million for the Successor period from February 10 to December 31, 2020 and the Predecessor period from January 1 to February 9, 2020, respectively, compared to $2.5 million for the Predecessor year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in income tax expense was due primarily to higher taxable income in certain foreign jurisdictions and an income tax rate increase in the United Kingdom.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our future liquidity will depend primarily on: (i) the operating cash flows of the APW Group, (ii) our management of available cash, (iii) cash distributions on sale of existing assets and (iv) the use of borrowings, if any, to fund short-term liquidity needs.
We primarily require cash to pay our operating expenses, service the cash requirements associated with our contractual obligations and acquire additional real property interests and rental streams underlying wireless communication cell sites. Our principal sources of liquidity, both short-term and long-term, include revenue generated from our Tenant Leases, our cash and cash equivalents, restricted cash and borrowings available under our credit arrangements. As of December 31, 2020, we had working capital of approximately $59.8 million, including $99.9 million in cash and cash equivalents and $1.6 million in short-term restricted cash, and long-term restricted cash of $113.9 million. On February 19, 2021, we made additional borrowings under our Subscription Agreement (as defined below) totaling approximately $94 million. In addition to the available borrowing capacity under our Facility Agreement (as defined below) and Subscription Agreement, we expect to have access to the worldwide credit and capital markets, subject to market conditions, in order to issue additional debt if needed or desired.
Although we believe that our cash on hand, available restricted cash, and future cash from operations of the APW Group, together with our access to and the credit and capital markets, will provide adequate resources to provide both short-term and long-term liquidity, our access to, and the availability of, financing on acceptable terms in the future will be affected by many factors, including: (i) the performance of the APW Group and/or its operating subsidiaries, as applicable, (ii) our credit rating or absence of a credit rating and/or the credit rating of our operating subsidiaries, as applicable, (iii) the provisions of any relevant credit agreements and similar or associated documents, (iv) the liquidity of the overall credit and capital markets and (v) the current state of the economy. There can be no assurances that we will continue to have access to the credit and capital markets on acceptable terms.
Cash Flow Information
The tables below summarize our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the periods indicated and the cash and cash equivalents and restricted cash as of the applicable period end.
Cash used in operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the Successor period from February 10 to December 31, 2020 and the Predecessor period from January 1 to February 9, 2020 was $42.5 million and $3.5 million, respectively, compared to $6.6 million for the Predecessor year ended December 31, 2019. Cash used in the Successor period included payments made for accrued expenses of Landscape for professional fees and other costs incurred prior to the Successor period of approximately $34.6 million, primarily associated with the APW Transaction.
Cash used in investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the Successor period from February 10 to December 31, 2020 and the Predecessor period from January 1 to February 9, 2020 was $436.3 million and $22.6 million, respectively, compared to $73.9 million for the Predecessor year ended December 31, 2019. Cash paid in the APW Acquisition net of the cash acquired in the Successor period was $277.1 million. Payments to acquire real property interests were $175.7 million in the Successor period and $5.1 million in the Predecessor period from January 1 to February 9, 2020, as compared to $78.1 million in the Predecessor year ended December 31, 2019.
Cash provided by (used in) financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the Successor period from February 10 to December 31, 2020 was $99.9 million and net cash used in financing activities for the Predecessor period from January 1 to February 9, 2020 was $3.4 million, compared to $59.1 million for the Predecessor year ended December 31, 2019. In August 2020, we made additional borrowings under our Facility Agreement totaling approximately $160.5 million. In April 2020, APW OpCo acquired all of the rights to the loans and obligations under the DWIP II Loan from the lenders thereunder for $47.8 million.
Contractual Obligations and Material Cash Requirements
DWIP Agreement
On August 12, 2014, AP WIP Holdings, LLC (“DWIP”), a subsidiary of AP WIP Investments, entered into a $115 million loan agreement (as amended or supplemented, the “DWIP Agreement”). Under the terms of the DWIP Agreement, DWIP is the sole borrower and the lending syndicate is a collection of lenders managed by an affiliate of the administrative agent (the “DWIP Lender”). AP Service Company, LLC (the “Servicer”), a wholly owned subsidiary of AP Wireless, is the servicer under the DWIP Agreement. An unrelated party to DWIP was named as backup servicer in the event of a default by the Servicer as defined in the DWIP Agreement. The DWIP Agreement requires an annual rating be performed by Fitch Ratings, Inc. The private securitization loan provided pursuant to the DWIP Agreement is structured as non-recourse to other collateral of the APW Group.
On October 16, 2018, DWIP signed an amendment to the DWIP Agreement that (i) extended the maturity of the DWIP loan from August 10, 2019, to October 16, 2023, at which time all outstanding principal balances are required to be repaid, and (ii) reduced the fixed rate coupon from 4.50% to 4.25% per annum. The amendment provides that principal balances may be prepaid in whole on any date, provided that a prepayment premium equal to: 3.0% of the prepayment loan amount shall apply if the payment occurs on or prior to 24 months after October 16, 2018, 2.0% of the prepayment loan amount shall apply if the payment occurs on or prior to 36 months after October 16, 2018 but after 24 months after October 16, 2018, 1.0% of the prepayment loan amount shall apply if the payment occurs on or prior to 60 months after October 16, 2018 but after 36 months after October 16, 2018, and 0% of the prepayment loan amount shall apply if the payment occurs after 60 months after October 16, 2018.
Interest and fees due under the DWIP Agreement are payable monthly through the application of funds secured in a bank account controlled by the collateral agent (the collection account). The collateral agent sweeps customer collections from DWIP’s lockbox account each month. After receipt of a monthly report prepared by the Servicer detailing loan activity, borrowing compliance, customer collections, and general reserve account required balances, the collateral agent disburses funds monthly for interest, fees, deposits to the reserve account (if required), mandatory prepayments (if required), and remaining amounts from the prior months’ collections to DWIP. Fees equal to 0.80% to 1.00% of the $102.6 million loan amount are payable to the DWIP Lender, Servicer, backup servicer, and rating agency of the loan, as applicable.
Pursuant to the DWIP Agreement, DWIP is subject to restrictive covenants relating to, among others, a leverage cap of 7.75x eligible annual cash flow, future indebtedness, transfers of control of DWIP and compliance with a financial ratio relating to interest coverage (as defined in the DWIP Agreement as Debt Service). For the periods presented, DWIP was in compliance with all covenants associated with the DWIP Agreement.
Amounts outstanding under the DWIP Agreement are due in full on the maturity date of October 16, 2023. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the balance outstanding under the DWIP Agreement was $102.6 million.
Facility Agreement
On October 24, 2017, AP WIP International Holdings, LLC (“IWIP”), a subsidiary of AP WIP Investments, entered into a facility agreement (the “Facility Agreement”) providing for loans of up to £1.0 billion, with AP WIP Investments, as guarantor, Telecom Credit Infrastructure Designated Activity Company (“TCI DAC”), as original lender, Goldman Sachs Lending Partners LLC, as agent, and GLAS Trust Corporation Limited, as security agent. The Facility Agreement provides for funding in the form of loans consisting of tranches in Euros, Pounds Sterling, Canadian dollars, Australian dollars and U.S. dollars.
TCI DAC is an Irish Section 110 Designated Activity Company and is a passive/holding vehicle. TCI DAC is an uncommitted, £1.0 billion note issuance program with an initial 10-year term (due 2027) and was created by Associated Partners, in its capacity as sponsor (the “Sponsor”), as a special purpose vehicle with the objective of issuing notes from time to time and using proceeds thereof to originate and acquire loans (“Portfolio Loans”) to the Sponsor (including its successors and assigns, including RADI) subsidiary companies, secured by cash flows from communication infrastructure assets (ground leases, towers and other opportunistic assets) in predominantly Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development jurisdictions according to “Investment Criteria” in the Trust Deed dated October 24, 2017, governing the issuance of the notes. Pursuant to the Investment Criteria, the notes may be issued in U.S. dollars, Pounds Sterling, Euros, Australian dollars or Canadian dollars, and no rating of the loans is required. Portfolio Loans are fixed rate senior secured loans of portfolio companies which are wholly owned or controlled and will not be available to invest in preferred or common equity, unsecured debt or subordinated debt. At least 80% of the revenue generated by assets backing any Portfolio Loan must be from investment grade permitted jurisdictions. The notes are listed on the International Stock Exchange (TISE).
TCI DAC has no subsidiaries and raises funds through the issuance of notes to investors. All notes issued by TCI DAC are cross collateralized and rank pari-passu upon recovery. Additional note holders may be added with the issuance of additional notes over time.
Portfolio Loans acquired by TCI DAC support the notes issued on a pass-through basis and are not cross collateralized or cross defaulted to other Portfolio Loans. The initial Portfolio Loans were made to IWIP in 2017 and 2018 and additional Portfolio Loans may be issued through additional tranches or series as per the Facility Agreement.
Under the terms of the Facility Agreement, IWIP is the sole borrower and the finance parties include a lender, an agent and certain other financial institutions. AP WIP Investments is a guarantor of the loan and the loan is secured by the direct equity interests in IWIP. The loan is also secured by a debt service reserve account and escrow cash account of IWIP available for growth as well as direct equity interests and bank accounts of all significant IWIP’s asset owning subsidiaries. AP Service Company, LLC is the servicer under the Facility Agreement. The loan is senior in right of payment to all other debt of IWIP. The payments under the Facility Agreement are made quarterly.
On October 30, 2017, $266.2 million of the amount available under the Facility Agreement was funded. This amount comprised €115.0 million (“Series 1-A Tranche”) and £100.0 million (“Series 1-B Tranche”). The Series 1-A Tranche and the Series 1-B Tranche loans accrue interest of 4.098% and 4.608% per annum, respectively. At closing of the Facility Agreement, $5.0 million was funded to, and is required to be held in, an escrow account.
On November 26, 2018, an additional $98.4 million of the amount available under the Facility Agreement was funded. This amount comprised of €40.0 million (“Series 2-A Tranche”) and £40.0 million (“Series 2-B Tranche”). The Series 2-A Tranche and the Series 2-B Tranche loans accrue interest of 3.44% and 4.29% per annum, respectively.
On August 27, 2020, additional borrowings under the Facility Agreement were made, consisting of €75.0 million (“Series 3-A Tranche”) and £55.0 million (“Series 3-B Tranche”) and resulting in an increase in our outstanding debt thereunder of approximately $160.5 million. The Series 3-A Tranche and the Series 3-B Tranche loans accrue interest of 2.97% and 3.74% per annum, respectively. In connection with the Series 3-A Tranche and Series 3-B Tranche borrowings, the Facility Agreement was amended to, among other things, extend the termination date of the Facility Agreement from October 30, 2027 to such latest date of any outstanding Portfolio Loan. As a result, the maturity dates for the Series 3-A Tranche and the Series 3-B Tranche were set at August 26, 2030. The amendment to the definition of termination date in the Facility Agreement does not impact the maturity dates of the Series 1-A Tranche, Series 1-B Tranche, the Series 2-A Tranche or the Series 2-B Tranche.
Each tranche may include sub-tranches which may have a different interest rate than the other loans under the initial tranche. All tranches will have otherwise identical terms. For any floating interest rate portion of any tranche (or sub tranche), the interest rate is as reported and delivered to IWIP five days prior to a quarter end date. Coupons do not reflect certain related administration or servicing costs from third parties.
IWIP is subject to certain financial condition and testing covenants (such as interest coverage, leverage cap of 9.0x eligible annual cash flow and equity requirements and limits) pursuant to Facility Agreement documentation, as well as restrictive covenants relating to, among other things, future indebtedness (issuance cap of 8.25x eligible annual cash flow), liens and other material activities of IWIP and its subsidiaries. IWIP was in compliance with all covenants associated with the Facility Agreement as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Principal balances under the Facility Agreement may be prepaid in whole on any date, subject to the payment of a make-whole at the related benchmark plus a 50 basis point margin (as calculated pursuant to the applicable Facility Agreement documentation). Amounts outstanding under the Facility Agreement as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 totaled $547.7 million and $359.8 million, respectively.
Mezzanine Loan and Security Agreement
On September 20, 2018, AP WIP Domestic Investment II, LLC (“DWIP II”), a wholly owned subsidiary of AP WIP Investments, entered into an amended and restated loan and security agreement (as further amended by first amendment to amended and restated loan and security agreement dated July 25, 2019, the “Mezzanine Loan Agreement”). The Mezzanine Loan Agreement provided credit facilities that were designed to work in concert with the DWIP Agreement described under “-DWIP Agreement” above. Such credit facilities also replaced the $40.0 million facility provided to DWIP II under a secured loan and security agreement dated December 15, 2015. Pursuant to the Mezzanine Loan Agreement, DWIP II obtained an original term loan of $56.3 million (the “DWIP II Loan”) and borrowings thereunder accrued interest at a rate of 6.5% per annum, maturing on the earlier of (i) June 30, 2020, and (ii) the maturity date under the DWIP Agreement. Amortization under the Mezzanine Loan Agreement was $250,000 per calendar quarter plus that amount necessary such that the total of the outstanding balance of the DWIP Agreement and the term loans did not exceed 12.0x Eligible Free Cash Flow (as defined in the Mezzanine Loan Agreement).
In April 2020, APW OpCo acquired all of the rights to the loans and obligations under the Mezzanine Loan Agreement from the lenders thereunder for approximately $48.0 million, including accrued interest. Following consummation of the acquisition by APW OpCo, the Mezzanine Loan Agreement remains in effect and any amounts outstanding thereunder are treated as intercompany loans between DWIP II and APW OpCo.
Subscription Agreement
On November 6, 2019, AP WIP Investments Borrower, LLC (“AP WIP Investments Borrower”), a subsidiary of AP WIP Investments, entered into a subscription agreement (the “Subscription Agreement”) to borrow funds for working capital and other corporate purposes. Under the terms of the Subscription Agreement, AP WIP Investments Borrower is the sole borrower and AP WIP Investments is the guarantor of the loan and the loan is secured by AP Wireless’ direct equity interests in AP WIP Investments. The loan is senior in right of payment to all other debt of AP WIP Investments Borrower. There is no cross default or cross acceleration to senior secured debt other than if there is an acceleration under the senior debt in relation to certain events as per documentation such as the breach by the guarantor in certain cases. The Subscription Agreement provides for uncommitted funding up to £250.0 million in the form of nine-year term loans consisting of three tranches available in Euros, Pounds Sterling and U.S. dollars.
On November 8, 2019, $75.5 million of the amount available under the Subscription Agreement was funded (“Class A, Tranche 1 Euro”). This amount was comprised of €68.0 million. At closing of the Subscription Agreement, $3.0 million was funded to, and is required to be held in, a debt service reserve account.
Other tranches maybe be issued as long as in compliance and certain parameters in the deal documentation such as (a) loan to value less than 65%; (b) interest coverage is not less than 1.5x; and (c) leverage as at any collection period end date shall not exceed 10.0x.
The Class A, Tranche 1 Euro balance outstanding under the Subscription Agreement accrues interest at a fixed annual rate equal to 4.25%, which is payable quarterly on the twentieth day following the end of each calendar quarter; provided that, on February 10, 2020, the Subscription Agreement was amended to provide that the first quarterly interest payment (including the amount accrued from November 8, 2019 through December 31, 2019) would be due on the twentieth day following March 31, 2020. The loans under the Subscription Agreement mature on November 6, 2028, at which time all outstanding principal balances shall be repaid. The loans also carry a 2.00% payment-in-kind interest (PIK), payable on repayment of principal. Principal balances under the Subscription Agreement may be prepaid in whole on any date, subject to the payment of any applicable prepayment fee. Each tranche may include sub-tranches, which may have a different interest rate than other promissory certificates under its related tranche.
In February 2021, a new tranche of debt was issued under the Subscription Agreement. The Company added approximately $94 million of USD equivalents (€77 million) of new interest-only secured notes under the existing debt facility. The notes mature on November 8, 2028, with a blended current cash interest rate of 3.9% plus 1.75% payment-in-kind interest. The cash pay interest rates consist of both fixed and floating rates.
Pursuant to the Subscription Agreement, AP WIP Investments Borrower is subject to certain financial condition and testing covenants (such as interest coverage of 1.5x and leverage cap of 12.0x eligible annual cash flow) as well as restrictive and operating covenants relating to, among others, future indebtedness and liens and other material activities of AP WIP Investments Borrower and its affiliates. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, AP WIP Investments Borrower was in compliance with all covenants associated with the Subscription Agreement. The amounts outstanding under the Subscription Agreement as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 totaled $85.1 million and $76.6 million, respectively.
Lease Obligations
As disclosed in Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements, under certain circumstances, we are committed to make future payments under our leasehold interest arrangements, either as payments under arrangements determined to be finance leases or as noninterest bearing installments for arrangements that do not qualify as leases. As of December 31, 2020, the aggregate committed contractual obligation under these arrangements was $54.3 million, of which $50.5 million is due within the five-year period ending December 31, 2025. As disclosed in Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements, we are lessees under operating leases, primarily for the use of office space. As of December 31, 2020, we are contractually committed to make future payments of $4.8 million under operating lease arrangements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in conformity with GAAP, which requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from these estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are described in greater detail in the notes to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies involve critical judgments and estimates that are used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Real Property Interests
Our core business is to contract for the purchase of leasehold interests either through an up-front payment or on an installment basis from property owners who have leased their property to companies that own telecommunications infrastructure assets at cell sites. Real property interests include costs recorded under leasehold interest arrangements either as intangible assets or right of use assets, depending on whether the arrangement is determined to be a lease at the inception of the agreement under ASC Topic 842, Leases (“ASC 842”) or an asset acquisition. For acquisitions of real property interests that meet the definition of an asset acquisition, the cell site leasehold interests are recorded as intangible assets and are stated at cost less accumulated amortization.
ASC 842 requires us to recognize a right-of-use asset and a lease liability arising from a lease arrangement, which also must be classified as either a financing or an operating lease. This classification determines whether the lease expense associated with future lease payments is recognized based on an effective interest method or on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease. We consider an arrangement to be a lease if it conveys the right to control the use of the asset for a specific period of time in exchange for consideration. The determination of the classification of a lease as financing typically depends on whether or not the term of the arrangement covers a major portion of the remaining economic life of the underlying asset, though other factors may apply.
For each arrangement determined to be a lease, we record a lease liability at the present value of the remaining contractually-required payments and right-of-use asset in the same amount plus any upfront payments made under the arrangement and any initial direct costs. The incremental borrowing rate used depends on the country in which the arrangement was consummated and approximates an interest rate we would pay under borrowings to purchase such assets on a collateralized basis over similar payment terms.
Finance lease right-of-use assets are amortized over the lesser of the lease term or the estimated useful life of the underlying asset associated with the leasing arrangement, which is estimated to be twenty-five years. To determine the lease term, the Company considers all renewal periods that are reasonably certain to be exercised, taking into consideration all economic factors, including the cell site’s estimated economic life. The Company continually reassesses the estimated useful lives used in determining amortization of its real property interests.
Long-Lived Assets, Including Definite-Lived Intangible Assets
Our primary long-lived assets include real property interests and in-place tenant lease intangible assets. The carrying amount of any long-lived asset group is evaluated for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable through the estimated undiscounted future cash flows derived from such assets. If the carrying amount of the long-lived asset group is not recoverable on an undiscounted cash flow basis, an impairment is recognized to the extent that the carrying amount exceeds its fair value.
Share-based compensation expense
Share-based compensation expense is recorded for equity awards granted to employees and nonemployees over the requisite service period associated with the award, based on the grant-date fair value of the award. Calculating the fair value of share-based awards requires that we make highly subjective assumptions, as well as making judgments regarding the most acceptable valuation methodology to use in each circumstance. Generally, we use Monte Carlo simulation and Black-Scholes option pricing models. Use of either valuation technique requires that we make assumptions as to the expected volatility of our common shares, the expected term associated with the award, the risk-free interest rate for a period that approximates the expected term and our expected dividend yield.
Accounting Pronouncements Update
For a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements, see Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
JOBS Act
We qualify as an “emerging growth company” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”). As such, we may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies. In particular, Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of the exemption from complying with new or revised accounting standards provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act. An emerging growth company can therefore delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. The JOBS Act provides, however, that a company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies, but any such election to opt out is irrevocable. We have elected to opt out of such extended transition period. As a result, we will adopt new or revised accounting standards on the same timeline as other public companies.