Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
OVERVIEW
You should read the following discussion in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that are based on management’s current expectations, estimates and projections about our business and operations. Our actual results may differ materially from those currently anticipated and expressed in such forward-looking statements. See “Forward-Looking Statements.”
We are a diversified manufacturer of railcars and railcar components. We design and manufacture a broad variety of railcar types for transportation of bulk commodities and containerized freight products primarily in North America.
We rebuild and convert railcars and sell forged, cast and fabricated parts for all of the railcars we produce, as well as those manufactured by others. We also lease freight cars. Our primary customers are financial institutions, railroads and shippers.
During 2019, the Company entered into a joint venture arrangement with Fasemex, a Mexican company with operations in both Mexico and the United States to manufacture railcars in Castaños, in exchange for a 50% interest in the operation. Production of railcars at the facility began during the third quarter of 2020. On October 16, 2020, the Company acquired Fasemex’s 50% ownership in the joint venture in exchange for $0.2 million in cash and
2,257,234 shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.01 per share. Starting in March 2021, the Company moved all of its production to the Castaños facility.
The Company ceased operations at the Roanoke Facility and vacated the facility as of March 31, 2020. On September 10, 2020, the Company announced its plan to permanently close its Shoals Facility in light of the ongoing cyclical industry downturn, which has been magnified by the COVID-19 pandemic. The closure will reduce costs and align the Company’s manufacturing capacity with the current rail car market. The Company ceased production at the Shoals Facility in February 2021.
Restructuring and impairment charges of $18.3 million related to these actions were incurred during the year ended December 31, 2020. Restructuring and impairment charges for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily included a $17.5 million non-cash impairment charge recorded to reduce the right of use asset for the Shoals Facility lease to its fair value, non-cash impairment charges for property, plant and equipment of $9.5 million and employee severance and retention charges of $3.3 million which were offset by a $15.2 million lease termination gain for the Shoals Facility.
Railcar deliveries totaled 751 units, consisting of 600 new railcars and 151 rebuilt railcars, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2,276 units, consisting of 1,728 new railcars and 548 rebuilt railcars, for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our total backlog of firm orders for railcars decreased from 1,650 railcars as of December 31, 2019 to 1,389 railcars as of December 31, 2020.
Since first being reported in December 2019, the global pandemic continues to create a general disruption in the world economy. We are closely monitoring and managing the impacts of the global pandemic on our business, as well as the significant decline in global economic activity, and governmental reactions to the pandemic. The United States government and the Mexico Federal Ministry of Health and Federal Ministry of Communications and Transportation cited the railcar industry as critical to the United States and Mexico’s response efforts to the pandemic. The railcar industry is susceptible to a reduction in demand associated with the overall economic slowdown caused by the virus. In addition, public health organizations and national, state and local governments have implemented measures to combat the spread of COVID-19, including restrictions on movement such as quarantines, “stay-at-home” orders and social distancing ordinances and restricting or prohibiting some forms of business activity. Accordingly, our ability to predict industry demand and establish forecasts for sales, operating results and cash flows may be impacted. Furthermore, our plant operations and supply chain are potentially susceptible to large-scale outbreaks of the virus within our workforce or that of any of our suppliers.
Our management is focused on mitigating the impact of COVID-19 on our business and the risk to our employees. We have taken a number of precautionary measures including implementing detailed cleaning and disinfecting
processes at our facilities, adhering to social distancing protocols, suspending non-essential air travel and encouraging employees to work remotely, when possible.
The Company recognized a decrease in revenue compared against the corresponding prior year which we attribute primarily to the backlog delivery schedule and the cyclical downturn in economic activity in the railcar industry which began prior to the pandemic. The cyclical downturn has intensified as a result of the global pandemic. As discussed under Liquidity and Capital Resources, if the pandemic continues, it may have a material adverse affect on our business financial condition and operations.
FINANCIAL STATEMENT PRESENTATION
Revenues
Our Manufacturing segment revenues are generated primarily from sales of the railcars that we manufacture. Our Manufacturing segment sales depend on industry demand for new railcars, which is driven by overall economic conditions and the demand for railcar transportation of various products, such as coal, steel products, minerals, cement, motor vehicles, forest products and agricultural commodities. Our Manufacturing segment sales are also affected by competitive market pressures that impact our market share, the prices for our railcars and by the types of railcars sold. Our Manufacturing segment revenues also include revenues from major railcar rebuilds and lease rental payments received with respect to railcars under operating leases. Our Corporate and other revenue sources include parts sales.
We generally recognize revenue at a point in time as we satisfy a performance obligation by transferring control over a product or service to a customer. Revenue is measured at the transaction price, which is based on the amount of consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for transferring the promised goods or services to the customer. Performance obligations are typically completed and revenue is recognized for the sale of new and rebuilt railcars when a certificate of acceptance has been issued by the customer and control has been transferred to the customer. At that time, the customer directs the use of, and obtains substantially all of the remaining benefits from, the asset. In certain sales contracts, our performance obligation includes transfer of the finished railcar to a specified railroad connection point. In these instances, we recognize revenue from the sale when the railcar reaches the specified railroad connection point. When a railcar sales contract contains multiple performance obligations, we allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations based on the relative stand-alone selling price of the performance obligation determined at the inception of the contract based on an observable market price, expected cost plus margin or market price of similar items. The variable purchase patterns of our customers and the timing of completion, delivery and customer acceptance of railcars may cause our revenues and income from operations to vary substantially each quarter, which will result in significant fluctuations in our quarterly results.
Cost of sales
Our cost of sales includes the cost of raw materials such as aluminum and steel, as well as the cost of finished railcar components, such as castings, wheels, truck components and couplers, and other specialty components. Our cost of sales also includes labor, utilities, freight, manufacturing depreciation and other operating costs. As we diversified, although we strove to reduce manufacturing costs at our manufacturing facilities, our cost of sales has been negatively impacted by production inefficiencies and idle capacity as we entered into new railcar markets and invested in diversifying our product portfolio. A portion of the contracts covering our backlog at December 31, 2020 are fixed-rate contracts. Therefore, if material costs were to increase, we will likely not be able to pass on these increased costs to our customers. We manage material price increases by locking in prices where possible.
Operating loss
Operating loss represents revenues less cost of sales, loss on sale of railcars available for lease, impairment on leased railcars, gain on termination of postretirement benefit plan, selling, general and administrative expenses, and restructuring and impairment charges.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Year Ended December 31, 2020 compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenues
Our consolidated revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $108.4 million compared to $230.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Manufacturing segment revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $98.7 million compared to $219.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in Manufacturing segment revenues for 2020 compared to 2019 period reflects a decrease in the number of railcars delivered from 2,276 railcars in 2019 to 751 railcars in 2020, which was partially offset by a higher average selling price for new railcars. Corporate and Other revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $9.7 million compared to $10.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 reflecting lower parts sales.
Gross Loss
Our consolidated gross loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $13.5 million compared to $14.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our consolidated gross loss margin was 12.5% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 6.2% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Manufacturing segment gross loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $15.2 million compared to $16.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in gross loss in our Manufacturing segment for 2020 compared to 2019 reflects a favorable price/mix variance on railcars sold and reduction in overhead costs in our Shoals Facility which were partially offset by an unfavorable volume variance. The reduction in overhead costs in our Shoals Facility was primarily the result of a lease amendment entered into in October 2020 whereby the Shoals landlord agreed to waive the base rent payable under the original lease for the months of October 2020 through February 2021 in exchange for the Company selling and transferring certain facility-related assets to the landlord as part of the permanent shut-down of the Shoals Facility.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses Consolidated selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $29.8 million compared to $38.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in consolidated selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to $7.5 million recorded during the year ended December 31, 2019 as part of a settlement agreement reached with one of our customers to settle all claims related to a commercial dispute. Consolidated selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 also included decreases in research and development costs, travel and entertainment and rent expense which were partially offset by an increase in the allowance for doubtful accounts related to our leased railcars compared to the 2019 period. Consolidated selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were 27.5% of revenue, compared to 16.7% of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019. Manufacturing segment selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $7.1 million compared to $7.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Manufacturing segment selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were 7.2% of revenue compared to 3.2% of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019. Corporate and Other selling, general and administrative expenses were $22.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $31.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, the decrease primarily due to the $7.5 million settlement recorded in 2019 and decreases in research and development costs of $1.0 million.
Loss on Sale of Railcars Available for Lease
We did not sell any railcars available for lease during the year ended December 31, 2020. Loss on sale of railcars available for lease for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $7.3 million and represented the loss on sale of leased railcars with a net book value of $24.5 million.
Impairment on Leased Railcars
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a pre-tax non-cash impairment charge of $17.0 million related to our small cube covered hopper railcars. Additionally, we evaluated the right-of-use asset associated with our leased railcar portfolio of small cube covered hopper railcars and determined that these assets were impaired based on consideration of an expected decline in future cash flows over the remaining lease term. This resulted in an additional pre-tax non-cash impairment charge of approximately $2.0 million. See Note 7 - Leased Railcars to our consolidated financial statements.
Gain on Termination of Postretirement Benefit Plan
On October 15, 2019, the Company notified retirees and affected active employees that it would terminate medical benefits offered to retirees of the Company and their dependents effective January 1, 2020. The retiree benefits that were terminated include medical insurance and vision insurance that were offered under the FreightCar America, Inc. Health and Welfare Plan. The benefit termination resulted in a gain of $6.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Restructuring and Impairment Charges
Restructuring and impairment charges for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $18.3 million compared to $22.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Restructuring and impairment charges for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily included a $17.5 million non-cash impairment charge recorded to reduce the right of use asset for the Shoals Facility lease to its fair value, non-cash impairment charges for property, plant and equipment of $9.5 million and employee severance and retention charges of $3.3 million which were offset by a $15.2 million lease termination gain for the Shoals Facility.
Restructuring and impairment charges for the year ended December 31, 2019 included employee severance and other employment termination costs of $1.3 million, other charges of $0.6 million and non-cash impairment charges of $1.4 million for property, plant and equipment related to the closure of the Roanoke Facility. The plant closure also resulted in a lease termination gain of $2.4 million which partially offset restructuring and impairment charges for the year ended December 31, 2019. During the Company’s annual goodwill impairment analysis as of August 1, 2019, the Company determined that the carrying value of its Manufacturing reporting unit exceeded its fair value by an amount that exceeded the Manufacturing reporting unit goodwill. As a result, the Company recorded a goodwill impairment charge equal to the total goodwill balance of the Manufacturing reporting unit of $21.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Operating Loss
Our consolidated operating loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $80.6 million compared to $75.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Operating loss for the Manufacturing segment was $59.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $53.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Corporate and Other operating loss was $21.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $22.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Income Taxes
Our income tax provision was $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to an income tax benefit of $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 the Company recorded a full valuation allowance against its deferred tax assets.
Net Loss
As a result of the foregoing, our net loss was $86.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a net loss of $75.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020 our net loss per share was $6.29 compared to net loss per share of $5.95 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our primary sources of liquidity are our cash and cash equivalent balances on hand and our credit and debt facilities outlined below.
The Company manufactures and provides essential products and services to a variety of critical infrastructure customers, and it intends to continue providing its products and services to these customers. The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s operational and financial performance will depend on future developments, including the duration and spread of the pandemic and related actions taken by the U.S. and Mexico governments, state and local government officials, and other international governments to prevent disease spread, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. Accordingly, our ability to predict industry demand and establish forecasts for sales, operating results and cash flows may be impacted.
On March 25, 2020, the United States enacted the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) which, among other things, removed the 80% taxable income limitation for utilization of net operating losses generated in tax years 2018 through 2020, allowing for 5-year net operating loss carrybacks, increased the adjusted taxable income limitation for the disallowance of interest expense from 30% to 50%, and provided for refunds of any remaining alternative minimum tax (“AMT”) credits.
SBA Paycheck Protection Program Loan
In March 2020, Congress passed the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”), authorizing loans to small businesses for use in paying employees that they continue to employ throughout the COVID-19 pandemic and for rent, utilities and interest on mortgages. In June 2020, Congress enacted the Paycheck Protection Program Flexibility Act (“PPPFA”), amending the PPP.
Loans obtained through the PPP, as amended, are eligible to be forgiven as long as the proceeds are used for qualifying purposes and certain other conditions are met. On April 16, 2020, the Company received a loan in the amount of $10.0 million through the Paycheck Protection Program. Since the entire loan was used for payroll, utilities and interest, management anticipates that the majority of the PPP Loan will be forgiven. To the extent it is not forgiven, the Company would be required to repay that portion at an interest rate of 1% over a period of two years, with $7.5 million due in 2021 and $2.5 million due in 2022. The Company filed an application for PPP Loan forgiveness on October 28, 2020 along with a request for extension of the loan term to five years.
Siena Loan and Security Agreement
On October 8, 2020, the Company entered into a Loan and Security Agreement (the “Siena Loan Agreement”) by and among the Company, as guarantor, and certain of its subsidiaries, as borrowers (together with the Company, the “Loan Parties”), and Siena Lending Group LLC, as lender (“Siena”). Pursuant to the Siena Loan Agreement, Siena provided an asset backed credit facility, in the maximum aggregate principal amount of up to $20.0 million, consisting of revolving loans.
The Siena Loan Agreement replaced the Company’s prior revolving credit facility under the Credit and Security Agreement (the “BMO Credit Agreement”) dated as of April 12, 2019, among the Company and certain of its subsidiaries, as borrowers and guarantors, and BMO Harris Bank N.A., as lender, as amended from time to time, which was terminated effective October 8, 2020 and otherwise would have matured on April 12, 2024.
The Siena Loan Agreement has a term ending on October 8, 2023. Revolving loans outstanding thereunder bear interest, subject to the provisions of the Siena Loan Agreement, at the Base Rate (as defined in the Siena Loan Agreement) plus 3.00% per annum. As of December 31, 2020, the interest rate on outstanding debt under the Siena Loan Agreement was 6.35%.
The Siena Loan Agreement provides for a revolving credit facility with maximum availability of $20.0 million, subject to borrowing base requirements set forth in the Siena Loan Agreement, which generally limit availability under the revolving credit facility to (a) 85% of the value of eligible accounts and (b) up to the lesser of (i) 50% of the lower of cost or market value of eligible inventory and (ii) 85% of the net orderly liquidation value of eligible
inventory, and as reduced by reserves established by Siena from time to time in accordance with the Siena Loan Agreement.
The Siena Loan Agreement contains affirmative and negative covenants, including, limitations on future indebtedness, liens and investments. The Siena Loan Agreement also provides for customary events of default. Pursuant to the terms and conditions set forth in the Siena Loan Agreement, each of the Loan Parties granted Siena a continuing lien upon certain assets of the Loan Parties to secure the obligations of the Loan Parties under the Siena Loan Agreement.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had $6.9 million in outstanding debt under the Siena Loan Agreement and remaining borrowing availability of $9.7 million. The Company incurred $1.1 million in deferred financing costs related to the Siena Loan Agreement. The deferred financing costs are presented as an asset and amortized on a straight-line basis to interest expense over the term of the Siena Loan Agreement.
Term Loan Credit Agreement
On October 13, 2020, the Company entered into a Credit Agreement (the “Term Loan Credit Agreement”) by and among the Company, as guarantor, FreightCar North America (“Borrower” and together with the Company and certain other subsidiary guarantors, collectively, the “Loan Parties”), CO Finance LVS VI LLC, as lender (the “Lender”), an affiliate of a corporate credit fund for which Pacific Investment Management Company LLC serves as investment manager, and U.S. Bank National Association, as disbursing agent and collateral agent (“Agent”). Pursuant to the Term Loan Credit Agreement, the Lender committed to the extension of a term loan credit facility in the principal amount of $40.0 million, consisting of a single term loan to be funded upon the satisfaction of certain conditions precedent set forth in the Term Loan Credit Agreement, including stockholder approval of the issuance of the common stock underlying the Warrant described below (the funding date of such term loan, the “Closing Date”). FreightCar America, Inc. stockholders approved the issuance of the common stock underlying the Warrant at a special stockholders’ meeting on November 24, 2020. The $40.0 million term loan closed and was funded on November 24, 2020. The Company incurred $2.9 million in deferred financing costs related to the Term Loan Agreement. The deferred financing costs are presented as a reduction to the long-term debt balance and amortized to interest expense on a straight-line basis over the term of the Term Loan Agreement.
The Term Loan Credit Agreement contains a term ending five years following the Closing Date. The term loan outstanding under the Term Loan Credit Agreement bears interest, at Borrower’s option and subject to the provisions of the Term Loan Credit Agreement, at Base Rate (as defined in the Term Loan Credit Agreement) or Eurodollar Rate (as defined in the Term Loan Credit Agreement) plus the Applicable Margin for each such interest rate set forth in the Term Loan Credit Agreement. As of December 31, 2020, the interest rate on outstanding debt under the Term Loan Credit Agreement was 14.0%.
The Term Loan Credit Agreement has both affirmative and negative covenants, including, minimum liquidity, limitations on indebtedness, liens and investments. The Term Loan Credit Agreement also provides for customary events of default. Pursuant to the terms and conditions set forth in the Term Loan Credit Agreement and the related loan documents, each of the Loan Parties granted to Agent a continuing lien upon all of such Loan Parties’ assets to secure the obligations of the Loan Parties under the Term Loan Credit Agreement.
Warrant
In connection with the entry into the Term Loan Credit Agreement, the Company issued to an affiliate of the Lender (the “Warrantholder”) a warrant (the “Warrant”), pursuant to that certain warrant acquisition agreement, dated as of October 13, 2020 (the “Warrant Acquisition Agreement”), by and between the Company and the Lender to purchase a number of shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.01 per share, equal to 23% of the outstanding common stock on a fully-diluted basis at the time the Warrant is exercised (after giving effect to such issuance). The Warrant is exercisable for a term of ten years from the date of the issuance of the Warrant. The Warrant was issued on November 24, 2020 after the Company received stockholder approval of the issuance of the common stock issuable upon exercise of the Warrant by the Warrantholder. In connection with the issuance of the Warrant, the Company and the Lender entered into a registration rights agreement (the “Registration Rights Agreement”) as of the Closing Date of November 24, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, the Warrant was exercisable for an aggregate of
5,307,539 shares of common stock of the Company with a per share exercise price of $0.01. The Company determined that the Warrant should be accounted for as a derivative instrument and classified as a liability on its Consolidated Balance Sheets primarily due to the instrument obligating the Company to settle the Warrant in a variable number of shares of common stock. The Warrant was recorded as a liability at fair value and is treated as a discount on the associated debt. The discount on the associated debt is amortized over the life of the Term Loan Credit Agreement and included in interest expense.
M&T Credit Agreement
On April 16, 2019, FreightCar America Leasing 1, LLC, an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company (“Freightcar Leasing Borrower”), entered into a Credit Agreement (the “M&T Credit Agreement”) with M & T Bank, N.A., as lender (“M&T”). Pursuant to the M&T Credit Agreement, M&T extended a revolving credit facility to Freightcar Leasing Borrower in an aggregate amount of up to $40.0 million for the purpose of financing railcars which will be leased to third parties.
Freightcar Leasing Borrower also entered into a Security Agreement on April 16, 2019 (the “M&T Security Agreement”) pursuant to which it granted a security interest in all of its assets to M&T to secure its obligations under the M&T Credit Agreement.
On April 16, 2019, FreightCar America Leasing, LLC, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company and parent of Freightcar Leasing Borrower (“Freightcar Leasing Guarantor”), entered into (i) a Guaranty Agreement (the “M&T Guaranty Agreement”) pursuant to which Freightcar Leasing Guarantor guaranties the repayment and performance of certain obligations of Freightcar Leasing Borrower and (ii) a Pledge Agreement (the “M&T Pledge Agreement”) pursuant to which Freightcar Leasing Guarantor pledged all of the equity of Freightcar Leasing Borrower held by Freightcar Leasing Guarantor.
The loans under the M&T Credit Agreement are non-recourse to the assets of the Company or its subsidiaries other than the assets of Freightcar Leasing Borrower and Freightcar Leasing Guarantor.
The M&T Credit Agreement had a term ending on April 16, 2021. Loans outstanding thereunder will bear interest, accrued daily, at the Adjusted LIBOR Rate (as defined in the M&T Credit Agreement) or the Adjusted Base Rate (as defined in the M&T Credit Agreement).
The M&T Credit Agreement has both affirmative and negative covenants, including, without limitation, maintaining an Interest Coverage Ratio (as defined in the M&T Credit Agreement) of not less than 1.25:1.00, measured quarterly, and limitations on indebtedness, loans, liens and investments. The M&T Credit Agreement also provides for customary events of default. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, FreightCar Leasing Borrower had $10.1 million and $10.2 million, respectively in outstanding debt under the M&T Credit Agreement which was collateralized by leased railcars with a carrying value of $7.0 million and $16.5 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, the interest rate on outstanding debt under the M&T Credit Agreement was 4.24%.
On August 7, 2020, FreightCar Leasing Borrower received notice (the “First Notice”) from M&T Bank, N.A. (“M&T”) that, based on an appraisal (the “Appraisal”) conducted by a third party at the request of M&T with respect to the railcars in FreightCar Leasing Borrower’s Borrowing Base (as defined in the M&T Credit Agreement) under the M&T Credit Agreement, the unpaid principal balance under the M&T Credit Agreement exceeded the availability under the M&T Credit Agreement as of the date of the Appraisal by $5.1 million (the “Payment Demand Amount”). In the First Notice, M&T Bank: (a) asserted that an Event of Default under the M&T Credit Agreement has occurred because FreightCar Leasing Borrower did not pay the Payment Demand Amount to M&T within five days of the asserted change in availability; (b) demanded payment of the amount within five days of the date of the First Notice; and (c) terminated the commitment to advance additional loans under the M&T Credit Agreement.
On December 18, 2020, FreightCar Leasing Borrower received a revised notice (the “Second Notice,” and together with the First Notice, the “Notices”) from M&T asserting that: (a) as a result of the continuing Event of Default that M&T alleged to have occurred under the M&T Credit Agreement, M&T has declared a default and accelerated and demands immediate payment by FreightCar Leasing Borrower of $10.1 million (the “Outstanding Amount”); (b) FreightCar Leasing Borrower is liable for all interest that continues to accrue on the Outstanding Amount; and (c)
FreightCar Leasing Borrower is liable for all attorneys’ fees, costs and expenses as set forth in the M&T Credit Agreement.
FreightCar Leasing Borrower has engaged in discussions with M&T since the receipt of the First Notice, which discussions are continuing.
Additional Liquidity Factors
Our restricted cash, restricted cash equivalents and restricted certificates of deposit balances were $10.6 million and $4.2 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Restricted deposits of $3.2 million as of December 31, 2020 relate to a customer deposit for purchase of railcars. Restricted deposits of $7.4 million and $4.2 million as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 respectively are used to collateralize standby letters of credit with respect to performance guarantees. The standby letters of credit outstanding as of December 31, 2020 are scheduled to expire at various dates through December 10, 2021.
Based on our current level of operations and known changes in planned volume based on our backlog, we believe that our cash balances will be sufficient to meet our expected long-term liquidity needs for at least the next twelve months. Our long-term liquidity is contingent upon future operating performance and our ability to continue to meet financial covenants under our revolving credit facilities, our term loan credit agreement and the PPP loan and any other indebtedness and the availability of additional financing if needed. We may also require additional capital in the future to fund working capital as demand for railcars increases, payments for contractual obligations, organic growth opportunities, including new plant and equipment and development of railcars, joint ventures, international expansion and acquisitions, and these capital requirements could be substantial.
Based upon our operating performance and capital requirements, we may, from time to time, be required to raise additional funds through additional offerings of our common stock and through long-term borrowings such as the $40.0 million term loan under the Term Loan Credit Agreement. There can be no assurance that long-term debt, if needed, will be available on terms attractive to us, or at all. Furthermore, any additional equity financing may be dilutive to stockholders and debt financing, if available, may involve restrictive covenants. Our failure to raise capital if and when needed could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations and financial condition.
Benefits under our pension plan are now frozen and will not be impacted by increases due to future service and compensation increases. The most significant assumptions used in determining our net periodic benefit costs are the discount rate used on our pension obligations and expected return on pension plan assets. As of December 31, 2020, our benefit obligation under our defined benefit pension plan was $55.4 million, which exceeded the fair value of plan assets by $7.0 million. We made no contributions to our defined benefit pension plan during 2020 and are not required to make any contributions to our defined benefit pension plan in 2021. Funding levels will be affected by future contributions, investment returns on plan assets, growth in plan liabilities and interest rates.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our net cash provided by or used in operating activities, investing activities and financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Operating Activities. Our net cash used in operating activities reflects net income or loss adjusted for non-cash charges and changes in operating assets and liabilities. Cash flows from operating activities are affected by several factors, including fluctuations in business volume, contract terms for billings and collections, the timing of collections on our contract receivables, processing of bi-weekly payroll and associated taxes, and payments to our suppliers. As some of our customers accept delivery of new railcars in train-set quantities, variations in our sales lead to significant fluctuations in our operating profits and cash from operating activities. We do not usually experience business credit issues, although a payment may be delayed pending completion of closing documentation.
Our net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $58.9 million compared to $19.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 reflects changes in working capital, including increases in inventory of $17.9 million and increases in accounts receivable of $6.9 million. Our net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 includes non-cash restructuring and impairment charges of $11.7 million related to the closure of the Shoals Facility and the Roanoke Facility and a non-cash impairment charge of $19.0 million for leased railcars. Our net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 reflects changes in working capital, including decreases in inventory and accounts receivable due to the timing of deliveries of railcars and the related cash receipts. Our net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 includes non-cash goodwill impairment charges of $21.5 million and loss from the sale of railcars available for lease of $7.3 million.
Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $6.1 million and primarily represented capital expenditures of $9.8 million which were partially offset by the $3.6 million maturity of restricted certificates of deposit (net of purchases). Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $31.0 million and represented the $18.0 million maturity of U.S. Treasury securities and certificates of deposit (net of purchases), $17.3 million proceeds from sale of railcars available for lease and the $1.3 million maturity of restricted certificates of deposit (net of purchases) which were partially offset by capital expenditures of $5.6 million.
Financing Activities. Net cash provided by financing activities was $52.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $9.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily represented $56.9 million of proceeds from issuance of long-term debt which were partially offset by $3.8 million of deferred financing costs related to our new credit facility and term loan. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily represented $10.2 million of proceeds from our line of credit borrowings (collateralized by leased railcars) which were partially offset by $0.9 million of deferred financing costs related to our new credit facilities.
Capital Expenditures
Our capital expenditures were $9.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $5.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and primarily related to our new Castaños, Mexico facility. We anticipate capital expenditures during 2021 to be approximately $2.0 million to $3.0 million.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of sales and expenses during the reporting period. Significant estimates include long-lived assets, goodwill, pension and postretirement benefit assumptions, the valuation reserve on net deferred tax assets, warranty accrual and contingencies and litigation. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Our critical accounting policies include the following:
Impairment of long-lived assets and right-of-use assets
We monitor the carrying value of long-lived assets and right-of-use assets for potential impairment. The carrying value of long-lived assets and right-of-use assets is considered impaired when the asset's carrying value is not recoverable through undiscounted future cash flows and the asset's carrying value exceeds its fair value.
For assets to be held or used, we group a long-lived asset or assets with other assets and liabilities at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities. An impairment loss for an asset group reduces only the carrying amounts of a long-lived asset or assets of the group being evaluated. Our estimates of future cash flows used to test the recoverability of a long-lived asset group include only the future cash flows that are directly associated with and that are expected to arise as a direct result of the use and eventual disposition of the asset group. Our future cash flow estimates exclude interest charges.
We test long-lived assets for recoverability whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. These changes in circumstances may include a significant decrease in the market price of an asset group, a significant adverse change in the manner in or extent to which an asset group is used, a current year operating loss combined with a history of operating losses or a current expectation that, more likely than not, a long-lived asset group will be sold or otherwise disposed of significantly before the end of its previously estimated useful life. If indicators of impairment are present, we then determine if the carrying value of the asset group is recoverable by comparing the carrying value of the asset group to total undiscounted future cash flows of the asset group. If the carrying value of the asset group is not recoverable, an impairment loss is measured based on the excess of the carrying amount of asset group over the estimated fair value of the asset group.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, the oil and gas proppants (or “frac sand”) industry continued to experience economic pressure created by low oil prices, reduced fracking activity, and the ongoing economic impact of COVID-19. In particular, small cube covered hopper railcars are primarily used in North America to serve the frac sand industry. Given the decline in global oil prices, reduced fracking activity, and pressure on the oil and gas industry to maintain a low-cost structure, fracking operations, have increasingly shifted away from the use of Northern White sand and towards the use of in-basin sand, which can be sourced locally rather than transporting by rail. Consequently, the cash flows and profitability of the frac sand industry continued to decline during the fourth quarter. As a result, certain small cube covered hopper customers requested rent relief that were renegotiated.
We believe that the events and circumstances that arose during the fourth quarter of 2020 constituted an impairment triggering event related to the small cube covered hopper car type in our leased railcar portfolio.
We performed a cash flow recoverability test of our small cube covered hopper railcars and compared the undiscounted cash flows to the carrying value of the assets. This analysis indicated that the carrying value exceeded the estimated undiscounted cash flows, and therefore, we were required to measure the fair value of our fleet of small cube covered hopper railcars and determine the amount of an impairment loss, if any.
The fair value of the asset group was determined using both a market and cost approach, which we believe most accurately reflects a market participant's viewpoint in valuing these railcars. The results of our analysis indicated an estimated fair value of the asset group of approximately $13.2 million, in comparison to the asset group's carrying amount of $30.1 million. As a result, during the fourth quarter of 2020, we recorded a pre-tax non-cash impairment charge of $17.0 related to our small cube covered hopper railcars. Additionally, we evaluated the right-of-use asset associated with our leased railcar portfolio of small cube covered hopper railcars and determined that these assets were impaired based on consideration of an expected decline in future cash flows over the remaining lease term, which resulted in an additional pre-tax non-cash impairment charge of approximately $2.0 million. The aggregate impairment charge of $19.0 million is reflected in the impairment of leased railcars line of our Consolidated Statements of Operations for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Significant management judgment was used to determine the key assumptions utilized in our impairment analysis, the substantial majority of which represent unobservable (Level 3) inputs. These assumptions include, but are not limited
to: estimates regarding the remaining useful life over which the railcars are expected to generate cash flows; average lease rates; and discount rate. Management selected these estimates and assumptions based on our railcar industry expertise. Although we believe the estimates utilized in our analysis were reasonable, any change in these estimates could materially affect the amount of the impairment charge.
Due to the closure of our Shoals Facility, we tested the long-lived assets and right-of-use assets at our Shoals Facility for impairment during the third quarter of 2020. In connection with the announcement, we estimated the fair value of the related asset group because it determined that an impairment trigger had occurred due to the shortened asset recoverability timeframe. Non-cash restructuring and impairment charges totaling $26.6 million were allocated to the asset group and recognized during 2020. These non-cash charges for 2020 related to the right of use (“ROU”) asset were $17.5 million and non-cash impairment charges for property, plant and equipment at the Shoals Facility were $9.0 million. In connection with the impairment the Company reassessed the estimated useful lives of equipment that will continue to be used by the Company (primarily in Castaños) and are depreciating it over their useful lives in accordance with the Company’s policies.
The fair value of the ROU asset for our Shoals Facility was estimated using an income valuation approach known as the “sublease” discounted cash flow (“DCF”) model in which the cash flows were based on current market-based lease pricing over the remaining term of the Shoals Facility lease. The cash flows were discounted to present value using a market-derived rate of return of 6.50%.
The Shoals Facility personal property was abandoned in place at the facility, sold, transferred to another FCA facility (primarily Castaños), or scrapped. The assets abandoned in place represent property, plant and equipment to be transferred to the Shoals landlord as consideration for the landlord’s entry into the lease amendment. The premise of fair value differs for each type of asset disposition. The fair value of the personal property assets to be abandoned in place at the Shoals Facility were analyzed under a fair value in continued use (“In-Use”) premise. This premise assumes that the assets will continue to be used in the ongoing operation of the facility and therefore includes installation, other assembly, freight, engineering, electrical set-up and process piping costs that would be required to make the assets fully operational. Assets to be sold or transferred were analyzed under the In-Exchange (“In-Exchange”) premise of fair value. Under this premise, we considered the value of the assets assuming an orderly sale on a stand-alone basis. It is assumed the assets will be sold on an as-is, where-is basis and alternative uses for the assets from the originally designed purpose are considered. Any remaining personal property assets that will neither be abandoned in place nor sold/transferred were considered unmarketable and were valued under a scrap value premise.
For both the aforementioned In-Use and In Exchange premises, in instances where an asset was found to have no active secondary market, we utilized the cost approach. For assets in which there was an active secondary market where recent comparable sales exist, the market approach was utilized. In instances where market data was available but deemed too incomplete to apply a complete market approach, we used the market relationship data available to influence, confirm, or adjust the cost approach results.
Due to the closure of the Roanoke Facility, we tested the long-lived assets at the Roanoke Facility for impairment during the second quarter of 2019. The carrying values of property, plant and equipment at the Roanoke Facility were reduced to their estimated fair market values, resulting in a pre-tax impairment charge of $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Fair market value was estimated using the market approach using market data such as recent sales of comparable assets in active markets and estimated salvage values.
Pensions and postretirement benefits
We historically provided pension and retiree welfare benefits to certain salaried and hourly employees upon their retirement. Benefits under our pension plan are now frozen and will not be impacted by increases due to future service. The most significant assumptions used in determining our net periodic benefit costs are the discount rate used on our pension and postretirement welfare obligations and expected return on pension plan assets.
In 2020, we assumed that the expected long-term rate of return on pension plan assets would be 5.40%. As permitted under ASC 715, the assumed long-term rate of return on assets is applied to a calculated value of plan assets, which recognizes changes in the fair value of plan assets in a systematic manner over five years. This produces the
expected return on plan assets that is included in our net periodic benefit cost. The difference between this expected return and the actual return on plan assets is deferred. The net deferral of past asset gains (losses) affects the calculated value of plan assets and, ultimately, future net periodic benefit cost. We review the expected return on plan assets annually and would revise it if conditions should warrant. A change of one hundred basis points in the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets would have the following effect for the year ended December 31, 2020:
At the end of each year, we determine the discount rate to be used to calculate the present value of our pension plan liability. The discount rate is an estimate of the current interest rate at which our pension liabilities could be effectively settled at the end of the year. In estimating this rate, we look to rates of return on high-quality, fixed-income investments that receive one of the two highest ratings given by a recognized ratings agency. At December 31, 2020, we determined this rate on our pension plan to be 2.48% a decrease of 0.74% from the 3.22% rate used at December 31, 2019. A change of one hundred basis points in the discount rate would have the following effect:
In October 2020, the Society of Actuaries issued base mortality table Pri-2012 which is split by retiree and contingent survivor tables and includes mortality improvement assumptions for U.S. plans, scale (MP-2020), which reflects additional data that the Social Security Administration has released since prior assumptions (MP-2019) were developed. We have historically utilized the Society of Actuaries’ published mortality data in our plan assumptions. Accordingly, we adopted Pri-2012 with MP-2020 for purposes of measuring our pension obligations at December 31, 2020.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized consolidated pre-tax pension benefit cost (income) of $(0.4) million and $0.2 million, respectively. We are not required to make any contributions to our pension plan during 2021. However, we may elect to adjust the level of contributions based on a number of factors, including performance of pension investments and changes in interest rates. The Pension Protection Act of 2006 provided for changes to the method of valuing pension plan assets and liabilities for funding purposes as well as requiring minimum funding levels. Our defined benefit pension plan is in compliance with minimum funding levels established in the Pension Protection Act. Funding levels will be affected by future contributions, investment returns on plan assets, growth in plan liabilities and interest rates. Once the plan is Fully Funded as that term is defined within the Pension Protection Act, we will be required to fund the ongoing growth in plan liabilities on an annual basis. We anticipate funding pension contributions with cash from operations.
On October 15, 2019, the Company notified retirees and affected active employees that it would terminate medical benefits offered to retirees of the Company and their dependents effective January 1, 2020. The retiree benefits that were terminated include medical insurance and vison insurance that were offered under the FreightCar America, Inc. Health and Welfare Plan. The benefit termination resulted in a gain of $6.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Income taxes
We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method prescribed by ASC 740, Income Taxes. We provide for deferred income taxes based on differences between the book and tax bases of our assets and liabilities and for items that are reported for financial statement purposes in periods different from those for income tax reporting purposes. The deferred tax liability or asset amounts are based upon the enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the periods in which the deferred tax liability or asset is expected to be settled or realized.
Our income tax expense, deferred tax assets and liabilities and reserves for unrecognized tax benefits reflect our best assessment of estimated future taxes to be paid. Management judgment is required in developing our provision for income taxes, including the determination of deferred tax assets, liabilities and any valuation allowances recorded against the deferred tax assets. We record net deferred tax assets to the extent we believe these assets will more likely than not be realized. In evaluating whether it is more likely than not that our net deferred tax assets will be realized, we consider both positive and negative evidence including the reversal of existing taxable temporary differences, taxable income in prior carryback years if carryback is permitted under the tax law and such taxable income has not previously been used for carryback, future taxable income exclusive of reversing temporary differences and carryforwards based on near-term and longer-term projections of operating results and the length of the carryforward period. We evaluate the realizability of our net deferred tax assets and assess the valuation allowance on a quarterly basis, adjusting the amount of such allowance, if necessary. Failure to achieve forecasted taxable income might affect the ultimate realization of the net deferred tax assets. Factors that may affect our ability to achieve sufficient forecasted taxable income include, but are not limited to, increased competition, a decline in sales or margins and loss of market share.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we concluded that, based on evaluation of the positive and negative evidence, primarily our history of operating losses, it is not more likely than not that we will realize the benefit of our deferred tax assets. As of December 31, 2020, we had deferred tax assets of $67.1 million for which there was a valuation allowance of $59.6 million and we had total net deferred tax liabilities of $0.1 million.
Product warranties
Warranty terms are based on the negotiated railcar sales contracts. We generally warrant that new railcars will be free from defects in material and workmanship under normal use and service identified for a period of up to five years from the time of sale. We also provide limited warranties with respect to certain rebuilt railcars. The warranty costs are estimated using a two-step approach. First, an engineering estimate is made for the cost of all claims that have been asserted by customers. Second, based on historical claims experience, a cost is accrued for all products still within a warranty period for which no claims have been filed. We provide for the estimated cost of product warranties at the time revenue is recognized related to products covered by warranties and assess the adequacy of the resulting reserves on a quarterly basis.
Revenue recognition
We generally recognize revenue at a point in time, as we satisfy a performance obligation, by transferring control over a product or service to a customer. Revenue is measured at the transaction price, which is based on the amount of consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for transferring the promised goods or services to the customer. Performance obligations are typically completed and revenue is recognized for the sale of new and rebuilt railcars when a certificate of acceptance has been issued by the customer and control has been transferred to the customer. At that time, the customer directs the use of, and obtains substantially all of the remaining benefits from, the asset. In certain sales contracts, our performance obligation includes transfer of the finished railcar to a specified railroad connection point. In these instances, we recognize revenue from the sale when the railcar reaches the specified railroad connection point. When a railcar sales contract contains multiple performance obligations, we allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations based on the relative stand-alone selling price of the performance obligation determined at the inception of the contract based on an observable market price, expected cost plus margin or market price of similar items. We treat shipping costs that occur after control is transferred as fulfillment costs. Accordingly, gross revenue is recognized, and shipping cost is accrued, when control transfers to the customer. We generally do not provide discounts or rebates in the normal course of business. As a practical expedient, we recognize the incremental costs of obtaining contracts, such as sales commissions, as an expense when incurred since the amortization period of the asset that we otherwise would have recognized is one year or less. Performance obligations are satisfied and we recognize revenue from most parts sales when the parts are shipped to customers. We recognize operating lease revenue on Railcars Available for Lease on a straight-line basis over the contract term. We recognize revenue from the sale of Railcars Available for Lease on a net basis as Gain (Loss) on Sale of Railcars Available for Lease since the sale represents the disposal of a long-term operating asset.
We recognize a loss against related inventory when we have a contractual commitment to manufacture railcars at an estimated cost in excess of the contractual selling price.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS (See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our Consolidated Financial Statements)
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains certain forward-looking statements including, in particular, statements about our plans, strategies and prospects. We have used the words “may,” “will,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “plan,” “likely,” “unlikely,” “intend” and similar expressions in this Annual Report on Form 10-K to identify forward-looking statements. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current views with respect to future events and financial performance. However, forward-looking statements inherently involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those projected in the forward-looking statements. These risks and uncertainties relate to, among other things, the potential financial and operational impacts of the global pandemic; the cyclical nature of our business, the competitive nature of our industry, our reliance upon a small number of customers that represent a large percentage of our sales, the variable purchase patterns of our customers and the timing of completion, delivery and customer acceptance of orders, fluctuating costs of raw materials, including steel and aluminum, and delays in the delivery of raw materials, the risk of lack of acceptance of our new railcar offerings by our customers and other competitive factors. The factors listed above are not exhaustive. Other sections of this Form 10-K include additional factors that could materially and adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations. New factors emerge from time to time and it is not possible for management to predict the impact of all of these factors on our business, financial condition or results of operations or the extent to which any factor, or combination of factors, may cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements. Given these risks and uncertainties, investors should not rely on forward-looking statements as a prediction of actual results. We expressly disclaim any duty to provide updates to forward-looking statements, and the estimates and assumptions associated with them, in order to reflect changes in circumstances or expectations or the occurrence of unanticipated events except to the extent required by applicable securities laws.
‎