ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Discussion and Analysis
The following discussion and analysis is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, and should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. In addition, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, those discussed in “Forward Looking Statements,” and elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a development-stage medical device company focusing on the research, development and commercialization of autologous (using a patient's own cells) cellular therapies that can be used for medical and aesthetic applications. The Company does not have any commercialized products. The Company's activities have consisted principally of performing research and development activities, business development efforts, and raising capital to support such activities.
The Company, through its wholly owned subsidiary, RenovaCare Sciences Corp., owns the CellMist™ System which is comprised of (a) a treatment methodology for cell isolation for the regeneration of human skin cells and other tissues (the “CellMist™ Solution”) and (b) a solution sprayer device (the (SkinGun™”) for delivering cells to the treatment area.
In August 2020, the Company announced that the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) conditionally approved the Company’s Investigational Device Exemption (IDE) application to conduct a clinical trial to evaluate the safety and feasibility of autologous skin and pluripotent stem cells rendered by its manual CellMist™ System from donor skin and applied topically with the electronic SkinGun™ spray device for treatment of acute burn wounds. The clinical trial protocol is an open-label single-arm clinical study that will enroll 14 adult human burn subjects with partial-thickness, second-degree thermal burn wounds covering between 10% and 30% total body surface area. The Company expects to conduct the clinical study at four (4) U.S. burn centers commencing in the second quarter of 2021.
The development of our new closed, automated cell isolation device for the CellMistTM System is in the early stage and we anticipate that we will be required to expend significant time and resources to further develop our technology and determine whether a commercially viable product can be developed. Research and development of new technologies involves a high degree of risk and there is no assurance that our development activities will result in a commercially viable product. The long-term profitability of our operations will be, in part, directly related to the cost and success of our development programs, which may be affected by a number of factors.
The Company has not generated any revenue and has sustained recurring losses and negative cash flows from operations since inception. The Company expects to incur losses as it continues development of its products and technologies and expects that it will need to raise additional capital through partnerships or the sale of its securities to accomplish its business plan. Failing to secure such additional funding before achieving sustainable revenue and profit from operations poses a significant risk. The Company's ability to fund the development of its cellular therapies depends on the amount and timing of cash receipts from future financing activities. There can be no assurance as to the availability or terms upon which such financing and capital might be available.
Additionally, there is significant uncertainty relating to the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s operations and capital requirements. Should financing when needed be unavailable or prohibitively expensive or the COVID-19 pandemic continue, it may adversely affect the Company’s ability to (i) retain employees and consultants; (ii) obtain additional financing on terms acceptable to the Company, if at all; (iii) delay regulatory submissions and approvals; (iv) delay, limit or preclude the Company from the operation of clinical study sites and testing laboratories; (v) delay, limit or preclude the Company from achieving technology or product development goals, milestones, or objectives; and (vi) preclude or delay entry into joint venture or partnership arrangements. The occurrence of any one or more of such events may affect the Company’s ability to continue its pathway to commercialization of its technology or products.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
To date we have not generated any product revenues and do not expect to generate any revenue for the foreseeable future. Our ability to generate revenue and become profitable depends upon our ability to obtain marketing approval and successfully commercialization of our CellMistTM System.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for the development of our CellMistTM System and include:
· pilot-scale manufacturing of our cell isolation and SkinGunTM spray devices.
· employee-related expenses associated with our research and development activities, including salaries, benefits, travel and non-cash stock-based compensation expenses.
· costs associated with regulatory operations and regulatory compliance.
· expenses incurred under agreements related to our clinical trials.
· other research and development costs including contract consulting fees and non-cash stock-based compensation to contract research organizations (CROs) and other third parties.
We do not believe that it is possible at this time to accurately project total expenses required for us to reach commercialization of our CellMistTM System. In the future, we expect that research and development expenses will increase due to our ongoing product development and approval efforts. We expense research and development costs as incurred.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs, including non-cash stock-based compensation related to directors and employees, professional service costs including legal, accounting, and other consulting fees and other general and administrative expenses including investor relations, insurance, and facilities costs. We expect general and administrative expenses to increase in the future as we hire personnel and incur additional costs to support the expansion of our research and development activities and our operation as a public company.
Other Income
Other income consists of interest income earned on our cash and cash equivalents.
Income Taxes
We have yet to generate taxable income. We have historically incurred operating losses resulting in carry forward tax losses totaling approximately $22.3 million as of December 31, 2020. We anticipate that we will continue to generate tax losses for the foreseeable future and that we will be able to carry forward these tax losses indefinitely to future taxable years. Accordingly, we do not expect to pay taxes until we have taxable income after the full utilization of our carry forward tax losses. We have provided a full valuation allowance with respect to the deferred tax assets related to these carry forward losses.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
Research and Development Expenses
Total research and development expenses increased by $3.4 million from $0.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2019 to $4.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. Manufacturing clinical supplies increased $1.4 million due to the pilot-scale manufacturing of the components of the CellMist™ System and the electronic SkinGun™ spray device to be used in our clinical trials. We expect costs associated with manufacturing clinical supplies to decrease in 2021 as we move into the clinical trial stage of our research and development program. Personnel related expenses increased $1.8 million due to the hiring of employees to support the development of our CellMist™ System. The $1.8 million of personnel related expenses in 2020 include $1.5 million of stock-based compensation. Clinical trial expenses increased $0.1 million due to initial costs associated with preparing for clinical trials which are expected to begin in 2021. We expect clinical trial expenses to increase significantly in 2021. Regulatory expenses increased $80 thousand to support additional regulatory compliance as we expanded our research and development efforts in 2020. All other expenses increased $38 thousand, and primarily consist of CRO services outsourced by the Company to evaluate the safety and feasibility of an autologous skin cell therapy using the Company’s products to facilitate burn wound healing.
We expect clinical trial expenses to increase significantly in 2021. Regulatory expenses increased $80 thousand to support additional regulatory compliance as we expanded our research and development efforts in 2020. All other expenses increased $38 thousand, and primarily consist of CRO services outsourced by the Company to evaluate the safety and feasibility of an autologous skin cell therapy using the Company’s products to facilitate burn wound healing.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased by $2.6 million from $2.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $5.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Excluding stock-based compensation general and administrative expenses increased by $0.1 million. Personnel related expenses increased $2.7 million of which $2.1 million is attributable to stock-based compensation. The increases in personnel related expenses are due to the addition of our new Chief Executive Officer in November 2019, our new Chief Financial Officer in July 2020 and stock options granted to employees and directors. Professional and consultant fees decreased $0.3 million due to $1.0 million of decreased costs related to corporate compliance and governance matters offset by an increase in stock-based compensation to consultants in the amount of $0.4 million and an increase in other professional and consultant fees in the amount of $0.3 million. All other general and administrative expenses increased $0.2 million primarily due to increased insurance and facilities costs.
Other Income
Other income which consists of interest income decreased $0.2 million due to a lower average cash balance during the year and lower interest rates being earned on deposits.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company does not have any commercialized products, has not generated any meaningful revenue since inception and has sustained recurring losses and negative cash flows since inception. The Company has incurred operating losses of $9,677,098 and $3,690,322 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The Company expects to incur losses as it continues development of its products and technologies. Historically, the Company has been funded through the sale of equity securities and debt financings. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had $7,412,969 of cash. The Company believes that it currently has sufficient cash to meet its funding requirements over the next year.
Net cash used in operating activities was $4.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to our net loss of $9.5 million offset by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $0.3 million and non-cash charges of $4.2 million. Net cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of $1.1 million increase in accounts payable offset by a $0.3 million decrease in other current assets and a $0.1 million decrease on accounts payable - related parties.
Net cash used in investing was $49 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $0 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was attributable to the Company entering into a lease for its corporate headquarters, paying a security deposit along with purchasing equipment for the new office.
There was no net cash used in financing activities during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Dividends
We have neither declared nor paid any dividends on our common stock. We intend to retain our earnings to finance growth and expand our operations and do not anticipate paying any dividends on our common stock in the foreseeable future.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments and Risks
The carrying value of cash and cash equivalents, accounts payable, and contract and contribution payable, approximate their fair value because of the short-term nature of these instruments and their liquidity. It is not practical to determine the fair value of the Company’s notes payable and accrued interest due to the complex terms. Management is of the opinion that the Company is not exposed to significant interest or credit risks arising from these financial instruments.
Plans for Next Twelve Months
During the next twelve months we intend to continue our research and development efforts on the CellMistTM System. As part of these efforts, we intend to pursue certain filings with regulatory bodies, including, but not limited to, the FDA, seeking regulatory clearance for clinical studies of the CellMistTM System. There is no assurance the Company will be able to successfully make any such filings or will receive any such clearance.
Share Capital
At December 31, 2020, we had:
• Authorized share capital of 10,000,000 preferred shares with par value of $0.0001.
• Authorized share capital of 500,000,000 common shares with par value of $0.00001 each.
• 87,352,364 common shares were issued and outstanding.
Market Risk Disclosures
We have not entered into derivative contracts either to hedge existing risks or for speculative purposes during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, and the subsequent period through the date of this annual report.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements or contractual obligations at December 31, 2020, and the subsequent period through the date of this annual report, that are likely to have or are reasonably likely to have a material current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that have not been disclosed in our consolidated financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies
See “Note 2. Significant Accounting Policies” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Form 10-K.