Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Introduction
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is intended to provide a reader of our financial statements with a narrative from the perspective of our management on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and certain other factors that may affect our future results. Our MD&A is presented in five main sections:
● Overview
● Results of Operations
● Liquidity and Capital Resources
● Off Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations
● Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and accompanying Notes included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this annual report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical data, this discussion contains forward-looking statements about our business, operations and financial performance based on current expectations that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those in this discussion as a result of various factors, including but not limited to those discussed in Part, 1. Item 1A, “Risk Factors” in this annual report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Our Business
We are a multi-strategy real estate finance company that originates, acquires, finances, and services SBC loans, SBA loans, residential mortgage loans, and to a lesser extent, MBS collateralized primarily by SBC loans, or other real estate-related investments. Our loans generally range in original principal amounts up to $35 million and are used by businesses to purchase real estate used in their operations or by investors seeking to acquire small multi-family, office, retail, mixed use or warehouse properties. Our originations and acquisition platforms consist of the following four operating segments:
● Acquisitions. We acquire performing and non-performing SBC loans as part of our business strategy. We hold performing SBC loans to term, and we seek to maximize the value of the non-performing SBC loans acquired by us through borrower-based resolution strategies. We typically acquire non-performing loans at a discount to their unpaid principal balance (“UPB”) when we believe that resolution of the loans will provide attractive risk-adjusted returns. We also acquire purchased future receivables through our Knight Capital platform.
● SBC Originations. We originate SBC loans secured by stabilized or transitional investor properties using multiple loan origination channels through our wholly-owned subsidiary, ReadyCap Commercial, LLC (“ReadyCap Commercial”). These originated loans are generally held-for-investment or placed into securitization structures. Additionally, as part of this segment, we originate and service multi-family loan products under the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation’s Small Balance Loan Program (“Freddie Mac” and the “Freddie Mac program”). These originated loans are held for sale, then sold to Freddie Mac.
● SBA Originations, Acquisitions and Servicing. We acquire, originate and service owner-occupied loans guaranteed by the SBA under its Section 7(a) loan program (the “SBA Section 7(a) Program”) through our wholly-owned subsidiary, ReadyCap Lending, LLC (“ReadyCap Lending”). We hold an SBA license as one of only 14 non-bank Small Business Lending Companies (“SBLCs”) and have been granted preferred lender status by the SBA. These originated loans are either held-for-investment, placed into securitization structures, or sold.
● Residential Mortgage Banking. We operate our residential mortgage loan origination segment through our wholly-owned subsidiary, GMFS, LLC ("GMFS"). GMFS originates residential mortgage loans eligible to be purchased, guaranteed or insured by the Federal National Mortgage Association (“Fannie Mae”), Freddie Mac, Federal Housing Administration (“FHA”), U.S. Department of Agriculture (“USDA”) and U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (“VA”) through retail, correspondent and broker channels. These originated loans are then sold to third parties, primarily agency lending programs.
Our objective is to provide attractive risk-adjusted returns to our stockholders, primarily through dividends and secondarily through capital appreciation. In order to achieve this objective, we intend to continue to grow our investment portfolio and we believe that the breadth of our full service real estate finance platform will allow us to adapt to market conditions and deploy capital in our asset classes and segments with the most attractive risk-adjusted returns.
We are organized and conduct our operations to qualify as a REIT under the Code. So long as we qualify as a REIT, we are generally not subject to U.S. federal income tax on our net taxable income to the extent that we annually distribute all of our net taxable income to stockholders. We are organized in a traditional UpREIT format pursuant to which we serve as the general partner of, and conduct substantially all of our business through Sutherland Partners, LP, or our operating partnership, which serves as our operating partnership subsidiary. We also intend to operate our business in a manner that will permit us to be excluded from registration as an investment company under the 1940 Act.
For additional information on our business, refer to Part I, Item 1, “Business” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
2020 marked the Great COVID Recession which shocked our core commercial real estate debt market. Despite these challenges, Ready Capital delivered record results in a recession due to our diversified business model. The following items highlight Ready Capital’s differentiated business model and our commitment to provide attractive risk-adjusted returns to our stockholders, primarily through dividends and capital appreciation.
● Despite pandemic shutdown for over half the year, we originated and acquired $910 million of SBC loans to be held on balance sheet. As of December 31, 2020, we held $4.2 billion portfolio of SBC loans, which provides stable net interest income and is core to our stable dividend. Our strong credit culture has held 60+ day delinquencies at 2.7%, vs 6% in the large balance CMBS market, with a weighted average coupon of 5.4% and duration of 7 years.
● At year end, we serviced over $11.7 billion of loans across our residential, SBA and Freddie Mac platforms, with a weighted average servicing fee of 34bps.
● We added $4.9 billion of originations in our government sponsored SBA, residential and Freddie Mac gain on sale businesses, an 83% increase from prior year.
● Our SBA 7(a) lending subsidiary has originated $820 million since inception, including $83 million and $65 million in third and fourth quarters of 2020, respectively. We continue to grow market share in 2020, rising from 14th to 9th largest 7(a) lender and 2nd non-bank lender. Throughout the pandemic, bilateral support in DC for the SBA is evident in 2 rounds of the Paycheck Protection Program, principal and interest support on 7(a) loans and the increase in government guarantee from 75% to 90%.
● We also continue to expand our Freddie Mac SBL and broader GSE lending operations actively lending during the pandemic with $545 million in 2020 originations. Demand for this product continues to grow due to low rates relative to banks and stable demand due to the strength of the SBL multifamily market as rent growth and collections have held up through the pandemic. Additionally, we entered into two agency correspondence agreements in 2020, which will allow us to provide a full suite of GSE products. We expect volume through these new programs to experience modest growth as we build out the necessary infrastructure to achieve scale.
● Residential mortgage originations and GMFS experienced record volume and profitability. In 2020, GMFS originated $4.2 billion at margins averaging 285bps. Year-over year volume growth was 100% and average margins were 2.0x 2019 levels. Additionally, we added $1.4 billion of net loans to the servicing asset and lowered weighted average coupon 9% to 368bps.
● Despite headwinds in the sector, we securitized over $609 million of loans, renewed 6 credit facilities and managed average recourse leverage to 2.1x. Finally, we continued to find an accretive way to expand and scale our business through the signing of the Anworth merger.
Factors Impacting Operating Results
We expect that our results of operations will be affected by a number of factors and will primarily depend on, among other things, the level of the interest income from our assets, the market value of our assets and the supply of, and demand for, SBC and SBA loans, residential loans, MBS and other assets we may acquire in the future and the financing and other costs associated with our business. Our net investment income, which includes the amortization of purchase premiums and accretion of purchase discounts, varies primarily as a result of changes in market interest rates, the rate at which our distressed assets are liquidated and the prepayment speed of our performing assets. Interest rates and prepayment speeds vary according to the type of investment, conditions in the financial markets, competition and other factors, none of which can be predicted with any certainty. Our operating results may also be impacted by conditions in the financial markets, credit losses in excess of initial estimates or unanticipated credit events experienced by borrowers whose loans are held directly by us or are included in our MBS. Our operating results may also be impacted by difficult market conditions as well as inflation, energy costs, geopolitical issues, health epidemics and outbreaks of contagious diseases, such as the recent outbreak of COVID-19, unemployment and the availability and cost of credit. Our operating results will also be impacted by our available borrowing capacity.
Changes in Market Interest Rates. We own and expect to acquire or originate fixed rate mortgages (“FRMs”), and ARMs, with maturities ranging from five to 30 years. Our loans typically have amortization periods of 15 to 30 years or balloon payments due in five to ten years. ARM loans generally have a fixed interest rate for a period of five, seven or ten years and then an adjustable interest rate equal to the sum of an index rate, such as the LIBOR, plus a margin, while FRM loans bear interest that is fixed for the term of the loan. As of December 31, 2020, approximately 57% of the loans in our portfolio were ARMs, and 43% were FRMs, based on UPB. We utilize derivative financial and hedging instruments in an effort to hedge the interest rate risk associated with our ARMs.
With respect to our business operations, increases in interest rates, in general, may over time cause:
● the interest expense associated with our variable-rate borrowings to increase;
● the value of fixed-rate loans, MBS and other real estate-related assets to decline;
● coupons on variable-rate loans and MBS to reset to higher interest rates; and
● prepayments on loans and MBS to slow.
Conversely, decreases in interest rates, in general, may over time cause:
● the interest expense associated with variable-rate borrowings to decrease;
● the value of fixed-rate loans, MBS and other real estate-related assets to increase;
● coupons on variable-rate loans and MBS to reset to lower interest rates; and
● prepayments on loans and MBS to increase.
Additionally, non-performing loans are not as interest rate sensitive as performing loans, as earnings on non-performing loans are often generated from restructuring the assets through loss mitigation strategies and opportunistically disposing of them. Because non-performing loans are short-term assets, the discount rates used for valuation are based on short-term market interest rates, which may not move in tandem with long-term market interest rates. A rising rate environment often means an improving economy, which might have a positive impact on commercial property values, resulting in increased gains on the disposition of these assets. While rising rates could make it more costly to refinance these assets, we expect that the impact of this would be mitigated by higher property values. Moreover, small business owners are generally less interest rate sensitive than large commercial property owners, and interest cost is a relatively small component of their operating expenses. An improving economy will likely spur increased property values and sales, thereby increasing the need for loan financing.
Changes in Fair Value of Our Assets. Certain originated loans, mortgage backed securities, and servicing rights are carried at fair value and future assets may also be carried at fair value. Accordingly, changes in the fair value of our assets may impact the results of our operations for the period in which such change in value occurs. The expectation of changes in real estate prices is a major determinant of the value of loans and ABS. This factor is beyond our control.
Prepayment Speeds. Prepayment speeds on loans vary according to interest rates, the type of investment, conditions in the financial markets, competition, foreclosures and other factors that cannot be predicted with any certainty. In general, when interest rates rise, it is relatively less attractive for borrowers to refinance their mortgage loans and, as a result, prepayment speeds tend to decrease. This can extend the period over which we earn interest income. When interest rates fall, prepayment speeds on loans, and therefore, ABS and servicing rights tend to increase, thereby decreasing the period over which we earn interest income or servicing fee income. Additionally, other factors such as the credit rating of the borrower, the rate of property value appreciation or depreciation, financial market conditions, foreclosures and lender competition, none of which can be predicted with any certainty, may affect prepayment speeds on loans.
Credit Spreads. Our investment portfolio may be subject to changes in credit spreads. Credit spreads measure the yield demanded on loans and securities by the market based on their credit relative to a specific benchmark and is a measure of the perceived risk of the investment. Fixed rate loans and securities are valued based on a market credit spread over the rate payable on fixed rate swaps or fixed rate U.S. Treasuries of similar maturity. Floating rate securities are typically valued based on a market credit spread over LIBOR (or another floating rate index) and are affected similarly by changes in LIBOR spreads. Excessive supply of these loans and securities or reduced demand may cause the market to require a higher yield on these securities, resulting in the use of a higher, or “wider,” spread over the benchmark rate to value such assets. Under such conditions, the value of our portfolios would tend to decline. Conversely, if the spread used to value such assets were to decrease, or “tighten,” the value of our loans and securities would tend to increase. Such changes in the market value of these assets may affect our net equity, net income or cash flow directly through their impact on unrealized gains or losses.
The spread between the yield on our assets and our funding costs is an important factor in the performance of this aspect of our business. Wider spreads imply greater income on new asset purchases but may have a negative impact on our stated book value. Wider spreads generally negatively impact asset prices. In an environment where spreads are widening, counterparties may require additional collateral to secure borrowings which may require us to reduce leverage by selling assets. Conversely, tighter spreads imply lower income on new asset purchases but may have a positive impact on our stated book value. Tighter spreads generally have a positive impact on asset prices. In this case, we may be able to reduce the amount of collateral required to secure borrowings.
Loan and ABS Extension Risk. Waterfall estimates the projected weighted-average life of our investments based on assumptions regarding the rate at which the borrowers will prepay the underlying mortgages and/or the speed at which we are able to liquidate an asset. If the timeline to resolve non-performing assets extends, this could have a negative impact on our results of operations, as carrying costs may therefore be higher than initially anticipated. This situation may also cause the fair market value of our investment to decline if real estate values decline over the extended period. In extreme situations, we may be forced to sell assets to maintain adequate liquidity, which could cause us to incur losses.
Credit Risk. We are subject to credit risk in connection with our investments in loans and ABS and other target assets we may acquire in the future. Increases in defaults and delinquencies will adversely impact our operating results, while declines in rates of default and delinquencies will improve our operating results from this aspect of our business. Default rates are influenced by a wide variety of factors, including, property performance, property management, supply and demand factors, construction trends, consumer behavior, regional economics, interest rates, the strength of the United States economy and other factors beyond our control. All loans are subject to the possibility of default. We seek to mitigate this risk by seeking to acquire assets at appropriate prices given anticipated and unanticipated losses and by deploying a value-driven approach to underwriting and diligence, consistent with our historical investment strategy, with a focus on projected cash flows and potential risks to cash flow. We further mitigate our risk of potential losses while managing and servicing our loans by performing various workout and loss mitigation strategies with delinquent borrowers. Nevertheless, unanticipated credit losses could occur which could adversely impact operating results.
Size of Investment Portfolio. The size of our investment portfolio, as measured by the aggregate principal balance of our loans and ABS and the other assets we own, is also a key revenue driver. Generally, as the size of our investment portfolio grows, the amount of interest income and realized gains we receive increases. A larger investment portfolio, however, drives increased expenses, as we may incur additional interest expense to finance the purchase of our assets.
Current market conditions. The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic around the globe continues to adversely impact global commercial activity and has contributed to significant volatility in financial markets. The impact of the outbreak has been rapidly evolving, with many countries taking drastic measures to limit the spread of the virus by instituting quarantines or lockdowns and imposing travel restrictions. While some of these restrictions have been relaxed or phased out, many of these or similar restrictions remain in place, continue to be implemented or additional restrictions are being considered. Such actions are creating significant disruptions to global supply chains and adversely impacting several industries, including but not limited to airlines, hospitality, retail, and the broader real estate industry. The major disruption caused by COVID-19 significantly reduced economic activity in most of the United States resulting in a significant increase in unemployment claims. COVID-19 has had a continued and prolonged adverse impact on economic and market conditions and has caused a global economic slowdown which has had and could further have a material adverse effect on the Company’s results and financial condition. The full impact of COVID-19 on the real estate industry, the commercial real estate market, the small business lending market and the credit markets generally, and consequently on the Company’s financial condition and results of operations is uncertain and cannot be predicted at the current time as it depends on several factors beyond the control of the Company including, but not limited to, (i) the uncertainty around the severity and duration of the outbreak, (ii) the effectiveness of the United States public health response, (iii) the pandemic’s impact on the U.S. and global economies, (iv) the timing, scope and effectiveness of governmental responses to the pandemic, including the PPP and other programs under the CARES Act, (v) the timing and speed of economic recovery, (vi) the availability of a treatment or vaccination for COVID-19, and (vii) the negative impact on our borrowers, real estate values and cost of capital.
Results of Operations
Key Financial Measures and Indicators
As a real estate finance company, we believe the key financial measures and indicators for our business are earnings per share, dividends declared per share, distributable earnings, and net book value per share. As further described below, distributable earnings is a measure that is not prepared in accordance with GAAP. We use distributable earnings to evaluate our performance and determine dividends, excluding the effects of certain transactions and GAAP adjustments that we believe are not necessarily indicated of our current loan activity and operations. See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below for reconciliation to distributable earnings.
The following table sets forth certain information on our operating results:
The following table presents information on our investment portfolio activity (based on fully committed amounts):
The following table presents information on our acquisition and origination pipeline opportunities (based on fully committed amounts):
(1) Includes 2021 fundings.
We operate in a competitive market for investment opportunities and competition may limit our ability to originate or acquire the potential investments in the pipeline. The consummation of any of the potential loans in the pipeline depends upon, among other things, one or more of the following: available capital and liquidity, our Manager’s allocation policy, satisfactory completion of our due diligence investigation and investment process, approval of our Manager’s Investment Committee, market conditions, our agreement with the seller on the terms and structure of such potential loan, and the execution and delivery of satisfactory transaction documentation. Historically, we have acquired less than a majority of the assets in our Manager’s pipeline at any one time and there can be no assurance the assets currently in its pipeline will be acquired or originated by our Manager in the future.
Return Information
The following tables present certain information related to our SBC and SBA loan portfolios as of December 31, 2020 and per share information for the three months ended December 31, 2020, which includes distributable earnings per share or return information. Distributable earnings is not a measure calculated in accordance with GAAP and is defined further within Item 7 - Non-GAAP Financial Measures in this Annual report on Form 10-K.
The following table provides a detailed breakdown of our calculation of return on equity and distributable return on equity for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020. Distributable return on equity is not a measure calculated in accordance with GAAP and is defined further within Item 7 - Non-GAAP Financial Measures in this Annual report on Form 10-K.
Portfolio Metrics
SBC Originations. The following table includes certain portfolio metrics related to our SBC originations segment:
SBA Originations, Acquisitions, and Servicing. The following table includes certain portfolio metrics related to our SBA originations, acquisitions and servicing segment:
Acquired Portfolio. The following table includes certain portfolio metrics related to our acquisitions segment:
Residential Mortgage Banking. The following table includes certain portfolio metrics related to our residential mortgage banking segment:
Balance Sheet Analysis and Metrics
The following table compares our consolidated balance sheets as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
As of December 2020, total assets in our consolidated balance sheet were $5.4 billion, an increase of $395 million from December 2019, primarily reflecting an increase in Loans eligible for repurchase from Ginnie Mae, Loans, held for sale, at fair value and assets of consolidated VIEs, partially offset by a decrease in Loans, net. Loans eligible for repurchase from Ginnie Mae increased $172 million primarily due to an increase in demand for residential loans and refinancing as the rate environment decreased. Loans, held for sale, at fair value increased $152 million primarily due to an increase in volumes for agency Freddie Mac and residential loans. Assets of consolidated VIEs increased $140 million primarily due to the transfer of loans as a result of securitizations. Loan originations and acquisitions of $1.0 billion was partially offset by scheduled and unscheduled payments of $962 million. Loans, net decreased by $102 million primarily due to the transfer of loans as a result of securitizations.
As of December 2020, total liabilities in our consolidated balance sheet were $4.5 billion, an increase of $406 million from December 2019, primarily reflecting an increase in Secured borrowings and Liabilities for loans eligible for repurchase from Ginnie Mae. Secured borrowings increased $181 million, primarily due to borrowings from the Federal Reserve’s Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility for loans made under the Paycheck Protection Program, borrowings against ORM collateral from Bank of Sierra and an increase in borrowings associated with higher volumes from gains on sale agency loans. Liabilities for loans eligible for repurchase from Ginnie Mae increased $172 million, primarily due to an in increase in borrowings associated with higher demand for residential loans and refinancings as the rate environment decreased.
Total equity attributable to our company decreased by $11 million, primarily due to provisions for loan losses associated with the implementation of CECL, partially offset by gains from PPP loan originations and net interest income from the overall loans portfolio.
Selected Balance Sheet Information by Business Segment and Corporate - Other. The following table presents certain selected balance sheet data by each of our four business segments, with the remaining amounts reflected in Corporate -Other, as of December 31, 2020:
Income Statement Analysis and Metrics
The following table compares our consolidated statements of income for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 (amounts in thousands):
Results of Operations - Supplemental Information. Realized and unrealized gains (losses) on financial instruments are recorded in the consolidated statements of income and classified based on the nature of the underlying asset or liability.
The following table presents the components of realized and unrealized gains (losses) on financial instruments:
Acquisition Segment Results.
2020 versus 2019. Interest income of $61.2 million for 2020 represented a decrease of $4.8 million from the prior year, primarily due to a decrease in paydown revenue, partially offset by portfolio interest income due to an increase in carrying value of the acquired loan portfolio as a result of new SBC loan acquisitions. Interest expense of $43.4 million for 2020 represented an increase of $2.9 million from the prior year, primarily due to an increase in borrowing needs due to additional acquisitions and a higher average carrying value of the acquired portfolio. Provision for loan losses of $3.5 million for 2020 represented an increase of $2.7 million from the prior year, primarily due to the implementation of CECL. Non-interest income of $13.8 million for 2020 represented an increase of $0.6 million from the prior year, primarily due to income on purchased future receivables from Knight Capital for a full year, partially offset by unrealized losses on MBS positions due to COVID-19 impacts to the market. Non-interest expense of $34.3 million for 2020 represented an increase of $21.9 million from the prior year, primarily due to compensation and operating expenses from Knight Capital for a full year.
2019 versus 2018. Interest income of $65.9 million for 2019 represented an increase of $18.7 million from the prior year, primarily due to an increase in interest income generated on our acquired SBC loan portfolio due to higher average carrying values as a result of new SBC loan acquisitions, partially offset by paydowns. Interest expense of $40.5 million for 2019 represented an increase of $11.6 million from the prior year, primarily due to an increase in borrowing needs due to additional acquisitions and a higher average carrying value of the acquired loan portfolio. Provision for loan losses of $0.8 million for 2019 represented a decrease of $0.9 million from the prior year, primarily due to a decrease in credit deteriorated loans due to paydowns and sales and increased focus on newer loan vintages with better credit quality. Non-interest income of $13.2 million for 2019 represented a decrease of $3.2 million from the prior year, primarily due to a decrease in income generated on our equity method investments, partially offset by income on purchased future receivables acquired as part of our acquisition of Knight Capital. Non-interest expense of $12.4 million for 2019 represented an increase of $3.1 million from the prior year, primarily due to an increase in loan servicing expense and an increase in employee compensation due to the acquisition of Knight Capital.
SBC Originations Segment Results.
2020 versus 2019. Interest income of $150.4 million for 2020 represented an increase of $22.9 million from the prior year, primarily due to SBC loan originations, resulting in higher average loan balances. Interest expense of $95.1 million for 2020 represented an increase of $4.4 million from the prior year, primarily due to an increase in borrowing needs required to finance new originations. Provision for loan losses of $23.4 million for 2020 represented an increase of $23.1 million from the prior year, primarily due to the implementation of CECL. Non-interest income of $22.5 million for 2020 represented an increase of $2.1 million from the prior year, primarily due to an increase in Freddie Mac realized gains and the creation of MSRs. Non-interest expense of $37.3 million for 2020 represented an increase of $11.9 million from the prior year, primarily due to an increase in compensation expense.
2019 versus 2018. Interest income of $127.5 million for 2019 represented an increase of $45.7 million from the prior year, primarily due to an increase in SBC loan originations, resulting in higher average loan balances. Interest expense of $90.7 million for 2019 represented an increase of $29.8 million from the prior year, primarily due to an increase in borrowing needs required to finance new originations. Provision for loan losses of $0.3 million for 2019 was essentially unchanged from the prior year. Non-interest income of $20.4 million for 2019 represented a decrease of $2.9 million from the prior year, primarily due to a decrease in realized gains on sales of Freddie Mac loans and a decrease in realized gains on the creation of Freddie Mac MSRs, partially offset by servicing income on Freddie Mac loans. Non-interest expense of $25.5 million for 2019 represented an increase of $1.1 million from the prior year, primarily due to an increase in loan servicing expenses and other operating expenses, partially offset by a decrease in employee compensation expense.
SBA Originations, Acquisitions and Servicing Segment Results.
2020 versus 2019. Interest income of $39.4 million for 2020 represented an increase of $7.3 million from the prior year, primarily due to an increase in guaranteed loan financing from guaranteed portions of loans sold tied to securitization activity. Interest expense of $27.5 million for 2020 represented an increase of $12.6 million from the prior year, primarily due to an increase in guaranteed loan financing from guaranteed portions of loans sold tied to securitization activity. Provision for loan losses of $7.8 million for 2020 represented an increase of $5.2 million from the prior year, primarily due to the implementation of CECL. Non-interest income of $57.3 million for 2020 represented an increase of $34.9 million from the prior year, primarily due to revenue from originated PPP loans. Non-interest expense of $33.7 million for 2020 represented an increase of $9.6 million from the prior year, primarily due to an increase in expenses related to originated PPP loans.
2019 versus 2018. Interest income of $32.1 million for 2019 represented a decrease of $4.6 million from the prior year, primarily due to a decrease in interest income generated on our acquired SBA 7(a) loan portfolio as we have shifted capital to new SBA loan originations, partially offset by an increase in realized gains on sales of SBA loans and originated SBA loan servicing income. Interest expense of $14.9 million for 2019 represented a decrease of $1.3 million from the prior year, primarily due to a decrease in borrowing activities under secured borrowings and guaranteed loan financing. Provision for loan losses of $2.6 million for 2019 represented an increase of $2.6 million from the prior year, primarily due to an increase in the general allowance for loan losses on originated SBA 7(a) loans and an increase in the specific allowance for loan losses on legacy acquired SBA 7(a) loans. Non-interest income of $22.5 million for 2019 was essentially unchanged from the prior year. Non-interest expense of $24.1 million for 2019 represented an increase of $5.9 million from the prior year, primarily due to an increase in employee compensation expense and other operating expenses.
Residential Mortgage Banking Segment Results.
2020 versus 2019. Interest income of $7.7 million for 2020 represented an increase of $3.3 million from the prior year, primarily due to an increase in overall loan originations. Interest expense of $8.3 million for 2020 represented an increase of $2.5 million from the prior year, primarily due to an increase in borrowing needs required to finance new originations. Non-interest income of $240.9 million for 2020 represented an increase of $153.0 million from the prior year, primarily due to an increase in revenue generated on residential mortgage banking activities. Non-interest expense of $186.1 million for 2020 represented an increase of $95.5 million from the prior year, primarily due to an increase in variable expenses on residential mortgage banking activities due to increased loan origination volumes.
2019 versus 2018. Interest income of $4.4 million for 2019 represented an increase of $0.6 million from the prior year, primarily due to an increase in overall loan originations and carrying values. Interest expense of $5.8 million for 2019 represented an increase of $2.6 million from the prior year, primarily due to an increased need to finance a greater number of loans. Non-interest income of $87.9 million for 2019 represented an increase of $1.8 million from the prior year, primarily due to an increase in revenue generated on residential mortgage banking activities and loan servicing income, partially offset by unrealized losses on residential MSRs carried at fair value. Non-interest expense of $90.7 million for 2019 represented an increase of $18.8 million from the prior year, primarily due to an increase in variable expenses on residential mortgage banking activities due to increased loan origination volumes.
Corporate - Other.
2020 versus 2019. Non-interest income of $0.2 million for 2020 represented a decrease of $30.5 million from the prior year, primarily due to a one-time bargain purchase gain related to the acquisition of ORM in 2019. Interest expense of $1.3 million for 2020 represented an increase of $1.3 million from the prior year, due to repo borrowings for general business purposes. All interest expense from corporate debt offerings were deployed to the business segments. Non-interest
expense of $37.3 million for 2020 represented an increase of $5.4 million from the prior year, primarily due to an increase in management and incentive fees and professional fees, partially offset by one-time merger expenses in 2019.
2019 versus 2018. Non-interest income of $30.6 million for 2019 represented a bargain purchase gain related to the acquisition of ORM. There was no interest expense incurred during 2019 and 2018 as all borrowings from corporate debt offerings were deployed to the business segments. Non-interest expense of $31.9 million for 2019 represented an increase of $12.0 million from the prior year, primarily due to merger-related expenses, an increase in employee compensation expense and an increase in management fees.
Non-GAAP financial measures
We believe that providing investors with distributable earnings, formerly referred to as core earnings, gives investors greater transparency into the information used by management in our financial and operational decision-making, including the determination of dividends. Distributable earnings is a non-U.S. GAAP financial measure and because distributable earnings is an incomplete measure of our financial performance and involves differences from net income computed in accordance with U.S. GAAP, it should be considered along with, but not as an alternative to, our net income as a measure of our financial performance. In addition, because not all companies use identical calculations, our presentation of distributable earnings may not be comparable to other similarly-titled measures of other companies.
We calculate distributable earnings as GAAP net income (loss) excluding the following:
i) any unrealized gains or losses on certain MBS
ii) any realized gains or losses on sales of certain MBS
iii) any unrealized gains or losses on Residential MSRs
iv) any unrealized current non-cash provision for credit losses on accrual loans
v) any unrealized gains or losses on de-designated cash flow hedges
vi) one-time non-recurring gains or losses, such as gains or losses on discontinued operations, bargain purchase gains, or merger related expenses
In calculating distributable earnings, net income (in accordance with GAAP) is adjusted to exclude unrealized gains and losses on MBS acquired by us in the secondary market, but is not adjusted to exclude unrealized gains and losses on MBS retained by us as part of our loan origination businesses, where we transfer originated loans into an MBS securitization and retain an interest in the securitization. In calculating distributable earnings, we do not adjust net income (in accordance with GAAP) to take into account unrealized gains and losses on MBS retained by us as part of our loan origination businesses because we consider the unrealized gains and losses that are generated in the loan origination and securitization process to be a fundamental part of this business and an indicator of the ongoing performance and credit quality of our historical loan originations. In calculating distributable earnings, net income (in accordance with GAAP) is adjusted to exclude realized gains and losses on certain MBS securities due to a variety of reasons which may include collateral type, duration, and size. In 2016, we liquidated the majority of our MBS portfolio excluded from distributable earnings to fund our recurring operating segments.
In addition, in calculating distributable earnings, net income (in accordance with GAAP) is adjusted to exclude unrealized gains or losses on residential MSRs, held at fair value. We treat our commercial MSRs and residential MSRs as two separate classes based on the nature of the underlying mortgages and our treatment of these assets as two separate pools for risk management purposes. Servicing rights relating to our small business commercial business are accounted for under ASC 860, Transfer and Servicing, while our residential MSRs are accounted for under the fair value option under ASC 825, Financial Instruments. In calculating distributable earnings, we do not exclude realized gains or losses on either commercial MSRs or residential MSRs, held at fair value, as servicing income is a fundamental part of our business and as an indicator of the ongoing performance.
To qualify as a REIT, we must distribute to our stockholders each calendar year at least 90% of our REIT taxable income (including certain items of non-cash income), determined without regard to the deduction for dividends paid and excluding net capital gain. There are certain items, including net income generated from the creation of MSRs, that are included in distributable earnings but are not included in the calculation of the current year’s taxable income. These differences may result in certain items that are recognized in the current period’s calculation of distributable earnings not being included in taxable income, and thus not subject to the REIT dividend distribution requirement, until future years.
The following table presents an annual reconciliation to distributable earnings:
2020 versus 2019. Consolidated net income of $46.1 million for 2020 represented a decrease of $29.0 million from the prior year, primarily due to an increase of reserves on loans due to the uncertainty of loan performance and recovery related to COVID-19 as well as an increase in unrealized losses on residential mortgage servicing rights, partially offset by net income on PPP activities. Consolidated distributable earnings of $101.4 million for 2020 represented an increase of $34.1 million from the prior year, primarily due to PPP related income and residential mortgage banking activities as well as an increase in distributable earnings reconciling items including unrealized losses on residential mortgage servicing rights and the impact of the adoption of ASU 2016-13 on accrual loans.
2019 versus 2018. Consolidated net income of $75.1 million for 2019 represented an increase of $13.6 million from the prior year, primarily due to the recognition of a bargain purchase gain, partially offset by merger transaction costs, primarily due to the acquisition of ORM, and an increase in net interest income after provision for loan losses, partially offset by after-tax unrealized losses on our residential mortgage servicing rights carried at fair value. Consolidated distributable earnings of $67.3 million for 2019 represented an increase of $8.6 million from the prior year, primarily due to an increase in SBC loan originations and loan acquisitions.
The following table presents a quarterly reconciliation to distributable earnings:
QTD 2020 versus QTD 2019. Consolidated net income of $27.6 million for the three months ended December 31, 2020 represented an increase of $6.6 million from the prior year respective period, primarily due to an increase in net residential mortgage banking activities, partially offset by an increase in employee compensation and benefits primarily driven by our residential mortgage banking segment. Consolidated distributable earnings of $28.8 million for the three months ended December 31, 2020 represented an increase of $7.8 million from the prior year respective period, primarily due to increased net income in the residential mortgage banking segment.
COVID-19 Impact on Operating Results
The significant and wide-ranging response of international, federal, state and local public health and governmental authorities to the COVID-19 pandemic in regions across the United States and the world, including the imposition of quarantines, “stay-at-home” orders and similar mandates for many individuals to substantially restrict daily activities and for many businesses to curtail or cease normal operations, and the volatile economic, business and financial market conditions resulting therefrom, are expected to negatively impact our business, financial performance and operating results as we enter 2021. Although we are uncertain of the potential full magnitude or duration of the business and economic impacts from the unprecedented public health efforts to contain and combat the spread of COVID-19, we will likely experience material deterioration in our financial performance and operating results, revenues, cash flow and/or profitability in one or more of the upcoming periods in 2021 compared to the corresponding prior-year periods. Further discussion of the potential impacts on our business from the COVID-19 pandemic is provided in the section entitled “Risk Factors” in Part II, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Incentive distribution payable to our manager
Under the partnership agreement of our operating partnership, our Manager, the holder of the Class A special unit in our operating partnership, is entitled to receive an incentive distribution, distributed quarterly in arrears in an amount not less than zero equal to the difference between (i) the product of (A) 15% and (B) the difference between (x) distributable earnings (as described below) of our operating partnership, on a rolling four-quarter basis and before the incentive distribution for the current quarter, and (y) the product of (1) the weighted average of the issue price per share of common stock or operating partnership unit (“OP unit”) (without double counting) in all of our offerings multiplied by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding (including any restricted shares of common stock and any other shares of common stock underlying awards granted under our 2012 equity incentive plan) and OP units (without double counting) in such quarter and (2) 8%, and (ii) the sum of any incentive distribution paid to our Manager with respect to the first three quarters of such previous four quarters; provided, however, that no incentive distribution is payable with respect to any calendar quarter unless cumulative distributable earnings is greater than zero for the most recently completed 12 calendar quarters.
For purposes of calculating the incentive distribution, the shares of common stock and OP units issued as of the closing of the ZAIS Financial merger in connection with the merger agreement were deemed to be issued at the per share price equal to (i) the sum of (A) the weighted average of the issue price per share of Sutherland common stock or Sutherland OP units (without double counting) issued prior to the closing of the ZAIS Financial merger multiplied by the number of shares of Sutherland common stock outstanding and Sutherland OP units (without double counting) issued prior to the closing of the merger plus (B) the amount by which the net book value of our Company as of the closing of the merger (after giving effect to the closing of the merger agreement) exceeded the amount of the net book value of Sutherland immediately preceding the closing of the merger, divided by (ii) all of the shares of our common stock and OP units issued and outstanding as of the closing of the merger (including the date of the closing of the mergers).
The incentive distribution shall be calculated within 30 days after the end of each quarter and such calculation shall promptly be delivered to our Company. We are obligated to pay the incentive distribution 50% in cash and 50% in either common stock or OP units, as determined in our discretion, within five business days after delivery to our Company of the written statement from the holder of the Class A special unit setting forth the computation of the incentive distribution for such quarter. Subject to certain exceptions, our Manager may not sell or otherwise dispose of any portion of the incentive distribution issued to it in common stock or OP units until after the three year anniversary of the date that such shares of common stock or OP units were issued to our Manager. The price of shares of our common stock for purposes of determining the number of shares payable as part of the incentive distribution is the closing price of such shares on the last trading day prior to the approval by our board of the incentive distribution.
For purposes of determining the incentive distribution payable to our Manager, distributable earnings is defined under the partnership agreement of our operating partnership in a manner that is similar to the definition of distributable earnings described above under "Non-GAAP Financial Measures" but with the following additional adjustments which (i) further exclude: (a) the incentive distribution, (b) non-cash equity compensation expense, if any, (c) unrealized gains or losses on SBC loans (not just MBS and MSRs), (d) depreciation and amortization (to the extent we foreclose on any property), and (e) one-time events pursuant to changes in U.S. GAAP and certain other non-cash charges after discussions between our Manager and our independent directors and after approval by a majority of the independent directors and (ii) add back any realized gains or losses on the sales of MBS and on discontinued operations which were excluded from the definition of distributable earnings described above under "Non-GAAP Financial Measures".
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity is a measure of our ability to turn non-cash assets into cash and to meet potential cash requirements. We use significant cash to purchase SBC loans and other target assets, originate new SBC loans, pay dividends, repay principal and interest on our borrowings, fund our operations and meet other general business needs. Our primary sources of liquidity will include our existing cash balances, borrowings, including securitizations, re-securitizations, repurchase agreements, warehouse facilities, bank credit facilities (including term loans and revolving facilities), the net proceeds of offerings of equity and debt securities, including our Senior Secured Notes, Corporate debt, and Convertible Notes, and net cash provided by operating activities.
We are continuing to monitor the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on us, the borrowers underlying our real estate-related assets, the tenants in the properties we own, our financing sources, and the economy as a whole. Because the severity, magnitude and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and its economic consequences remain uncertain, rapidly changing and difficult to predict, the pandemic’s impact on our operations and liquidity remains uncertain and difficult to predict. Further discussion of the potential impacts on us from the COVID-19 pandemic is provided in the section entitled “Risk Factors” in Part II, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Cash flow
Year Ended December 31, 2020. Cash and cash equivalents increased by $72.5 million to $200.5 million at the end of 2020, primarily due to net cash provided by operating and financing activities, partially offset by net cash used for investing activities. The net cash provided by operating activities primarily reflected net realized gains on financial instruments and net proceeds on the origination and sale of loans, held for sale, at fair value. The net cash provided by financing activities primarily reflected proceeds from issuances of securitized debt and net proceeds from secured borrowings as a result of an increase in our origination and acquisition activities, partially offset by paydowns of secured debt and dividend payments. The net cash used for investing activities primarily reflected loan originations and purchases, partially offset by paydowns.
Year Ended December 31, 2019. Cash and cash equivalents increased by $33.0 million to $128.0 million at the end of 2019, primarily due to net cash provided by financings activities, partially offset by net cash used for investing and operating activities. The net cash provided by financing activities primarily reflected proceeds from issuances of securitized debt, partially offset by repayments and net proceeds from secured borrowings as a result of an increase in our origination and acquisition activities. The net cash used for investing activities primarily reflected loan originations and purchases, partially offset by paydowns. The net cash used for operating activities primarily reflected net realized gains on financial instruments.
Year Ended December 31, 2018. Cash and cash equivalents increased by $4.0 million to $95.0 million at the end of 2018, primarily due to net cash provided by financings and operating activities, partially offset by net cash used for investing activities. The net cash provided by financing activities primarily reflected proceeds from issuances of securitized debt and secured borrowings, partially offset by repayments. The net cash used for investing activities primarily reflected loan originations and purchases, partially offset by paydowns. The net cash provided by operating activities primarily reflected proceeds on sales and principal payments of loans held for sale, at fair value, partially offset by originations and purchases of loans held for sale, at fair value.
Collateralized borrowings under repurchase agreements
The following table presents the amount of collateralized borrowings outstanding under repurchase agreements as of the end of each quarter, the average amount of collateralized borrowings outstanding under repurchase agreements during the quarter and the highest balance of any month end during the quarter (dollars in thousands):
Year Ended December 31, 2020. The net increase in the outstanding balances during 2020 was primarily due to increased liquidity in the early half of 2020 due to uncertainty around COVID-19. Since then, borrowings under repurchases have reduced to normalized levels.
Year Ended December 31, 2019. The net increase in the outstanding balances during 2019 was primarily due to the increased loan origination and acquisition activity, resulting in a greater need to finance these assets through borrowings under repurchase agreements. These balances were partially paid down during the fourth quarter of 2019 using proceeds received from our securitization activities and equity issuances.
Year Ended December 31, 2018. The net increase in the outstanding balances during 2018 was primarily due to the increased loan and MBS investment activity, resulting in a greater need to finance these assets through borrowings under repurchase agreements. These balances are typically paid down as we securitize our acquired and originated loan assets and issue senior bonds.
Debt facilities
We maintain various forms of short-term and long-term financing arrangements. Borrowings underlying these arrangements are primarily secured by loans and investments. The following is a summary of our debt facilities:
(a) The current facility size is €200.0 million, but has been converted into USD for purposes of this disclosure.
(b) The weighted average interest rate of borrowings under credit facilities was 2.8% and 4.0% as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(c) The weighted average interest rate of borrowings under repurchase agreements was 3.3% and 4.2% as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Financing facilities
Deutsche Bank loan repurchase facility. Our subsidiaries, ReadyCap Commercial, LLC (“ReadyCap Commercial”), Sutherland Asset I, LLC (“Sutherland Asset I”), Ready Capital Subsidiary REIT I, LLC (“Ready Capital Sub-REIT”) and Sutherland Warehouse Trust II, LLC (“Sutherland Warehouse Trust II”) renewed their master repurchase agreement in January 2020, pursuant to which ReadyCap Commercial, Sutherland Asset I, Ready Capital Sub REIT and Sutherland Warehouse Trust II may be advanced an aggregate principal amount of up to $350 million on originated mortgage loans (the “DB Loan Repurchase Facility”). As of December 31, 2020, we had $190.6 million outstanding under the DB Loan Repurchase Facility. The DB Loan Repurchase Facility is used to finance SBC loans, and the interest rate is LIBOR plus a spread, which varies depending on the type and age of the loan. The DB Loan Repurchase Facility has been extended through November 2021 and our subsidiaries have an option to extend the DB Loan Repurchase Facility for an additional year, subject to certain conditions. ReadyCap Commercial’s, Sutherland Asset I’s, Ready Capital Sub REIT’s and Sutherland Warehouse Trust II’s obligations are fully guaranteed by us.
The eligible assets for the DB Loan Repurchase Facility are loans secured by a first mortgage lien on commercial properties subject to certain eligibility criteria, such as property type, geographical location, LTV ratios, debt yield and debt service coverage ratios. The principal amount paid by the bank for each mortgage loan is based on a percentage of the lesser of the mortgaged property value or the principal balance of such mortgage loan. ReadyCap Commercial, Sutherland Asset I, Ready Capital Sub REIT and Sutherland Warehouse Trust II paid the bank an up-front fee and are also required to pay the bank availability fees, and a minimum utilization fee for the DB Loan Repurchase Facility, as well as certain other administrative costs and expenses. The DB Loan Repurchase Facility also includes financial maintenance covenants, which include (i) an adjusted tangible net worth that does not decline by more than 25% in a quarter, 35% in a year or 50% from the highest adjusted tangible net worth, (ii) a minimum liquidity amount of the greater of (a) $5 million and (b) 3% of the sum of any outstanding recourse indebtedness plus the aggregate repurchase price of the mortgage loans on the Repurchase Agreement; provided however, that no less than two-thirds of the liquidity maintained by the Guarantor to satisfy this shall be cash liquidity, (iii) a debt-to-assets ratio no greater than 80% and (iv) a tangible net worth at least equal to the sum of (a) the product of 1/15 and the amount of all non-recourse indebtedness (excluding the aggregate repurchase price) and other securitization indebtedness and (b) the product of 1/3 and the sum of the aggregate repurchase price and all recourse indebtedness.
JPMorgan loan repurchase facility. Our subsidiaries, ReadyCap Warehouse Financing, LLC (“ReadyCap Warehouse Financing”) and Sutherland Warehouse Trust, LLC (“Sutherland Warehouse Trust”) entered into a master repurchase agreement in December 2015, pursuant to which ReadyCap Warehouse Financing and Sutherland Warehouse Trust, may sell, and later repurchase, mortgage loans in an aggregate principal amount of up to $400 million. As of October 2019, Ready Capital Mortgage Depositor II, LLC (“Ready Capital Mortgage Depositor II”) was added to the agreement. Our subsidiaries renewed their master repurchase agreement with JPMorgan in November 2020 (the “JPM Loan Repurchase Facility”). As of December 31, 2020, we had $247.6 million outstanding under the JPM Loan Repurchase Facility. The JPM Loan Repurchase Facility is used to finance commercial transitional loans, conventional commercial loans and commercial mezzanine loans and securities and the interest rate is LIBOR plus a spread, which is determined by the lender on an asset-by-asset basis. The JPM Loan Repurchase Facility is committed through November 2022, and up to 25% of the then current unpaid obligations of ReadyCap Warehouse Financing’s, Sutherland Warehouse Trust’s and Ready Capital Mortgage Depositor II, LLC Trust’s obligations are fully guaranteed by us.
The eligible assets for the JPM Loan Repurchase Facility are loans secured by first and junior mortgage liens on commercial properties and subject to approval by JPM as the Buyer. The principal amount paid by the bank for each mortgage loan is based on the principal balance of such mortgage loan. ReadyCap Warehouse Financing and Sutherland Warehouse Trust paid the bank a structuring fee and are also required to pay the bank unused fees for the JPM Loan Repurchase Facility, as well as certain other administrative costs and expenses. The JPM Loan Repurchase Facility also includes financial maintenance covenants, which include (i) total stockholders’ equity must not be permitted to be less than the sum of (a) 65% of total stockholders’ equity as of the most recent renewal date of the facility plus (b) 65% of the net proceeds of any equity issuance after the most recent renewal date (ii) maximum leverage of 3:1, excluding non-recourse indebtedness and (iii) liquidity equal to at least the lesser of (a) 5% of the sum of (without duplication) (1) any outstanding indebtedness plus (2) amounts due under the repurchase agreement and (b) $15.0 million.
Citibank loan repurchase agreement. Our subsidiaries, Waterfall Commercial Depositor, LLC, Sutherland Asset I, LLC, ReadyCap Commercial, LLC and Ready Capital Subsidiary REIT I,LLC renewed a master repurchase agreement in October 2020 with Citibank, N.A. (the "Citi Loan Repurchase Facility" and, together with the DB Loan Repurchase Facility and the JPM Loan Repurchase Facility, the "Loan Repurchase Facilities"), pursuant to where these subsidiaries may sell, and later repurchase, a trust certificate (the “Trust Certificate”), representing interests in mortgage loans in an aggregate principal amount of up to $500 million. As of December 31, 2020, we had $210.7 million outstanding under the Citi Loan Repurchase Facility. The Citi Loan Repurchase Facility is used to finance SBC loans, and the interest rate is one month LIBOR plus a spread, depending on asset characteristics. The Citi Loan Repurchase Facility is committed for a period of 364 days, and up to 25% of the then current unpaid obligations of Waterfall Commercial Depositor’s, Sutherland Asset I’s, Ready Capital Sub REIT’s and ReadyCap Commercial, LLC’s obligations are fully guaranteed by us.
The eligible assets for the Citi Loan Repurchase Facility are loans secured by a first mortgage lien on commercial properties, which, amongst other things, generally have a UPB of less than $10 million. The principal amount paid by the bank for the Trust Certificate is based on a percentage of the lesser of the market value or the UPB of such mortgage loans backing the Trust Certificate. Waterfall Commercial Depositor, Sutherland Asset I, ReadyCap Commercial, LLC and Ready Capital Sub REIT are required to pay the bank a commitment fee for the Citi Loan Repurchase Facility, as well as certain other administrative costs and expenses. The Citi Loan Repurchase Facility includes financial maintenance covenants, which include (i) our operating partnership’s net asset value not (A) declining more than 15% in any calendar month, (B) declining more than 25% in any calendar quarter, (C) declining more than 35% in any calendar year, or (D) declining more than 50% from our operating partnership’s highest net asset value set forth in any audited financial statement provided to the bank; (ii) our operating partnership maintaining liquidity in an amount equal to at least 1% of our outstanding indebtedness(excluding non-recourse liabilities in connection with any securitization transaction) of which no more than 20% could be Marketable Securities; and (iii) the ratio of our operating partnership’s total indebtedness (excluding non-recourse liabilities in connection with any securitization transaction) to our net asset value not exceeding 4:1 at any time.
Securities repurchase agreements. As of December 31, 2020, we had $178.7 million of secured borrowings related to SBC ABS and pledged Trust Certificates with four counterparties (lenders).
General statements regarding loan and securities repurchase facilities. At December 31, 2020, we had $837.4 million in fair value of Trust Certificates and loans pledged against our borrowings under the Loan Repurchase Facilities and $72.2 million in fair value of SBC ABS and short term investments pledged against our securities repurchase agreement borrowings.
Under the Loan Repurchase Facilities and securities repurchase agreements, we may be required to pledge additional assets to our counterparties in the event that the estimated fair value of the existing pledged collateral under such agreements declines and such lenders demand additional collateral, which may take the form of additional assets or cash. Generally, the Loan Repurchase Facilities and securities repurchase agreements contain a LIBOR-based financing rate, term and haircuts depending on the types of collateral and the counterparties involved.
If the estimated fair values of the assets increase due to changes in market interest rates or other market factors, lenders may release collateral back to us. Margin calls may result from a decline in the value of the investments securing the Loan Repurchase Facilities and securities repurchase agreements, prepayments on the loans securing such investments and from changes in the estimated fair value of such investments generally due to principal reduction of such investments from scheduled amortization and resulting from changes in market interest rates and other market factors. Counterparties also may choose to increase haircuts based on credit evaluations of our Company and/or the performance of the assets in question. Historically, disruptions in the financial and credit markets have resulted in increased volatility in these levels, and this volatility could persist as market conditions continue to change. Should prepayment speeds on the mortgages underlying our investments or market interest rates suddenly increase, margin calls on the Loan Repurchase Facilities and securities repurchase agreements could result, causing an adverse change in our liquidity position. To date, we have satisfied all of our margin calls and have never sold assets in response to any margin call under these borrowings.
Our borrowings under repurchase agreements are renewable at the discretion of our lenders and, as such, our ability to roll-over such borrowings is not guaranteed. The terms of the repurchase transaction borrowings under our repurchase agreements generally conform to the terms in the standard master repurchase agreement as published by the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association, as to repayment, margin requirements and the segregation of all assets we have initially sold under the repurchase transaction. In addition, each lender typically requires that we include supplemental
terms and conditions to the standard master repurchase agreement. Typical supplemental terms and conditions, which differ by lender, may include changes to the margin maintenance requirements, required haircuts and purchase price maintenance requirements, requirements that all controversies related to the repurchase agreement be litigated in a particular jurisdiction, and cross default and setoff provisions.
JPMorgan credit facility. We renewed our master loan and security agreement with JPMorgan in June 2020 providing for a credit facility of up to $200 million. As of December 31, 2020, we had $36.6 million outstanding under this credit facility. The credit facility is structured as a secured loan facility in which ReadyCap Lending and Sutherland 2016-1 JPM Grantor Trust act as borrowers. Under this facility, ReadyCap and Sutherland 2016-1 JPM Grantor Trust pledge loans guaranteed by the SBA under the SBA Section 7(a) Loan Program, SBA 504 loans and other loans which were part of the CIT loan acquisition. We act as a guarantor under this facility. The agreement contains financial maintenance covenants, which include (i) total stockholders’ equity must not be permitted to be less than the sum of (a) 60% of total stockholders’ equity as of the most recent renewal date of the facility plus (b) 50% of the net proceeds of any equity issuance after the most recent renewal date (ii) maximum leverage of 3:1, excluding non-recourse indebtedness and (iii) liquidity equal to at least the lesser of (a) 4% of the sum of (without duplication) (1) any outstanding recourse indebtedness plus (2) the aggregate amount of indebtedness outstanding under the agreement. The amended terms have an interest rate based on loan type ranging from one month LIBOR (reset daily), plus a spread. The term of the facility is one year.
At December 31, 2020, we had a leverage ratio of 2.2x on a recourse debt-to-equity basis.
We maintain certain assets, which, from time to time, may include cash, unpledged SBC loans, SBC ABS and short term investments (which may be subject to various haircuts if pledged as collateral to meet margin requirements) and collateral in excess of margin requirements held by our counterparties, or collectively, the “Cushion”, to meet routine margin calls and protect against unforeseen reductions in our borrowing capabilities. Our ability to meet future margin calls will be impacted by the Cushion, which varies based on the fair value of our investments, our cash position and margin requirements. Our cash position fluctuates based on the timing of our operating, investing and financing activities and is managed based on our anticipated cash needs. At December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all debt covenants.
East West Bank credit facility. Our subsidiary, ReadyCap Lending, LLC renewed a senior secured revolving credit facility with East West Bank in October 2020, which provides financing of up to $50.0 million. The agreement extends for two years, with an additional one year extension at the Company’s request and pays interest equal to the Prime Rate minus 0.821% on SBA 7(a) guaranteed loans and the Prime Rate plus 0.029% on unguaranteed loans. At December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all debt covenants.
Other credit facilities. GMFS funds its origination platform through warehouse lines of credit with five counterparties with total borrowings outstanding of $279.7 million at December 31, 2020. GMFS utilizes committed warehouse lines of credit agreements ranging from $50.0 million to $150.0 million, with expiration dates between March 2021 and September 2023. The lines of credit are collateralized by the underlying mortgages, related documents, and instruments, and contain a LIBOR-based financing rate and term, haircut and collateral posting provisions which depend on the types of collateral and the counterparties involved. These agreements contain covenants that include certain financial requirements, including maintenance of minimum liquidity, minimum tangible net worth, maximum debt to net worth ratio and current ratio and limitations on capital expenditures, indebtedness, distributions, transactions with affiliates and maintenance of positive net income, as defined in the agreements. We were in compliance with all significant debt covenants as of December 31, 2020.
Public debt offerings
Convertible notes. On August 9, 2017, we closed an underwritten public sale of $115.0 million aggregate principal amount of its 7.00% convertible senior notes due 2023 (the “Convertible Notes”). The Convertible Notes will mature on August 15, 2023, unless earlier repurchased, redeemed or converted. During certain periods and subject to certain conditions, the Convertible Notes will be convertible by holders into shares of our common stock. As of December 31, 2020, the conversion rate was 1.5994 shares of common stock per $25 principal amount of the Convertible Notes, which is equivalent to a conversion price of approximately $15.63 per share of common stock. Upon conversion, holders will receive, at our discretion, cash, shares of our common stock or a combination thereof.
We may redeem all or any portion of the Convertible Notes on or after August 15, 2021, if the last reported sale price of our common stock has been at least 120% of the conversion price in effect for at least 20 trading days (whether or not consecutive) during any 30 consecutive trading day period ending on, and including, the trading day immediately preceding the date on which we provide notice of redemption, at a redemption price payable in cash equal to 100% of the
principal amount of the Convertible Notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest. Additionally, upon the occurrence of certain corporate transactions, holders may require us to purchase the Convertible Notes for cash at a purchase price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the Convertible Notes to be purchased, plus accrued and unpaid interest.
As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all covenants with respect to the Convertible Notes.
Corporate debt. On April 27, 2018, we completed the public offer and sale of $50,000,000 aggregate principal amount of its 6.50% Senior Notes due 2021 (the “2021 Notes”). We issued the 2021 Notes under a base indenture, dated August 9, 2017, as supplemented by the second supplemental indenture, dated as of April 27, 2018, between us and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee. The 2021 Notes bear interest at a rate of 6.50% per annum, payable quarterly in arrears on January 30, April 30, July 30, and October 30 of each year, beginning on July 30, 2018. The 2021 Notes will mature on April 30, 2021, unless earlier redeemed or repurchased.
We may redeem for cash all or any portion of the 2021 Notes, at our option, on or after April 30, 2019 and before April 30, 2020 at a redemption price equal to 101% of the principal amount of the 2021 Notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the redemption date. On or after April 30, 2020, we may redeem for cash all or any portion of the 2021 Notes, at our option, at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the 2021 Notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the redemption date. If we undergo a change of control repurchase event, holders may require it to purchase the 2021 Notes, in whole or in part, for cash at a repurchase price equal to 101% of the aggregate principal amount of the 2021 Notes to be purchased, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but excluding, the date of repurchase, as described in greater detail in the Indenture. On February 24, 2021, we announced our intention to redeem all of the outstanding 2021 Notes. The redemption date is March 26, 2021 and the redemption price is 100% of the principal amount of the 2021 Notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the redemption date.
The 2021 Notes are our senior direct unsecured obligations and will not be guaranteed by any of its subsidiaries, except to the extent described in the Indenture upon the occurrence of certain events. The 2021 Notes rank equal in right of payment to any of our existing and future unsecured and unsubordinated indebtedness; effectively junior in right of payment to any of its existing and future secured indebtedness to the extent of the value of the assets securing such indebtedness; and structurally junior to all existing and future indebtedness, other liabilities (including trade payables) and (to the extent not held by us) preferred stock, if any, of its subsidiaries.
On July 22, 2019, we completed the public offer and sale of $57.5 million aggregate principal amount of its 6.20% Senior Notes due 2026 (the “2026 Notes” and together with the 2021 Notes, the “Corporate Debt”), which includes $7.5 million aggregate principal amount of the 2026 Notes relating to the full exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option. The net proceeds from the sale of the 2026 Notes are approximately $55.3 million, after deducting underwriters’ discount and estimated offering expenses. We will contribute the net proceeds to Sutherland Partners, L.P. (the “Operating Partnership”), its operating partnership subsidiary, in exchange for the issuance by the Operating Partnership of a senior unsecured note with terms that are substantially equivalent to the terms of the 2026 Notes. The Operating Partnership intends to use the net proceeds to originate or acquire our target assets and for general business purposes.
The 2026 Notes bear interest at a rate of 6.20% per annum, payable quarterly in arrears on January 30, April 30, July 30, and October 30 of each year, beginning on October 30, 2019. The 2026 Notes will mature on July 30, 2026, unless earlier repurchased or redeemed.
We may redeem for cash all or any portion of the 2026 Notes, at its option, on or after July 30, 2022 and before July 30, 2025 at a redemption price equal to 101% of the principal amount of the 2026 Notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the redemption date. On or after July 30, 2025, we may redeem for cash all or any portion of the 2026 Notes, at its option, at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the 2026 Notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the redemption date. If we undergo a change of control repurchase event, holders may require it to purchase the 2026 Notes, in whole or in part, for cash at a repurchase price equal to 101% of the aggregate principal amount of the 2026 Notes to be purchased, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but excluding, the date of repurchase, as described in greater detail in the Indenture.
The 2026 Notes are our senior unsecured obligations and will not be guaranteed by any of its subsidiaries, except to the extent described in the Indenture upon the occurrence of certain events. The 2026 Notes rank equal in right of payment to any of our existing and future unsecured and unsubordinated indebtedness; effectively junior in right of payment to any of its existing and future secured indebtedness to the extent of the value of the assets securing such indebtedness; and structurally junior to all existing and future indebtedness, other liabilities (including trade payables) and (to the extent not held by us) preferred stock, if any, of its subsidiaries.
On December 2, 2019, we completed the public offer and sale of $45.0 million aggregate principal amount of the 2026 Notes. The new notes have the same terms (expect with respect to issue date, issue price and the date from which interest will accrue) as, are fully fungible with and are treated as a single series of debt securities as, the 6.20% Senior Notes due 2026 we issued on July 22, 2019.
As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all covenants with respect to the corporate debt.
Subsequent to December 31, 2020, we completed the issuance of a public offering of $201.25 million in 5.75% senior notes due 2026 on February 10, 2021. We intend to use the net proceeds from the offering to redeem all of the outstanding 2021 Notes, as described above. We intend to use the remainder of the net proceeds for general business purposes, including to fund our small balance commercial origination and acquisition pipelines.
Public equity offerings
In December 2019, we completed a public offering of 6,000,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $15.30 per share and an additional 900,000 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $15.30 per share pursuant to the underwriter’s full exercise of the over-allotment option in January 2020. Proceeds, net of offering costs and expenses were $ 91.8 million and $13.8 million for December 2019 and January 2020, respectively. There were no equity offerings during 2020.
Other long term financing
ReadyCap Holdings’ 7.50% senior secured notes due 2022. During 2017, ReadyCap Holdings LLC, a subsidiary of the Company, issued $140.0 million in 7.50% Senior Secured Notes due 2022. On January 30, 2018, ReadyCap Holdings LLC, issued an additional $40.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 7.50% Senior Secured Notes due 2022, which have identical terms (other than issue date and issue price) to the notes issued during 2017 (collectively “the Senior Secured Notes”). The additional $40.0 million in Senior Secured Notes were priced with a yield to par call date of 6.5%. Payments of the amounts due on the Senior Secured Notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed by the Company and its subsidiaries: Sutherland Partners LP, Sutherland Asset I, LLC, and ReadyCap Commercial. The funds were used to fund new SBC and SBA loan originations and new SBC loan acquisitions.
The Senior Secured Notes bear interest at 7.50% per annum payable semiannually on each February 15 and August 15, beginning on August 15, 2017. The Senior Secured Notes will mature on February 15, 2022, unless redeemed or repurchased prior to such date. ReadyCap Holdings may redeem the Senior Secured Notes prior to November 15, 2021, at its option, in whole or in part at any time and from time to time, at a price equal to 100% of the outstanding principal amount thereof, plus the applicable “make-whole” premium as of, and unpaid interest, if any, accrued to, the redemption date. On and after November 15, 2021, ReadyCap Holdings may redeem the Senior Secured Notes, at its option, in whole or in part at any time and from time to time, at a price equal to 100% of the outstanding principal amount thereof plus unpaid interest, if any, accrued to the redemption date.
ReadyCap Holdings’ and the Guarantors’ respective obligations under the Senior Secured Notes and the Guarantees are secured by a perfected first-priority lien on the capital stock of ReadyCap Holdings and ReadyCap Commercial and certain other assets owned by certain of our Company’s subsidiaries as described in greater detail in our Current Report on Form 8-K filed on June 15, 2017. The Senior Secured Notes were issued pursuant to an indenture (the "Indenture") and a first supplemental indenture (the "First Supplemental Indenture"), which contains covenants that, among other things: (i) limit the ability of our Company and its subsidiaries (including ReadyCap Holdings and the other Guarantors) to incur additional indebtedness; (ii) require that our Company maintain, on a consolidated basis, quarterly compliance with the applicable consolidated recourse indebtedness to equity ratio of our Company and consolidated indebtedness to equity ratio of our Company and specified ratios of our Company’s stockholders’ equity to aggregate principal amount of the outstanding Senior Secured Notes and our Company's consolidated unencumbered assets to aggregate principal amount of the outstanding Senior Secured Notes; (iii) limit the ability of ReadyCap Holdings and ReadyCap Commercial to pay
dividends or distributions on, or redeem or repurchase, the capital stock of ReadyCap Holdings or ReadyCap Commercial; (iv) limit (1) ReadyCap's Holdings ability to create or incur any lien on the collateral and (2) unless the Senior Secured Notes are equally and ratably secured, (a) ReadyCap's Holdings ability to create or incur any lien on the capital stock of its wholly-owned subsidiary, ReadyCap Lending and (b) ReadyCap's Holdings ability to permit ReadyCap Lending to create or incur any lien on its assets to secure indebtedness of its affiliates other than its subsidiaries or any securitization entity; and (v) limit ReadyCap Holding's and the Guarantors' ability to consolidate, merge or transfer all or substantially all of ReadyCap' Holdings and the Guarantors’ respective properties and assets. The First Supplemental Indenture also requires that our Company ensure that the Replaceable Collateral Value (as defined therein) is not less than the aggregate principal amount of the Senior Secured Notes outstanding as of the last day of each of our Company's fiscal quarters.
As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all covenants with respect to the Senior Secured Notes.
Securitization transactions
Our Manager’s extensive experience in loan acquisition, origination, servicing and securitization strategies has enabled us to complete several securitizations of SBC and SBA loan assets since January 2011. These securitizations allow us to match fund the SBC and SBA loans on a long-term, non-recourse basis. The assets pledged as collateral for these securitizations were contributed from our portfolio of assets. By contributing these SBC and SBA assets to the various securitizations, these transactions created capacity for us to fund other investments.
The following table presents information on the securitization structures and related issued tranches of notes to investors:
We used the proceeds from the sale of the tranches issued to purchase and originate SBC and SBA loans. We are the primary beneficiary of all firm sponsored securitizations, therefore they are consolidated in our financial statements.
Contractual Obligations and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The following table provides a summary of our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
The table above does not include amounts due under our management agreement or derivative agreements as those contracts do not have fixed and determinable payments. As of the date of this annual report on Form 10-K, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP, which requires the use of estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We believe that all of the decisions and assessments upon which our financial statements are based were reasonable at the time made, based upon information available to us at that time. The following discussion describes the critical accounting estimates that apply to our operations and require complex management judgment. This summary should be read in conjunction with our accounting policies and use of estimates included in “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, Note 3 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” in this annual report on Form 10-K.
Allowance for credit losses
The allowance for credit losses consists of the allowance for losses on loans and lending commitments accounted for at amortized cost. Such loans and lending commitments are reviewed quarterly considering credit quality indicators, including probable and historical losses, collateral values, loan-to-value (“LTV”) ratio and economic conditions. The allowance for credit losses increases through provisions charged to earnings and reduced by charge-offs, net of recoveries.
On January 1, 2020, the Company adopted ASU No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses, and subsequent amendments (“ASU 2016-13”), which replaces the incurred loss methodology with an expected loss model known as the Current Expected Credit Loss ("CECL") model. CECL amends the previous credit loss model to reflect a reporting entity's current estimate of all expected credit losses, not only based on historical experience and current conditions, but also by including reasonable and supportable forecasts incorporating forward-looking information. The measurement of expected credit losses under CECL is applicable to financial assets measured at amortized cost. The allowance for credit losses required under ASU 2016-13 is deducted from the respective loans’ amortized cost basis on our consolidated balance sheets. The guidance also requires a cumulative-effect adjustment to retained earnings as of the beginning of the reporting period of adoption.
In connection with the Company’s adoption of ASU 2016-13 on January 1, 2020, the Company implemented new processes including the utilization of loan loss forecasting models, updates to the Company’s reserve policy documentation, changes to internal reporting processes and related internal controls. The Company has implemented loan loss forecasting models for estimating expected life-time credit losses, at the individual loan level, for its loan portfolio. The CECL forecasting methods used by the Company include (i) a probability of default and loss given default method using underlying third-party CMBS/CRE loan database with historical loan losses from 1998 to 2019 and (ii) probability weighted expected cash flow method, depending on the type of loan and the availability of relevant historical market loan loss data. The Company might use other acceptable alternative approaches in the future depending on, among other factors, the type of loan, underlying collateral, and availability of relevant historical market loan loss data.
The Company estimates the CECL expected credit losses for its loan portfolio at the individual loan level. Significant inputs to the Company’s forecasting methods include (i) key loan-specific inputs such as LTV, vintage year, loan-term, underlying property type, occupancy, geographic location, and others, and (ii) a macro-economic forecast. These estimates may change in future periods based on available future macro-economic data and might result in a material change in the Company’s future estimates of expected credit losses for its loan portfolio.
In certain instances, the Company considers relevant loan-specific qualitative factors to certain loans to estimate its CECL expected credit losses. The Company considers loan investments that are both (i) expected to be substantially repaid through the operation or sale of the underlying collateral, and (ii) for which the borrower is experiencing financial difficulty, to be “collateral-dependent” loans. For such loans that the Company determines that foreclosure of the collateral is probable, the Company measures the expected losses based on the difference between the fair value of the collateral and the amortized cost basis of the loan as of the measurement date. For collateral-dependent loans that the Company determines foreclosure is not probable, the Company applies a practical expedient to estimate expected losses using the difference between the collateral’s fair value (less costs to sell the asset if repayment is expected through the sale of the collateral) and the amortized cost basis of the loan.
While we have a formal methodology to determine the adequate and appropriate level of the allowance for credit losses, estimates of inherent loan losses involve judgment and assumptions as to various factors, including current economic conditions. Our determination of adequacy of the allowance for credit losses is based on quarterly evaluations of the above factors. Accordingly, the provision for loan losses will vary from period to period based on management's ongoing assessment of the adequacy of the allowance for credit losses.
Significant judgment is required when evaluating loans for impairment; therefore, actual results over time could be materially different. Refer to “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, Note 6 - Loans and Allowance for Credit Losses” included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” in this annual report on Form 10-K for results of our loan impairment evaluation.
Valuation of financial assets and liabilities carried at fair value
We measure our MBS, derivative assets and liabilities, residential mortgage servicing rights, and any assets or liabilities where we have elected the fair value option at fair value, including certain loans we have originated that are expected to be sold to third parties or securitized in the near term.
We have established valuation processes and procedures designed so that fair value measurements are appropriate and reliable, that they are based on observable inputs where possible, and that valuation approaches are consistently applied and the assumptions and inputs are reasonable. We also have established processes to provide that the valuation methodologies, techniques and approaches for investments that are categorized within Level 3 of the ASC 820 Fair Value Measurement fair value hierarchy (the “fair value hierarchy”) are fair, consistent and verifiable. Our processes provide a framework that ensures the oversight of our fair value methodologies, techniques, validation procedures, and results.
When actively quoted observable prices are not available, we either use implied pricing from similar assets and liabilities or valuation models based on net present values of estimated future cash flows, adjusted as appropriate for liquidity, credit, market and/or other risk factors. Refer to “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, Note 7 - Fair Value Measurements” included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” in this annual report on Form 10-K for a more complete discussion of our critical accounting estimates as they pertain to fair value measurements.
Servicing rights impairment
Servicing rights, at amortized cost, are initially recorded at fair value and subsequently carried at amortized cost. We have elected the fair value option on our residential mortgage servicing rights, which are not subject to impairment.
For purposes of testing our servicing rights, carried at amortized cost, for impairment, we first determine whether facts and circumstances exist that would suggest the carrying value of the servicing asset is not recoverable. If so, we then compare the net present value of servicing cash flow with its carrying value. The estimated net present value of servicing cash flows of the intangibles is determined using discounted cash flow modeling techniques which require management to make estimates regarding future net servicing cash flows, taking into consideration historical and forecasted loan prepayment rates, delinquency rates and anticipated maturity defaults. If the carrying value of the servicing rights exceeds the net present value of servicing cash flows, the servicing rights are considered impaired and an impairment loss is recognized in earnings for the amount by which carrying value exceeds the net present value of servicing cash flows. We monitor the actual performance of our servicing rights by regularly comparing actual cash flow, credit, and prepayment experience to modeled estimates.
Significant judgment is required when evaluating servicing rights for impairment; therefore, actual results over time could be materially different. Refer to “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, Note 9 - Servicing Rights” included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” in this annual report on Form 10-K for a more complete discussion of our critical accounting estimates as they pertain to servicing rights impairment.
Refer to “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, Note 4- Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements” included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” in this annual report on Form 10-K for a discussion of recent accounting developments and the expected impact to the Company.
Inflation. Virtually all of our assets and liabilities are and will be interest rate sensitive in nature. As a result, interest rates and other factors influence our performance far more than does inflation. Changes in interest rates do not necessarily correlate with inflation rates or changes in inflation rates. Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP and our activities and balance sheet shall be measured with reference to historical cost and/or fair market value without considering inflation.