ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including but not limited to those set forth in “Part I - Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
Overview
Recruiter.com Group, Inc. (“Recruiter.com,” “we.” “the Company,” “us”) is an on-demand recruiting platform aimed to disrupt the $120 billion recruiting and staffing industry. Recruiter.com combines an online hiring platform with the world’s largest network of over 28,000 small and independent recruiters. Businesses of all sizes recruit talent faster using the Recruiter.com platform, which is powered by virtual teams of Recruiters On Demand and Video and AI job-matching technology.
Our website, www.Recruiter.com, provides access to over 28,000 recruiters and utilizes an innovative web platform, with integrated AI-driven candidate to job matching and video screening software to more easily and quickly source qualified talent.
We help businesses accelerate and streamline their recruiting and hiring processes by providing on-demand recruiting services and technology. We leverage our expert network of recruiters to place recruiters on a project basis, aided by cutting edge artificial intelligence-based candidate sourcing, matching and video screening technologies. We operate a cloud-based scalable SaaS-enabled marketplace platform for professional hiring, which provides prospective employers access to a network of thousands of independent recruiters from across the country and worldwide, with a diverse talent sourcing skillset that includes information technology, accounting, finance, sales, marketing, operations and healthcare specializations.
Our mission is to grow our most collaborative and connective global platform to connect recruiters and employers and become the preferred solution for hiring specialized talent.
We generate revenue from the following activities:
● Consulting and Staffing: Consists of providing consulting and staffing personnel services to employers to satisfy their demand for long- and short-term consulting and temporary employee needs. We generate revenue by first referring qualified personnel for the employer’s specific talent needs, then placing that personnel with the employer, but with us or our providers acting as the employer of record, and finally, billing the employer for the time and work of our placed personnel on an ongoing basis. Our process for finding candidates for consulting and staffing engagements largely mirrors our process for fulltime placement hiring. This process includes employers informing us of open consulting and temporary staffing opportunities and projects, sourcing qualified candidates through our Platform and other similar means, and, finally, the employer selecting our candidates for placement after a process of review and selection. We bill these employer clients for our placed candidates’ ongoing work at an agreed-upon, time-based rate, typically on a weekly schedule of invoicing.
● Fulltime Placement: Consists of providing referrals of qualified candidates to employers to hire staff for full-time positions. We generate fulltime placement revenue by earning one-time fees for each time that employers hire one of the candidates that we refer. Employers alert us of their hiring needs through our Platform or other communications. We source qualified candidate referrals for the employers’ available jobs through independent recruiter users that access our Platform and other tools. We support and supplement the independent recruiters’ efforts with dedicated internal employees we call our internal talent delivery team. Our talent delivery team selects and delivers candidate profiles and resumes to our employer clients for their review and ultimate selection. Upon the employer hiring one or more of our candidate referrals, we earn a “fulltime placement fee”, an amount separately negotiated with each employer client. The full-time placement fee is typically either a percentage of the referred candidates’ first year’s base salary or an agreed-upon flat fee.
● Recruiters on Demand: Consists of a consulting and staffing service specifically for the placement of professional recruiters, which we market as Recruiters on Demand. Recruiters on Demand is a flexible, time-based solution that provides businesses of all sizes access to recruiters on an outsourced, virtual basis for help with their hiring needs. As with other consulting and staffing solutions, we procure for our employer clients qualified professional recruiters, and then place them on assignment with our employer clients. Revenue earned through Recruiters on Demand is derived by billing the employer clients for the placed recruiters’ ongoing work at an agreed-upon, time-based rate. We directly source recruiter candidates from our network of recruiters on the Platform, as the recruiter user base of our Platform has the proper skill-set for recruiting and hiring projects. We had previously referred to this service in our revenue disaggregation disclosure in our consolidated financial statements as license and other, but on July 1, 2020, we rebranded as Recruiters on Demand.
● Career Solutions: We provide services to assist job seekers with their career advancement. These services include a resume distribution service which involves promoting these job seekers’ profiles and resumes to assist with their procuring employment and upskilling and training. Our resume distribution service allows a job seeker to upload his/her resume to our database, which we then distribute to our network of recruiters on the Platform. We earn revenue from a one-time flat fee for this service. We also offer a recruiter certification program which encompasses our recruitment related training content, which we make accessible through our online learning management system. Customers of the recruiter certification program use a self-managed system to navigate through a digital course of study. Upon completion of the program, we issue a certificate of completion and make available a digital badge to certify their achievement for display on their online recruiter profile on the Platform. For approximately the four months following March 31, 2020, the Company provided the recruiter certification program free in response to COVID-19. We partner with Careerdash, a high-quality training company, to provide Recruiter.com Academy, an immersive training experience for career changers.
● Marketplace Solutions: Our “Marketing Solutions” allow companies to promote their unique brands on our website, the Platform, and our other business-related content and communication. This is accomplished through various forms of online advertising, including sponsorship of digital newsletters, online content promotion, social media distribution, banner advertising, and other branded electronic communications, such as in our quarterly digital publication on recruiting trends and issues. Customers who purchase our Marketplace Solutions typically specialize in B2B software and other platform companies that focus on recruitment and human Resources processing. We earn revenue as we complete agreed upon marketing related deliverables and milestones using pricing and terms set by mutual agreement with the customer. In addition to its work with direct clients, the Company categorizes all online advertising and affiliate marketing revenue as Marketplace Solutions.
The costs of our revenue primarily consist of employee costs, third-party staffing costs and other fees, outsourced recruiter fees and net margin revenue share.
Our results of operations and financial condition may be impacted positively and negatively by certain general macroeconomic and industry wide conditions, such as the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. The consequences of the pandemic and impact on the U.S. and global economies continue to evolve and the full extent of the impact is uncertain as of the date of this filing. The pandemic has had a detrimental effect on many recruitment technology companies and on the general employment and staffing industry. If the recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic is not robust, the impact could be prolonged and severe. We have reduced certain billing rates to respond to the current economic climate. Additionally, while we have experienced, and could continue to experience, a loss of clients as the result of the pandemic, we expect that the impact of such attrition would be mitigated by the addition of new clients resulting from our continued efforts to adjust the Company’s operations to meet the demands of the greater recruitment industry. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will impact our operations, ability to obtain financing or future financial results is uncertain at this time. As a result of COVID-19, the Company took steps to streamline certain expenses, including temporarily cutting certain executive compensation packages by approximately 20%. Management also worked to reduce unnecessary marketing expenditures and worked to improve staff and human capital expenditures, while maintaining overall workforce levels. The Company expects but cannot guarantee that demand for its recruiting solutions will improve in 2021, as certain clients re-open or accelerate their hiring initiatives, and new clients utilize our services. The Company does not expect reductions made in Q2 2020 due to COVID-19 to inhibit its ability to meet client demand. Overall, management is focused on effectively positioning the Company for a rebound in hiring, which we expect to occur in 2021. Ultimately, the recovery may be delayed, and the economic conditions may worsen. The Company continues to closely monitor the confidence of its recruiter users and customers, and their respective job requirement load through offline discussions and the Company’s Recruiter Index survey, which surveys recruiters’ sentiment on the job market and demand for recruiting services.
2020 Business Update
Our focus during 2020 comprised many areas to help improve our organizational structure, financial position, and corporate governance. Additionally, we continued investing and partnering to expand our service offerings and client and candidate reach. We also supplemented our internal efforts with a focus on acquisitions to help add scale, management talent and technology. All the while, we shared our progress with media outreach and a focused investor relations effort.
Key Highlights include:
Corporate Organization
● Achieved 27,752 recruiters on the Platform as of December 31, 2020;
● Continued build-out and enhancement of our executive team with the hiring of Evan Sohn, Chairman of the Board, as CEO and Judy Krandel as CFO, while effectively transitioning Miles Jennings to COO;
● Expanded the Board of Directors with the appointment of Deborah Leff, former Global leader and Industry CTO of Data Science and AI for IBM;
● Held a special meeting of shareholders and enacted the reincorporation of the Company’s domicile to Nevada from Delaware and increased the authorized shares from 31,250,000 to 250,000,000.
Additionally, effective May 28, 2020, we entered into Securities Purchase Agreements with several accredited investors and sold to the Purchasers a total of (i) $2,953,125 in the aggregate principal amount of 12.5% Original Issue Discount Senior Subordinated Secured Convertible Debentures, and (ii) 1,845,703 common stock purchase warrants, which represents 100% warrant coverage. The Company received a total of $2,226,000 in net proceeds from the offering, after deducting the 12.5% original issue discount of $328,125, offering expenses and commissions, including the placement agent’s commission and fees of $295,000, reimbursement of the placement agent’s and lead investor’s legal fees and the Company’s legal fees in the aggregate amount of $100,000 and escrow agent fees of $4,000. The Company also agreed to issue to the placement agent, as additional compensation, 369,141 common stock purchase warrants exercisable at $2.00 per share. The Debentures mature on May 28, 2021, subject to a six-month extension at the Company’s option. The Debentures bear interest at 8% per annum payable quarterly, subject to an increase in case of an event of default as provided for therein. The Debentures are convertible into shares of Common Stock at any time following the date of issuance at the Purchasers’ option at a conversion price of $1.60 per share, subject to certain adjustments. The Debentures are subject to mandatory conversion in the event the Company closes an equity offering of at least $5,000,000 resulting in the listing of the Company’s common stock on a national securities exchange. The Debentures rank senior to all existing and future indebtedness of the Company and its subsidiaries, except for approximately $77,040 of outstanding senior indebtedness. The Company may prepay the Debentures at any time at a premium as provided for therein. The Warrants are exercisable for three years from May 28, 2020 at an exercise price of $2.00 per share, subject to certain adjustments.
Investment and Expansion of Offerings
● Integrated advanced artificial intelligence (AI) powered candidate sourcing technology to create what we believe is the first platform in the world to offer recruiters access to both jobs and AI-matched candidates;
● Announced the launch of Recruiter.com’s Job Market Platform on the SAP App Center, the digital marketplace for SAP partner offerings;
● Launched Recruiters on Demand solution, offering clients the flexible hiring of recruiters to augment hiring efforts and secured notable clients;
● Launched a new on-demand Video Screening Platform that offers rapid recording and scalable management of candidate video resumes;
● Competed a significant upgrade to our software platform to improve our design, infrastructure and usability while integrating video and artificial intelligence technology and virtual teams of on-demand recruiter;
● Integrated the Recruiter.com Job Market Platform with the ADP digital marketplace
● Achieved a first milestone of growing a large client account to placing approximately 100 people on-site;
Partnerships/Acquisitions
Since December 31, 2019, we entered into the following partnerships or made the following acquisitions:
● Entered into a binding letter of intent to acquire OneWire, Inc., a leading SaaS-based recruiting and software platform focused on the financial services sector;
● Formed a strategic partnership with Beeline, a global leader in software solutions for managing the extended workforce, to bring to market a unique, diversity-focused network of recruiters to Beeline customers;
● Formed a partnership with DVBE Connect, an award winning, disabled veteran-owned recruiting and staffing company, to build a curated on-demand team of veteran recruiters;
● Delivered innovative recruiting solutions for the healthcare industry by partnering with hospitals and leading healthcare recruiting companies to work to fill many registered nursing positions.
Media
● Throughout 2020, appeared on CNBC on multiple occasions to discuss results of the Recruiter Index, Recruiter.com’s proprietary survey of recruiter sentiment on the job market and hiring and recruiting demand. Most recently, Evan Sohn appeared on CNBC on February 7, 2021 to discuss the conditions of the job market.
● Engaged in effective public relations campaigns, which included multiple appearances in cable news television broadcasts, including Bloomberg.
Results of Operations.
Revenue
Our revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $8,502,892 compared to $5,997,987 for the prior year representing an increase of $2,504,905 or 41.8%. This increase resulted primarily from the acquisition in March 2019 of certain assets and business from Genesys, now housed within the Company’s Recruiting Solutions division. The Company’s Consulting and Staffing businesses also began to show sequential growth from the third to the fourth quarter as we benefitted from efforts to grow existing relationships as well as build new customers in the health care, and mortgage finance industries. We also had an increase in our Recruiters on Demand business due to beginning work with new customers, some of which we acquired through the hiring of a key employee, on July 1, 2020 and others we developed internally. We also experienced growth in our Career Solutions business through a sales channel partner, as general job market conditions were favorable for the product. Offsetting our growth was a decline in marketing revenue as we continued to shift internal resources to focus on our core on-demand recruiting and recruiting technology business. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will impact our revenue in the subsequent future periods is uncertain at this time.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $6,138,363, which included related party costs of $1,363,905, compared to $4,448,202 in the prior year which included related party costs of $2,082,367. Cost of revenue was primarily attributable to third party staffing costs and other fees related to the recruitment and staffing business acquired from Genesys Talent, LLC (“Genesys”), (currently the Company’s Recruiting Solutions division).
Our gross profit for 2020 was $2,364,529 which produced a gross profit of 27.8%. In 2019 our gross profit was $1,549,785 which produced a gross profit margin of 25.8%. The increase in the gross profit margin from 2019 to 2020 reflects in part the shift in the mix in sales for the year as our Permanent Placement, Recruiters on Demand and Career Services revenue, which have higher gross margins than our Consulting and Staffing revenue, represented a larger percentage of our total revenue. Additionally, we experienced a higher gross margin in our Consulting and Staffing business year over year as we focused on growing business with clients that yielded higher gross margins and retained more business as the employer of record which yields higher gross margins.
Operating Expenses
We had total operating expenses of $9,102,792 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $12,053,967 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a $3 million non-cash impairment expense in 2019 related to the March 2019 Asset Purchase. Declines in sales and marketing and general and administrative expense were offset by increases in product development expense and the amortization of intangibles.
Sales and Marketing
Our sales and marketing expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $82,904 compared to $119,597 for the prior year, which reflected more conservative spending given COVID-19 and the uncertain financial and political environment.
Product Development
Our product development expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased to $299,512 from $203,400 for the prior year. This increase is attributable to the continued investment in our product offerings. The product development expense in 2020 included approximately $235,444 paid to Recruiter.com Mauritius, a related party. In 2019, product development expense included $181,400 paid to Recruiter.com Mauritius.
Amortization of Intangibles and Impairment Expense
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred a non-cash amortization charge of $686,691 related to the intangible assets acquired from Genesys, now the Company’s Recruiting Solutions division, and the cost of acquiring customer contracts on July 1, 2020 for our Recruiters on Demand business. For 2019 we incurred an amortization charge of $477,518. We began to record amortization expense for the Genesys asset acquisition starting in the fourth quarter of 2019 when the purchase allocation was finalized. Following our annual goodwill impairment test as of December 31, 2019, we recorded a non-cash goodwill impairment charge of approximately $3,000,000, primarily due to the market capitalization of the Company’s Common Stock. We also recorded approximately $113,000 of software impairment in 2019.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense include compensation-related costs for our employees dedicated to general and administrative activities, legal fees, audit and tax fees, consultants and professional services, and general corporate expenses. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our general and administrative expenses were $8,033,685 including $3,212,772 of non-cash stock-based compensation. In 2019, our general and administrative expense was $8,140,432, including $4,643,127 of non-cash stock-based compensation. The increase in general and administrative expense excluding stock-based compensation was due in part to expenses related to a full year of business in 2020 versus a partial year in 2019 due to the merger in March 2019. Additionally, we had an increase in salaries, software, insurance, filing and investor relations fees building our infrastructure to support future growth of our business.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of net expense of $10,298,574 compared to net expense of $1,339,331 in 2019. The primary reason for the increase of $8,959,243 is due to non-cash charges of $3,340,554 from an initial derivative expense and $2,642,175 from a change in derivative value due to anti-dilution adjustments. Additionally, we had a non-cash charge of $2,658,261 due to a change in the fair value of derivative liability from our outstanding warrants issued in 2019. As our common stock price increases, we incur an expense and contrarily if our common stock decreases, we recognize other income. We also had interest expense of $2,022,113 which is primarily related to note discount amortization and note debt cost amortization from our convertible note financing completed in May and June of 2020. We did recognize income of $376,177 from the forgiveness of Payroll Protection Program debt.
Net loss
In 2020, we incurred a net loss of $17,036,837 compared to $11,843,513 in 2019. After taking into account the accrued preferred stock dividends, we incurred a net loss attributable to shareholders of $17,036,837 in 2020 compared to $11,953,207 in 2019.
Definition of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The following discussion and analysis includes both financial measures in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles, or GAAP, as well as non-GAAP financial measures. Generally, a non-GAAP financial measure is a numerical measure of a company’s performance, financial position or cash flows that either excludes or includes amounts that are not normally included or excluded in the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP. Non-GAAP financial measures should be viewed as supplemental to, and should not be considered as alternatives to net income, operating income, and cash flow from operating activities, liquidity or any other financial measures. They may not be indicative of the historical operating results of Recruiter nor are they intended to be predictive of potential future results. Investors should not consider non-GAAP financial measures in isolation or as substitutes for performance measures calculated in accordance with GAAP.
Our management uses and relies on EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, which are non-GAAP financial measures. We believe that both management and shareholders benefit from referring to the following non-GAAP financial measures in planning, forecasting and analyzing future periods. Our management uses these non-GAAP financial measures in evaluating its financial and operational decision making and as a means to evaluate period-to-period comparison. Our management recognizes that the non-GAAP financial measures have inherent limitations because of the described excluded items.
Recruiter defines Adjusted EBITDA as earnings (or loss) from continuing operations before the items in the table below. Adjusted EBITDA is an important measure of our operating performance because it allows management, investors and analysts to evaluate and assess our core operating results from period-to-period after removing the impact of items of a non-operational nature that affect comparability.
We have included a reconciliation of our non-GAAP financial measures to the most comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP. We believe that providing the non-GAAP financial measures, together with the reconciliation to GAAP, helps investors make comparisons between the Company and other companies. In making any comparisons to other companies, investors need to be aware that companies use different non-GAAP measures to evaluate their financial performance. Investors should pay close attention to the specific definition being used and to the reconciliation between such measure and the corresponding GAAP measure provided by each company under applicable SEC rules.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net loss to Adjusted EBITDA:
$2,238,314 of penalties from covenant breaches are included as part of interest expense and finance cost in 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $2,526,155, compared to net cash used in operating activities of $1,390,858 for 2019. The increase in cash used in operating activities was attributable to a full year of operations and the growth and investments in our business following the March 31, 2019 Asset Purchase offset by non-cash charges.
For 2020, cash used in investing activities was $32,991 principally due to cash paid to acquire customer contracts, compared to $80,739 of cash provided by investing activities in 2019. The principal driver in 2019 were the sale of marketable securities and proceeds from an asset sale.
In 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $2,352,800. The principal factor was $2,476,000 from the sale of convertible notes offset by repayments of other debt. In 2019, net cash provided by financing activities was $1,602,219. The principal factors were $979,997 from the sale of preferred stock, a $500,000 refundable deposit on the purchase of preferred stock and $424,510 generated by the sale of future receivables, offset by a $215,000 repayment of preferred stock deposit and $105,034 in repayment of notes.
Based on cash on hand as of March 4, 2021 of approximately $1,063,000, the Company does not have the capital resources to meet its working capital needs for the next 12 months.
The Company’s consolidated financial statements are prepared using generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America applicable to a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. The Company has incurred net losses and negative operating cash flows since inception. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a net loss of $17,036,837. The Company has not yet established an ongoing source of revenue that is sufficient to cover its operating costs and allow it to continue as a going concern. The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent on the Company obtaining adequate capital to fund operating losses until it becomes profitable.
The Company’s historical operating results indicate substantial doubt exists related to the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. We can give no assurances that any additional capital that we are able to obtain, if any, will be sufficient to meet our needs, or that any such financing will be obtainable on acceptable terms. If we are unable to obtain adequate capital, we could be forced to cease operations or substantially curtail our commercial activities. These conditions raise substantial doubt as to our ability to continue as a going concern. The accompanying consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts and classification of liabilities should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
To date, private equity offerings have been our primary source of liquidity and we expect to fund future operations through additional securities offerings. We have also entered into arrangements with factoring companies to receive advances against certain future accounts receivable in order to supplement our liquidity. The COVID-19 pandemic has affected the Company’s ability to receive advances against its future accounts receivable as discussed in more detail below.
Financing Arrangements
Merchant Receivables Purchase and Security Agreements
The Company and its subsidiaries are parties to a Merchant Receivables Purchase and Security Agreement, dated December 6, 2019 (the “First Receivables Purchase Agreement”), with Change Capital Holdings I, LLC (“Change Capital”) and a Merchant Receivables Purchase and Security Agreement, dated December 16, 2019, with Change Capital (the “Second Receivables Purchase Agreement” and together with the First Receivables Purchase Agreement, the “Receivables Purchase Agreements”). Pursuant to the Receivables Purchase Agreements, Change Capital has agreed to advance a total of $450,000 in cash (the “Purchase Price”) and the Company and its subsidiaries agreed to pay Change Capital in equal weekly installments over the course of 52 weeks an amount of approximately $567,000 (the “Specified Amount”), which amount includes the fees payable by the Company under the Receivables Purchase Agreements. As long as no default has occurred under the Receivables Purchase Agreements, the Company has the right to pay the remaining balance of the Specified Amount to Change Capital prior to the due date at a total cost of 3% of the Purchase Price per month. Pursuant to the Receivables Purchase Agreements, the Company and the subsidiaries party to the Receivables Purchase Agreements also granted to Change Capital a security interest in all their assets now owned or acquired in the future. In May 2020, the Receivables Purchase Agreements were amended to limit the outstanding principal amount to $408,777 payable as two payments of $5,452 weekly, plus any default fees, late fees, legal fees and expenses and any other costs or expenses incurred in enforcing Change Capital’s rights under the Receivables Purchase Agreements. The Receivables Purchase Agreements contain covenants which limit the Company’s ability to enter into any secured financing agreements without the prior written consent of Change Capital. The transactions pursuant to the Receivables Purchase Agreements have been accounted for as “Sale of Future Revenues.” As of December 31, 2020, our outstanding balance with Change Capital was $10,904. As of January 8, 2021 the outstanding balance was $0 and there are no other payments or fees owed under the Receivables Purchase Agreements. The Company does not anticipate receiving any additional advances under the Receivables Purchase Agreements.
Agreement with Qwil PBC
A wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company was also a party to a receivables financing agreement with Qwil PBC, entered into in January 2020, that provided advances against the collection of accounts receivable. Advances made under the agreement were generally repayable in 45 days from the date of the advance and carried interest at 1.5% per month. In April 2020, Qwil informed the Company that it would not be able to advance additional funds pursuant to this arrangement due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. In May 2020, the Company negotiated a more favorable repayment plan with Qwil PBC, which consisted of payments of approximately $7,903 bi-weekly through August 14, 2020 and a weekly payment of $7,903 from August 21, 2020 through September 18, 2020, without additional interest. As of December 31, 2020, our outstanding balance with Qwil PBC was $0.
The advances received pursuant to the arrangements with Change Capital and Qwil were carried as liabilities on our balance sheet and the accounts receivable remained on our books until collected.
Term Loans
We have outstanding balances of $77,040 and $103,800 pursuant to two term loans as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively, which mature in 2023. The loans have variable interest rates, with current rates at 6.0% and 7.76%, respectively. Current monthly payments under the loans are $1,691 and $1,008, respectively.
Paycheck Protection Program Loan
During April and May 2020 the Company, through its four subsidiaries, received an aggregate of $398,545 in loans borrowed from a bank pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program under the CARES Act guaranteed by the SBA, which we expect to be forgiven in part or in full, subject to our compliance with the conditions of the Paycheck Protection Program. If not forgiven, the terms on the note provide for interest at 1% per year and the note mature in 24 months, with 18 monthly payments beginning after the initial 6 month deferral period for payments. We have applied for forgiveness for all loans. As of December 31, 2020 $373,795 of loans have been forgiven and the balance of $24,750 was forgiven subsequently. We have classified the remaining balance of $24,750 as long term at December 31, 2020. We recorded forgiveness of debt income of $376,177 for the $373,795 of principal and $2,382 of related accrued interest forgiven in 2020.
Senior Subordinated Secured Convertible Debentures
In May and June 2020, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement, effective May 28, 2020 (the “Purchase Agreement”) with several accredited investors (the “Purchasers”). Four of the investors had previously invested in the Company’s preferred stock. Pursuant to the Purchase Agreement, the Company sold to the Purchasers a total of (i) $2,953,125 in the aggregate principal amount of 12.5% Original Issue Discount Senior Subordinated Secured Convertible Debentures (the “Debentures”), and (ii) 1,845,703 common stock purchase warrants (the “Warrants”), which represents 100% warrant coverage. The Company received a total of $2,226,000 in net proceeds from the offering, after deducting the 12.5% original issue discount of $328,125, offering expenses and commissions, including the placement agent’s commission and fees of $295,000 and reimbursement of the placement agent’s and lead investor’s legal fees and the Company’s legal fees in the aggregate amount of $100,000 and escrow agent fees of $4,000. The Company also agreed to issue to the placement agent, as additional compensation, 369,141 common stock purchase warrants exercisable at $2.00 per share.
The Debentures mature on May 28, 2021, subject to a six-month extension at the Company’s option. The Debentures bear interest at 8% per annum payable quarterly, subject to an increase in case of an event of default as provided for therein. The Debentures are convertible into shares of the Company’s common stock at any time following the date of issuance at the purchasers’ option at a conversion price of $1.60 per share, subject to certain adjustments. The Debentures are subject to mandatory conversion in the event the Company closes an equity offering of at least $5,000,000 resulting in the listing of the Company’s common stock on a national securities exchange. The Debentures rank senior to all existing and future indebtedness of the Company and its subsidiaries, except for approximately $508,000 of outstanding senior indebtedness. The Company may prepay the Debentures at any time at a premium as provided for therein.
The Company’s obligations under the Debentures are secured by a first priority lien on all of the assets of the Company and its subsidiaries, subject to certain existing senior liens. The Company’s obligations under the Debentures are guaranteed by the Company’s subsidiaries.
The Securities Purchase Agreement for the Debentures and Warrants contains customary representations, warranties and covenants of the Company, including, among other things and subject to certain exceptions, covenants that restrict the ability of the Company and its subsidiaries, without the prior written consent of the Debenture holders, to incur additional indebtedness, including further advances under a certain preexisting secured loan, and repay outstanding indebtedness, create or permit liens on assets, repurchase stock, pay dividends or enter into transactions with affiliates. The Debentures contain customary events of default, including, but not limited to, failure to observe covenants under the Debentures, defaults on other specified indebtedness, loss of admission to trading on OTCQB or another applicable trading market, and occurrence of certain change of control events. Upon the occurrence of an event of default, an amount equal to 130% of the principal, accrued but unpaid interest, and other amounts owing under each Debenture will immediately come due and payable at the election of each Purchaser, and all amounts due under the Debentures will bear interest at an increased rate.
On January 5, 2021, Recruiter.com Group, Inc. (the “Company”) entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement, effective January 5, 2021 (the “Purchase Agreement”), with two accredited investors (the “Purchasers”). Pursuant to the Purchase Agreement, the Company agreed to sell to the Purchasers a total of (i) $562,500 in the aggregate principal amount of 12.5% Original Issue Discount Senior Subordinated Secured Convertible Debentures (the “Debentures”), and (ii) 351,562 common stock purchase warrants (the “Warrants”), which represents 100% warrant coverage. The Company received a total of $500,000 in gross proceeds from the offering, taking into account the 12.5% original issue discount, before deducting offering expenses and commissions, including the placement agent’s commission of $50,000 (10% of the gross proceeds) and fees related to the offering of the Debentures of approximately $40,000. The Company also agreed to issue to the placement agent, as additional compensation, 70,313 common stock purchase warrants exercisable at $2.00 per share (the “PA Warrants”). Joseph Gunnar& Co. LLC acted as placement agent for the offering of the Debentures.
On January 20, 2021, Recruiter.com Group, Inc. (the “Company”) entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement, (the “Purchase Agreement”) with eighteen accredited investors (the “Purchasers”). Pursuant to the Purchase Agreement, the Company agreed to sell to the Purchasers a total of (i) $2,236,500 in the aggregate principal amount of 12.5% Original Issue Discount Senior Subordinated Secured Convertible Debentures (the “Debentures”), and (ii) 1,397,813 common stock purchase warrants (the “Warrants”), which represents 100% warrant coverage. Joseph Gunnar & Co. LLC (“Gunner”) acted as placement agent for the offering of the Debentures. The Company received a total of $1,988,000 in gross proceeds from the offering, taking into account the 12.5% original issue discount, before deducting offering expenses and commissions, including Gunner’s commission of $191,270 (10% of the gross proceeds minus $7,500 paid to Gunner’s counsel) and additional fees related to the offering of the Debentures of approximately $50,500. The Company also agreed to issue to Gunner, as additional compensation, 279,563 common stock purchase warrants exercisable at $2.00 per share (the “PA Warrants”).
The Debentures mature on January 5th and January 20th, 2022 respectively, subject to a six-month extension at the Company’s option. The Debentures bear interest at 8% per annum payable quarterly, subject to an increase in case of an event of default as provided for therein. The Debentures are convertible into shares of the Company’s common stock (the “Common Stock”) at any time following the date of issuance at the Purchasers’ option at a conversion price of $1.60 per share, subject to certain adjustments. The Debentures are subject to mandatory conversion in the event the Company closes an equity offering of at least $5,000,000 resulting in the listing of the Common Stock on a national securities exchange. The Debentures rank senior to all existing and future indebtedness of the Company and its subsidiaries, except for approximately $95,000 of outstanding senior indebtedness. In addition the Debentures rank pari-passu with, and amounts owing thereunder shall be paid concurrently with, payments owing pursuant to and in connection with that certain offering by the Company of 12.5% Original Issue Discount Senior Subordinated Secured Convertible Debentures due May 28, 2021 consummated in May and June 2020 in the aggregate principal amount of $2,953,125. The Company may prepay the Debentures at any time at a premium as provided for therein.
The Warrants are exercisable for three years from January 5th and January 20th, 2021 respectively at an exercise price of $2.00 per share, subject to certain adjustments.
The Company’s obligations under the Purchase Agreement and the Debentures are secured by a first priority lien on all of the assets of the Company and its subsidiaries pursuant to a Security Agreement, dated January 5th and January 20th, 2021 respectively (the “Security Agreement”) by and among the Company, its wholly-owned subsidiaries, and the Purchasers, subject to certain existing senior liens. The Company’s obligations under the Debentures are guaranteed by the Company’s subsidiaries.
The Purchase Agreement contains customary representations, warranties and covenants of the Company, including, among other things and subject to certain exceptions, covenants that restrict the ability of the Company and its subsidiaries, without the prior written consent of the Debenture holders, to incur additional indebtedness, including further advances under a certain preexisting secured loan, and repay outstanding indebtedness, create or permit liens on assets, repurchase stock, pay dividends or enter into transactions with affiliates. The Debentures contain customary events of default, including, but not limited to, failure to observe covenants under the Debentures, defaults on other specified indebtedness, loss of admission to trading on OTCQB or another applicable trading market, and occurrence of certain change of control events. Upon the occurrence of an event of default, an amount equal to 130% of the principal, accrued but unpaid interest, and other amounts owing under each Debenture will immediately come due and payable at the election of each Purchaser, and all amounts due under the Debentures will bear interest at an increased rate.
Pursuant to the Purchase Agreement, the Purchasers have certain participation rights in future equity offerings by the Company or any of its subsidiaries after the closing, subject to customary exceptions. The Debentures and the Warrants also contain certain price protection provisions providing for adjustment of the number of shares of Common Stock issuable upon conversion of the Debentures and/or exercise of the Warrants and the conversion or exercise price in case of future dilutive offerings.
In order to meet our working capital needs for the next 12 months, we expect to finance our operations through additional debt or equity offerings. We may not be able to complete these or any other financing transactions on terms acceptable to the Company, or at all. Additionally, any future sales of securities to finance our operations will likely dilute existing shareholders’ ownership. The Company cannot guarantee when or if it will generate positive cash flow. If we are unable to raise sufficient capital to fund our operations, it is likely that we will be forced to reduce or cease operations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.
Critical Accounting Estimates and Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results and outcomes may differ from management’s estimates and assumptions. Included in these estimates are assumptions used to estimate collection of accounts receivable, fair value of available for sale securities, fair value of assets acquired in an asset acquisition and the estimated useful life of assets acquired, fair value of derivative liabilities, fair value of securities issued for acquisitions, fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in the business combination, fair value of intangible assets and goodwill, valuation of lease liabilities and related right of use assets, deferred income tax asset valuation allowances, and valuation of stock based compensation expense.
Revenue Recognition
Policy
The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”), Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”). Revenues are recognized when control is transferred to customers in amounts that reflect the consideration the Company expects to be entitled to receive in exchange for those goods. Revenue recognition is evaluated through the following five steps: (i) identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer; (ii) identification of the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determination of the transaction price; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognition of revenue when or as a performance obligation is satisfied.
We generate revenue from the following activities:
● Consulting and Staffing: Consists of providing consulting and staffing personnel services to employers to satisfy their demand for long- and short-term consulting and temporary employee needs. We generate revenue by first referring qualified personnel for the employer’s specific talent needs, then placing that personnel with the employer, but with us or our providers acting as the employer of record, and finally, billing the employer for the time and work of our placed personnel on an ongoing basis. Our process for finding candidates for consulting and staffing engagements largely mirrors our process for fulltime placement hiring. This process includes employers informing us of open consulting and temporary staffing opportunities and projects, sourcing qualified candidates through the Platform and other similar means, and, finally, the employer selecting our candidates for placement after a process of review and selection. We bill these employer clients for our placed candidates’ ongoing work at an agreed-upon, time-based rate, typically on a weekly schedule of invoicing.
● Fulltime Placement: Consists of providing referrals of qualified candidates to employers to hire staff for full-time positions. We generate fulltime placement revenue by earning one-time fees for each time that employers hire one of the candidates that we refer. Employers alert us of their hiring needs through our Platform or other communications. We source qualified candidate referrals for the employers’ available jobs through independent recruiter users that access our Platform and other tools. We support and supplement the independent recruiters’ efforts with dedicated internal employees we call our internal talent delivery team. Our talent delivery team selects and delivers candidate profiles and resumes to our employer clients for their review and ultimate selection. Upon the employer hiring one or more of our candidate referrals, we earn a “fulltime placement fee”, an amount separately negotiated with each employer client. The full-time placement fee is typically either a percentage of the referred candidates’ first year’s base salary or an agreed-upon flat fee.
● Recruiters on Demand: Consists of a consulting and staffing service specifically for the placement of professional recruiters, which we market as Recruiters on Demand. Recruiters on Demand is a flexible, time-based solution that provides businesses of all sizes access to recruiters on an outsourced, virtual basis for help with their hiring needs. As with other consulting and staffing solutions, we procure for our employer clients qualified professional recruiters, and then place them on assignment with our employer clients. Revenue earned through Recruiters on Demand is derived by billing the employer clients for the placed recruiters’ ongoing work at an agreed-upon, time-based rate. We directly source recruiter candidates from our network of recruiters on the Platform, as the recruiter user base of our Platform has the proper skill-set for recruiting and hiring projects. We had previously referred to this service in our revenue disaggregation disclosure in our consolidated financial statements as license and other, but on July 1, 2020, we rebranded as Recruiters on Demand.
● Career Solutions: We provide services to assist job seekers with their career advancement. These services include a resume distribution service which involves promoting these job seekers’ profiles and resumes to assist with their procuring employment and upskilling and training. Our resume distribution service allows a job seeker to upload his/her resume to our database, which we then distribute to our network of recruiters on the Platform. We earn revenue from a one-time flat fee for this service. We also offer a recruiter certification program which encompasses our recruitment related training content, which we make accessible through our online learning management system. Customers of the recruiter certification program use a self-managed system to navigate through a digital course of study. Upon completion of the program, we issue a certificate of completion and make available a digital badge to certify their achievement for display on their online recruiter profile on the Platform. For approximately the four months following March 31, 2020, the Company provided the recruiter certification program free in response to COVID-19. We partner with Careerdash, a high-quality training company, to provide Recruiter.com Academy, an immersive training experience for career changers.
● Marketplace Solutions: Our “Marketplace Solutions” allow companies to promote their unique brands on our website, the Platform, and our other business-related content and communication. This is accomplished through various forms of online advertising, including sponsorship of digital newsletters, online content promotion, social media distribution, banner advertising, and other branded electronic communications, such as in our quarterly digital publication on recruiting trends and issues. Customers who purchase our Marketing Solutions typically specialize in B2B software and other platform companies that focus on recruitment and human resources processing. We earn revenue as we complete agreed upon marketing related deliverables and milestones using pricing and terms set by mutual agreement with the customer. In addition to its work with direct clients, the Company categorizes all online advertising and affiliate marketing revenue as Marketplace Solutions.
We have a sales team and sales partnerships with direct employers as well as Vendor Management System companies and Managed Service companies that help create sales channels for clients that buy staffing, direct hire, and sourcing services. Once we have secured the relationship and contract with the interested Enterprise customer the delivery and product teams will provide the service to fulfil any or all of the revenue segments.
Revenues as presented on the statement of operations represent services rendered to customers less sales adjustments and allowances.
Consulting and Staffing Services revenues represent services rendered to customers less sales adjustments and allowances. Reimbursements, including those related to travel and out-of-pocket expenses, are also included in the net service revenues and equivalent amounts of reimbursable expenses are included in costs of revenue. We record substantially all revenue on a gross basis as a principal versus on a net basis as an agent in the presentation of this line of revenues and expenses. We have concluded that gross reporting is appropriate because we have the task of identifying and hiring qualified employees, and our discretion to select the employees and establish their compensation and duties causes us to bear the risk for services that are not fully paid for by customers. Consulting and staffing revenues are recognized when the services are rendered by the temporary employees. Payroll and related taxes of certain employees that are placed on temporary assignment are outsourced to third party payors or related party payors. The payors pay all related costs of employment for these employees, including workers’ compensation insurance, state and federal unemployment taxes, social security and certain fringe benefits. We assume the risk of acceptability of the employees to customers. Payments for consulting and staffing services are typically due within 90 days of completion of services.
Full time placement revenues are recognized on a gross basis when the guarantee period specified in each customer’s contract expires. No fees for direct hire placement services are charged to the employment candidates. Any payments received prior to the expiration of the guarantee period are recorded as a deferred revenue liability. Payments for recruitment services are typically due within 90 days of completion of services.
Recruiters on Demand services are billed to clients as either monthly subscriptions or time-based billings. Revenues for Recruiters on Demand are recognized on a gross basis when each monthly subscription service is completed.
Career services revenues are recognized on a gross basis upon distribution of resumes or completion of training courses, which is the point at which the performance obligations are satisfied. Payments for career services are typically due upon distribution or completion of services.
Marketplace Solutions revenues are recognized either on a gross basis when the advertising is placed and displayed or when lead generation activities and online publications are completed, which is the point at which the performance obligations are satisfied. Payments for marketing and publishing are typically due within 30 days of completion of services.
Deferred revenue results from transactions in which the Company has been paid for services by customers, but for which all revenue recognition criteria have not yet been met. Once all revenue recognition criteria have been met, the deferred revenues are recognized.
Sales tax collected is recorded on a net basis and is excluded from revenue.
Goodwill
Goodwill is comprised of the purchase price of business combinations in excess of the fair value assigned at acquisition to the net tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired. Goodwill is not amortized. The Company tests goodwill for impairment for its reporting units on an annual basis, or when events occur or circumstances indicate the fair value of a reporting unit is below its carrying value.
The Company performs its annual goodwill and impairment assessment on December 31st of each year.
Long-lived assets
Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the book value of the asset may not be recoverable. The Company periodically evaluates whether events and circumstances have occurred that indicate possible impairment. When impairment indicators exist, the Company estimates the future undiscounted net cash flows of the related asset or asset group over the remaining life of the asset in measuring whether or not the asset values are recoverable.
Derivative Instruments
The Company’s derivative financial instruments consist of derivatives related to the warrants issued with the sale of our preferred stock in 2020 and 2019 and the warrants issued with the sale of convertible notes in 2020 and subsequently in January 2021. The accounting treatment of derivative financial instruments requires that we record the derivatives at their fair values as of the inception date of the debt agreements and at fair value as of each subsequent balance sheet date. Any change in fair value is recorded as non-operating, non-cash income or expense at each balance sheet date. If the fair value of the derivatives was higher at the subsequent balance sheet date, we recorded a non-operating, non-cash charge. If the fair value of the derivatives was lower at the subsequent balance sheet date, we recorded non-operating, non-cash income.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company accounts for all stock-based payment awards made to employees, directors and others based on their fair values and recognizes such awards as compensation expense over the vesting period for employees or service period for non-employees using the straight-line method over the requisite service period for each award as required by FASB ASC Topic No. 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation. If there are any modifications or cancellations of the underlying vested or unvested stock-based awards, we may be required to accelerate, increase or cancel any remaining unearned stock-based compensation expense, or record additional expense for vested stock-based awards. Future stock-based compensation expense and unearned stock- based compensation may increase to the extent we grant additional stock options or other stock-based awards.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
There have not been any recent changes in accounting pronouncements and ASU issued by the FASB that are of significance or potential significance to the Company except as disclosed below.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, “Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes.” This guidance, among other provisions, eliminates certain exceptions to existing guidance related to the approach for intraperiod tax allocation, the methodology for calculating income taxes in an interim period and the recognition of deferred tax liabilities for outside basis differences. This guidance also requires an entity to reflect the effect of an enacted change in tax laws or rates in its effective income tax rate in the first interim period that includes the enactment date of the new legislation, aligning the timing of recognition of the effects from enacted tax law changes on the effective income tax rate with the effects on deferred income tax assets and liabilities. Under existing guidance, an entity recognizes the effects of the enacted tax law change on the effective income tax rate in the period that includes the effective date of the tax law. ASU 2019-12 is effective for interim and annual periods beginning after December 15, 2020, with early adoption permitted. We are currently evaluating the impact of this guidance.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, including statements regarding management’s beliefs with respect to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, the expected launch of the AI-sourced candidate matching on the Recruiter.com Platform, the anticipated benefits to our clients from the recruitment services that we provide, our plans with respect to continued growth of our network of recruiters and methods of growing such network, expansion of existing client relationships, growing our client base through strategic partnerships, investment in new products and features to help recruiters on the Recruiter.com Platform grow their business, investment of future development of our technology, development of tailored features and functionalities to customize client experience, potential future acquisitions, our beliefs regarding the possibility of emerging future direct competitors, expected future expenditures on marketing efforts, our expectation regarding the timing and expected effect of the Company’s changing its state of incorporation from Delaware to Nevada, the expected future characterization of the small and independent recruiters on the Recruiter.com Platform as independent contractors, expected future increase in competition, expected future fluctuations in our stock price, our beliefs with respect to the adequacy of our facilities and our ability to accommodate any future expansion, our plans with respect to payment of dividends, our expectations for the recovery of the recruitment industry in 2021, the timing of the software rollout resulting from integration with Censia, our expected decrease in future revenues and increase in the net loss, future capital-raising activity, expected forgiveness of the loans received under the Paycheck Protection Program, and liquidity. The words “believe,” “may,” “estimate,” “continue,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “should,” “plan,” “could,” “target,” “potential,” “is likely,” “will,” “expect” and similar expressions, as they relate to us, are intended to identify forward-looking statements. We have based these forward-looking statements largely on our current expectations and projections about future events and financial trends that we believe may affect our financial condition, results of operations, business strategy and financial needs. These forward-looking statements are subject to a number of risks, uncertainties and assumptions, including without limitation, the following:
● our ability to continue as a going concern;
● our ability to raise additional capital to support our operations;
● the effect of COVID-19 on our Company and the national and global economies;
● our ability to achieve positive cash flow from operations;
● continued demand for services of recruiters;
● unanticipated costs, liabilities, charges or expenses resulting from violations of covenants under our existing or future financing agreements;
● our ability to operate the Recruiter.com Platform free of security breaches; and
● our ability to identify suitable complimentary businesses and assets as potential acquisition targets or strategic partners, and to successfully integrate such businesses and /or assets with the Company’s business.
See “Part I - Item 1A. Risk Factors” for additional information regarding the risks and uncertainties that could affect our business, financial condition and results of operations. New risk factors emerge from time-to-time and it is not possible for us to predict all such risk factors, nor can we assess the impact of all such risk factors on our business or the extent to which any risk factor, or combination of risk factors, may cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements. Except as otherwise required by applicable laws, we undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements or the risk factors described in this Annual Report, whether as a result of new information, future events, changed circumstances or any other reason after the date of this Annual Report.