Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with “Item 6. Selected Financial Data” and our financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion and other parts of this report contain forward-looking statements that involve risk and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations, and intentions. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the section of this report titled “Risk Factors.”
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on creating best-in-class cancer therapies. Our initial focus has been on well-characterized biological pathways with significant scientific data supporting their importance. We have built a robust and highly efficient drug discovery capability to create highly differentiated small molecules, which we have the ability to develop in combinations with our monoclonal antibodies through rationally designed, indication-specific clinical trial designs. Our vision is to create, develop and commercialize highly differentiated combination cancer therapies.
We currently have four investigational products in clinical development. In 2020, we entered into an Option, License and Collaboration Agreement (Gilead Collaboration Agreement) with Gilead Sciences, Inc. (Gilead), whereby Gilead obtained rights to zimberelimab and a time-limited exclusive option to all of our current and future programs during the 10-year collaboration term. For each program to which Gilead exercises their option, the parties will co-develop globally and co-commercialize in the U.S., subject to certain exceptions, and Gilead will have the right to commercialize the program outside of the United States, subject to the rights of our existing partners to certain territories. In 2017, we entered into an Option and License Agreement (Taiho Agreement) with Taiho Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. (Taiho) pursuant to which Taiho has a time-limited option to exclusively license the development and commercialization rights to each of our programs for Japan and certain other territories in Asia (excluding China). To date, Taiho has exercised their option rights to our adenosine receptor antagonist program (including etrumadenant) and our anti-PD-1 program (including zimberelimab).
Domvanalimab (formerly referred to as AB154), our anti-TIGIT monoclonal antibody, is being evaluated in combination with zimberelimab with or without etrumadenant vs. zimberelimab monotherapy in ARC-7, our randomized Phase 2 trial in first-line metastatic PD-L1≥50% non-small cell lung cancer. In February 2021, we initiated ARC-10, our first registrational trial evaluating domvanalimab in combination with zimberelimab and zimberelimab monotherapy vs. chemotherapy in this same setting.
Etrumadenant (formerly referred to as AB928), our small molecule dual A2a/A2b adenosine receptor antagonist, is being evaluated by us in several randomized or Phase 2 trials across major tumor types, including in our ARC-4, ARC-6, ARC-7, and ARC-9 studies, as well as in two randomized Phase 1b/2 trials being conducted by Genentech (the Morpheus trials).
AB680, our small-molecule CD73 inhibitor, is being evaluated in a Phase 1/1b study for the treatment of first-line metastatic pancreatic cancer (ARC-8) as well as late-line metastatic prostate cancer (ARC-6).
Zimberelimab (formerly referred to as AB122), our anti-PD-1 monoclonal antibody, is the cornerstone of our combination strategy. We are currently evaluating zimberelimab, either alone or in combination with other agents across several tumor types, including non-small cell lung cancer in ARC-7, our Phase 2 trial, and ARC-10, our recently initiated registrational trial which is designed to support the approval of zimberelimab.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The degree to which COVID-19 impacts our business operations, research and development programs and financial condition will depend on future developments, including the ultimate duration and/or severity of the outbreak, the impact of any resurgences and new strains that emerge, actions by government authorities to contain the spread of the virus, the timing, availability and effectiveness of any vaccines, and when and to what extent normal economic and operating conditions can resume. Our management continues to actively monitor this health crisis and its effects on our operations, key vendors and workforce.
We conduct our clinical trials in the U.S. and internationally in geographic regions that are impacted by COVID-19 to varying degrees. While we have seen relatively robust enrollment across our ongoing Arcus-sponsored studies,
we expect to see volatility as local governments respond to resurgences and the emergence of new strains, each of which may result in the prolonged reinstitution, extension or enhancement of shelter-in-place measures. The American Cancer Society has also reported that the pandemic has led to declines in screening, diagnosis and treatment for cancer patients, which will impact the enrollment of patients in clinical trials targeting early stage cancers and retention of patients overall in our trials. Patient safety remains our paramount concern and we continue to collaborate with our existing and with new investigational sites to implement measures to minimize disruptions to patients and ensure continued access to treatment, in accordance with health authority guidance. We are unable to predict the full impact of this pandemic on our clinical programs.
With respect to manufacturing and supply, we believe we currently have sufficient drug supply for our ongoing clinical studies. Our third-party contract manufacturers continue to operate at or near normal levels and, at this time and subject to further COVID-19 implications, we do not anticipate any disruptions to our drug supply chain.
Our discovery programs were impacted by the suspension in our laboratory-based operations from mid-March to late June. Despite the return of our laboratory-based personnel back into our facilities, our laboratories are operating at reduced capacity due to employee safety measures, such as social distancing requirements and shift work. This has delayed the advancement of one of two preclinical programs that we had expected would enter the clinic in the first quarter of 2021. We expect a clinical trial for the first of these programs, AB308, our FcR-enabled anti-TIGIT antibody, to begin shortly; however, the pandemic has delayed the second of these programs until the second half of 2021.
The full impact of the COVID-19 outbreak remains highly uncertain and subject to change. In connection with our resumption of laboratory operations, we instituted regular COVID-19 testing services in order to minimize the risk to our employees. These additional operating costs, along with the absence of any furlough or measures to reduce personnel costs despite reduced laboratory capacity, will have a negative impact on our operations and financial condition. We do not expect the forward impact will be material due to adjustments in operations that we have made. However, there are many uncertainties around the COVID pandemic and future developments, which are unpredictable, may result in a material, negative impact to our operations and financial condition.
Financial Overview
Since commencing operations in 2015, we have devoted substantially all of our efforts and financial resources to building our research and development capabilities, advancing our investigational product pipeline, and establishing our corporate infrastructure.
To date, we have derived all of our revenue from non-refundable payments we received under the option and license agreements we entered into with Taiho Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. (the Taiho Agreement) and Gilead Sciences, Inc. (the Gilead Agreements). We have not generated any revenue from product sales and we have never had a profitable fiscal year. We have incurred net losses since the commencement of our operations. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $328.2 million. We incurred a net loss of $122.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. We do not expect to generate revenue from product sales unless and until we obtain regulatory marketing approval and commercially launch a product candidate. We cannot assure you that we will ever generate significant revenue or profits.
Through December 31, 2020, we have financed our operations primarily through net proceeds of approximately $677 million from equity offerings and proceeds of approximately $421 million from our collaboration agreements. As of December 31, 2020, we had $735.1 million of cash, cash equivalents and investments. In February 2021 we raised an additional $220.4 million from the sale to Gilead of 5,650,000 shares of our common stock. We believe our cash, cash equivalents and investments will be sufficient to fund our planned operations through 2023. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we expect.
We expect to incur substantial expenditures in the foreseeable future as we expand our pipeline and advance our investigational products through clinical development, the regulatory approval process and, if approved, commercial launch activities. Specifically, in the near term we expect to incur substantial expenses relating to our ongoing and planned clinical trials, the development and validation of our manufacturing processes, and other preclinical, research and discovery development activities.
We have no internal manufacturing facilities, and thus all of our manufacturing activities are contracted to third parties. We currently utilize third-party clinical research organizations to manage and execute various aspects of our clinical development and trials.
We will need substantial additional funding to support our continuing operations and pursue our development strategy. Until such time that we can generate significant revenue from sales of our product candidates, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through the sale of equity, debt financings or other capital sources, including existing or potential collaborations with other companies or other strategic transactions. Adequate funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. If we fail to raise capital or enter into such agreements as, and when, needed, we may have to significantly delay, scale back, or discontinue the development and commercialization of our product candidates or delay our efforts to expand our product pipeline.
Gilead Collaboration
On May 27, 2020, we entered into the Gilead Collaboration Agreement, a Common Stock Purchase Agreement (the Stock Purchase Agreement), and an Investor Rights Agreement, (collectively, the Gilead Agreements), each with Gilead. The transaction closed on July 13, 2020 following expiration of the antitrust waiting period. Upon closing, Gilead made an upfront payment of $175 million pursuant to the Gilead Collaboration Agreement, Gilead made an equity investment of approximately $200 million in us by purchasing 5,963,029 shares of our common stock at a per share price of $33.54 pursuant to the Stock Purchase Agreement. Gilead made an additional equity investment in us of approximately $56.7 million, net of offering costs, by purchasing 2,200,000 shares of our common stock at a per share price of $27.50 in our May 2020 Public Offering. We also appointed Gilead’s designees, Merdad Parsey, M.D., Ph.D. and Michael Quigley, Ph.D., to our Board of Directors pursuant to the Investor Rights Agreement.
Pursuant to the terms of the Gilead Collaboration Agreement, Gilead has an exclusive license to develop and commercialize zimberelimab in certain markets and obtained exclusive options to acquire an exclusive license to develop and commercialize all of our current and future clinical programs during the 10-year collaboration term, contingent upon Gilead’s payment of $400 million, with the first payment of $100 million in 2022 and an additional $100 million payment due at Gilead’s option on each of the fourth, sixth, and eighth anniversaries of the agreement. For those programs that enter clinical development prior to the end of the collaboration term, Gilead’s option rights will extend for up to an additional three years thereafter. Gilead may exercise its option, on a program-by-program basis, upon payment of an option fee that ranges from $200 million to $275 million per program for our clinical programs in existence at the date of the agreement, and $150 million per program for all other programs that enter clinical development thereafter. If Gilead exercises its option with respect to our TIGIT program, we are also eligible to receive up to $500 million in potential U.S. regulatory approval milestones with respect to domvanalimab.
Upon Gilead’s exercise of its option to a program, the two companies will co-develop and equally share global development costs, subject to certain of our opt-out rights, and expense caps on our spending and related subsequent adjustments. For each optioned program, provided we have not exercised our opt-out rights, we have an option to co-promote in the United States with equal sharing of related profits and losses. Gilead has the right to exclusively commercialize any optioned programs outside of the U.S., subject to the rights of our existing partners to any territories, and Gilead will pay to us tiered royalties as a percentage of revenues ranging from the high teens to the low twenties.
Pursuant to the Stock Purchase Agreement and the Investor Rights Agreement, Gilead has the right, at its option, to purchase additional shares from us, up to a maximum ownership of 35% of our then-outstanding voting common stock, from time to time over the next five years, at a purchase price equal to the greater of a 20% premium to market (based on a trailing five-day average closing price) at the time Gilead exercises such option, and the $33.54 initial purchase price. The Investor Rights Agreement also includes a three-year standstill and a two-year lockup and provides Gilead with registration rights commencing at the end of the lockup period, pro rata participation rights in certain future financings and the right to designate two individuals to be appointed to our Board of Directors.
On January 31, 2021, we and Gilead entered into an Amended and Restated Common Stock Purchase Agreement, which amended and restated in its entirety the Common Stock Purchase Agreement, pursuant to which Gilead purchased from us 5,650,000 shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $39.00 per share. All other terms of the original Common Stock Purchase Agreement, including Gilead’s option to purchase additional shares from us, up to a maximum ownership of 35% of our then-outstanding common stock, remain unchanged.
AstraZeneca Agreement
On October 29, 2020 we announced a collaboration with AstraZeneca to evaluate domvanalimab, our investigational anti-TIGIT antibody, in combination with AstraZeneca’s Imfinzi (durvalumab) in a registrational Phase 3 clinical trial in patients with unresectable Stage III non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Under the terms of the agreement, each company will retain existing rights to their respective molecules and any future commercial economics. AstraZeneca will conduct the trial, and each company will supply its respective anti-cancer agent to support the trial. Pursuant to the terms of the agreement, the parties will share costs for the trial.
Consistent with the terms of the recently completed Gilead Agreements, Gilead maintains an option to co-develop and co-commercialize domvanalimab. If Gilead exercises its option to domvanalimab, the trial from this AstraZeneca collaboration is expected to form part of the Arcus and Gilead joint development program and Arcus’s portion of the trial costs would be shared with Gilead.
Other Licenses and Collaborations
We in-licensed rights to zimberelimab from WuXi Biologics, and in-licensed rights to products that include an anti-TIGIT antibody, including domvanalimab, from Abmuno Therapeutics LLC (Abmuno). We also have a co-development and collaboration agreement with Strata Oncology, Inc. (Strata).
Components of Operating Results
Collaboration and License Revenue
Our collaboration and license revenue consists of revenue recognized from the upfront and periodic payments received from Taiho and Gilead, for research and development services performed by us to develop our investigational products under the terms of our collaboration agreements, and from any option exercise payments.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses consist of expenses incurred in connection with the research and development of our pipeline programs. These expenses include pre-clinical and clinical expenses, payroll and personnel expenses, including stock-based compensation for our employees, laboratory supplies, product licenses, consulting costs, contract research, and depreciation. Shared facility expenses are allocated to functional groups proportionally based on usage. Under certain collaboration agreements we agree to share research and development expenses with our partners or to reimburse our partners for qualified expenses. We expense both internal and external research and development costs as they are incurred. We record advance payments for services that will be used or rendered for future research and development activities as prepaid expenses and recognize them as an expense as the related services are performed.
We do not allocate our costs by investigational product, as a significant amount of research and development expenses include internal costs, such as payroll and other personnel expenses, and certain external costs that are not recorded at the investigational product level. In particular, with respect to internal costs, several of our departments support multiple research and development programs, and we do not allocate those costs by investigational product.
We expect our research and development expenses to increase substantially during the next few years due to our Gilead collaboration and as we seek to complete existing clinical trials and advance our programs into later-stage clinical trials, pursue regulatory approval for our investigational products, and advance other programs into the clinic. Later-stage clinical trials typically include a larger number of subjects, are of a longer duration and include more geographic regions. As we advance our clinical-stage programs and prepare to seek regulatory approval, we will also need to conduct certain validation activities with respect to our manufacturing processes for the investigational products in each program. Moreover, in order to maximize the potential of our collaboration with Gilead, we believe it will be important to grow our discovery capabilities and pipeline. As a result, we expect our preclinical, clinical, and contract manufacturing expenses to increase significantly relative to what we have incurred to date. The level of our future research and development investment will depend on a number of factors and uncertainties, including clinical outcomes from our ongoing clinical trials, whether our collaborators opt into any of our programs, the amount of opt-in and milestone payments we receive from our collaborators, and the breadth of any joint development program agreed to with Gilead for programs they opt into. In addition, under our license
agreements with WuXi Biologics and Abmuno, and our co-development and collaboration agreements with Strata, and AstraZeneca, we may be required to pay additional clinical and regulatory milestone payments based on the development progress of our investigational products. Therefore, we are unable to predict the timing or the final cost to complete our clinical programs or validation of our manufacturing and supply processes and delays may occur due to numerous factors. Factors that could cause or contribute to delays or additional costs include, but are not limited to, those discussed in “Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist principally of personnel-related costs including payroll and stock-based compensation for personnel in executive, finance, human resources, information technology, business and corporate development, and other administrative functions. Shared facility expenses are allocated to functional groups proportionally based on usage. Our general and administrative expenses also include professional fees for legal, consulting, and accounting services, rent and other facilities costs, fixed asset depreciation, and other general operating expenses not otherwise classified as research and development expenses.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase substantially during the next few years as we support our growing research and development activities, including due to staff expansion, additional occupancy costs, and other costs associated with increased infrastructure needs.
Other Non-Operating Income, net
Other non-operating income, net consists primarily of interest earned on our investments in fixed-income marketable securities as well as activity related to our equity method investment in PACT Pharma, Inc (PACT Pharma). To date, gains have consisted of gains on dilution of our investment in PACT Pharma, typically occurring upon PACT Pharma’s new issuances of equity securities. Losses associated with the investment consist of our share of PACT Pharma’s net losses.
Critical Accounting Policies, Significant Judgments and Use of Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported revenue and expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s significant judgments and estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements, we believe that the following critical accounting policies are most important to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Revenue Recognition
At the inception of an arrangement, we evaluate if a counterparty to a contract is a customer, if the arrangement is within the scope of revenue from contracts with customers guidance, and the term of the contract. We recognize revenue when our customer obtains control of promised goods or services in a contract for an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. For contracts with customers, we perform the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) we satisfy each performance obligation. We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that we will collect the consideration we are entitled to in exchange for the goods or services we transfer to the customer. As part of the accounting for contracts with customers, we must develop assumptions that require judgment to determine the standalone selling price of each performance obligation identified in the contract. We then allocate the total transaction price to each performance obligation based on the estimated standalone selling prices of each performance obligation. We then recognize as
revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
The estimation of the standalone selling price may include such estimates as forecasted revenues or costs, development timelines, discount rates, and probabilities of technical and regulatory success. We evaluate each performance obligation to determine if it can be satisfied at a point in time or over time, and we measure the services delivered to the customer, which we periodically review based on the progress of the related program. The effect of any change made to an estimated input component and, therefore revenue or expense recognized, would be recorded as a change in estimate. In addition, variable consideration (e.g. milestone payments) must be evaluated to determine if it is constrained and, therefore, excluded from the transaction price.
Research and Development Expenses
We expense research and development costs as incurred. We estimate preclinical and clinical study and research expenses based on services performed, pursuant to contracts with third-party research organizations that conduct and manage preclinical and clinical studies and research services on our behalf. We estimate these expenses based on communications with internal personnel and external service providers as to the progress or stage of completion of services and the contracted fees to be paid for such services. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the original estimates, we will adjust the accrual accordingly. Payments associated with licensing agreements to acquire exclusive licenses to develop, use, manufacture and commercialize products that have not reached technological feasibility and do not have alternative future use are expensed as incurred. Payments made to third parties under these arrangements in advance of the performance of the related services are recorded as prepaid expenses until the services are rendered.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
We account for stock-based compensation arrangements in accordance with ASC 718, Stock Compensation. Prior to January 1, 2019, we accounted for equity instruments issued to non-employees in accordance with ASC 505-50 Equity Based Payments to Non-Employees. Based on this guidance, we recorded awards at their fair value on the measurement date subject to periodic adjustments as the underlying equity instruments vest. We expensed the fair value of options granted to consultants when vested. On January 1, 2019, we adopted ASU No. 2018-07 (Topic 718), Compensation - Stock Compensation, which expanded the scope of Topic 718 to include share-based payment transactions with non-employees.
Stock-based awards granted include stock options and restricted stock units (RSUs). Accounting standards require the recognition of compensation expense, using a fair value-based method, for costs related to all stock-based payments. Our determination of the fair value of stock options with time-based vesting on the date of grant utilizes the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, and is impacted by our common stock price as well as other variables including, but not limited to, expected term that options will remain outstanding, expected common stock price volatility over the term of the option awards, risk-free interest rates and expected dividends. Compensation expense associated with restricted stock units is based on the fair value of common stock on the date of grant.
Leases
Subsequent to the adoption of the new leasing standard effective as of January 1, 2020, we recognize a lease asset for its right to use the underlying asset and a lease liability for the corresponding lease obligation. We determine whether an arrangement is or contains a lease at contract inception. We recognize operating lease right-of-use assets and liabilities at the lease commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. In determining the net present value of lease payments, we use an incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at the lease commencement date. The incremental borrowing rate represents the interest rate we would incur at lease commencement to borrow an amount equal to the lease payments on a collateralized basis over the term of a lease. We consider a lease term to be the noncancelable period that it has the right to use the underlying asset, including any periods where it is reasonably assured we will exercise the option to extend the contract. Periods covered by an option to extend are included in the lease term if the lessor controls the exercise of that option.
Income Taxes
We provide for income taxes under the asset and liability method. Current income tax expense or benefit represents the amount of income taxes expected to be payable or refundable for the current year. We determine deferred
income tax assets and liabilities based on differences between the financial statement reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities and net operating loss and credit carryforwards, and measure them using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when such items are expected to reverse. We reduce deferred income tax, as necessary, by a valuation allowance when management determines it is more likely than not that some or all of the tax benefits will not be realized.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the periods indicated (in thousands):
*
Not meaningful
Collaboration and License Revenue
Collaboration and license revenue increased $62.5 million, from $15.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $77.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in collaboration and license revenue was primarily due to the recognition of $55.1 million in revenue from the zimberelimab license granted to Gilead and $15.4 million related to Gilead’s ongoing rights to access our intellectual property in accordance with the Gilead Collaboration Agreement, partially offset by the recognition in 2019 of $8.0 million in revenue from Taiho’s exercise of its option for our anti-PD-1 antibody program, including zimberelimab.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased $80.8 million, or 103%, from $78.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $159.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in research and development expenses was primarily due to an increase of $27.8 million in manufacturing costs required to supply our clinical studies, an increase of $24.2 million in clinical costs for our ongoing clinical studies, and an increase of $20.1 million in employee compensation costs primarily due to additional headcount, approximately $7.1 million of which consists of non-cash stock-based compensation. Expenses related to sublicense fees and milestone payments also increased $7.4 million, from $11.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $18.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, largely as a result of sublicense fees paid to WuXi. We incurred a $1.5 million additional increase on telecommunications and remote work infrastructure due to shelter-in-place orders amid the COVID pandemic, partially offset by a decrease of $1.3 million in lab supplies and equipment due to decreased lab activities for the same reason.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased $17.2 million, or 68%, from $25.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $42.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in general and administrative expenses was due primarily to $7.6 million in employee compensation costs primarily due to
additional headcount, approximately $5.8 million of which consists of non-cash stock-based compensation. We also incurred increased expense of $3.8 million in consulting expenses incurred in corporate development activities and $3.8 million in legal and accounting expenses incurred to support our expanding operations and ongoing compliance with public company requirements. We further incurred a $1.5 million additional increase on telecommunications and remote work infrastructure due to shelter-in-place orders amid the COVID pandemic.
Non-Operating Income, Net
Non-operating income, net decreased $2.6 million or 66%, from $4.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to lower interest income resulting from lower investment yields on our portfolio of marketable fixed-income securities during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in the prior year.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the periods indicated (in thousands):
As described in Note 2 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements, in January 1, 2019, we adopted ASC 606. ASC 606 supersedes the guidance in ASC 605, Revenue Recognition. We adopted ASC 606 on a modified retrospective basis under which we recognized the $2.2 million cumulative effect of adoption as a reduction to opening accumulated deficit. We recorded revenue for the year ended December 31, 2018 under ASC 605, while we recorded revenue for year ended December 31, 2019 under ASC 606. Had we recognized revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 using ASC 605, revenue would have been $14.7 million as compared to the $15.0 million recorded under ASC 606.
Collaboration and License Revenue
Collaboration and license revenue increased $6.6 million or 80%, from $8.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $15.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in collaboration and license revenue was due to an additional $1.6 million of revenue recognized resulting from a higher initial transaction price for the Taiho Agreement that we remeasured upon adoption of ASC 606 during 2019 and $8.0 million recognized following Taiho’s exercise of its option for our anti-PD-1 antibody program, including zimberelimab, partially offset by $3.0 million recognized in 2018 from Taiho’s exercise of its option for our adenosine receptor antagonist program, including etrumadenant.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased $28.9 million, or 58%, from $49.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $78.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in expenses included an increase of $14.3 million in clinical study costs and an increase of $1.3 million in clinical consulting costs related to all four of our programs in clinical development. Also contributing to the increase in 2019 was the achievement of certain development milestones which resulted in expenses of $8.7 million pursuant to the terms of our WuXi Agreement and $2.5 million pursuant to the terms of our Strata Agreement, compared to a $2.0 million
product licensing expense pursuant to our Abmuno Agreement that was recorded in the prior year. Additional expenses in 2019 included an increase of $5.2 million in employee compensation, an increase of $2.0 million in stock-based compensation and an increase of $0.7 million in facilities and office expenses, primarily driven by growth in our headcount. Those increases were partially offset by a decrease of $4.2 million in manufacturing costs primarily due to the completion of certain manufacturing activities for domvanalimab in 2018.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased $11.6 million, or 86%, from $13.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $25.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in expenses was primarily due to an increase of $4.0 million in employee compensation, an increase of $3.2 million in stock-based compensation and an increase of $2.0 million in facilities and office expenses, primarily due to growth in headcount. General and administrative expenses further increased due to increases of $1.3 million in consulting and $0.7 million in legal and accounting fees, supporting the expansion of our research and development activities and on-going public company regulatory compliance costs.
Non-Operating Income, Net
Non-operating income, net decreased $1.3 million or 24%, from $5.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $4.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a gain on deemed sale recorded in conjunction with PACT Pharma’s Series B convertible preferred financing in 2018 without a similar gain in 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
To date, we have financed our operations primarily through net proceeds of approximately $677 million from equity offerings and proceeds of approximately $421 million from our collaboration agreements. As of December 31, 2020, we had $735.1 million of cash, cash equivalents and investments in marketable securities. In February 2021 we raised an additional $220.4 million from the sale to Gilead of 5,650,000 shares of our common stock. Our cash and investments are held in a variety of interest-bearing instruments, including money market funds, and investments in corporate notes, other debt securities, commercial papers and government agency obligations.
Based on our existing business plan, we believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and investments will be sufficient to fund our anticipated level of operations through 2023.
We may require additional capital to complete the development and any commercialization of our investigational products. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•
the scope, rate of progress and costs of clinical trials for our investigational products as well as drug discovery, preclinical development activities, and laboratory testing;
•
the number and scope of clinical programs we decide to pursue;
•
the scope and costs of manufacturing development and commercial manufacturing activities;
•
the timing and amount of expense related to our current and future clinical programs, subject to the rights of our existing partners, and the costs associated with our share of the global development plan for such programs;
•
the timing and amount of milestone payments we receive under the Taiho Agreement and Gilead Collaboration Agreement, and option fees under the Gilead Collaboration Agreement;
•
the extent to which we acquire or in-license other investigational products and technologies;
•
the cost, timing and outcome of regulatory review of our investigational products;
•
the cost and timing of establishing sales and marketing capabilities, if any of our investigational products receive marketing approval;
•
the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending intellectual property-related claims;
•
our ability to establish and maintain collaborations on favorable terms, if at all;
•
our efforts to enhance operational systems and our ability to attract, hire and retain qualified personnel, including personnel to support the development of our investigational products;
•
the costs associated with being a public company; and
•
the cost associated with commercializing our investigational products, if they receive marketing approval.
If we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, our stockholders may experience dilution. Any future debt financing into which we enter may impose upon us additional covenants that restrict our operations, including limitations on our ability to incur liens or additional debt, pay dividends, repurchase our common stock, make certain investments and engage in certain merger, consolidation or asset sale transactions. Any debt financing or additional equity that we raise may contain terms that are not favorable to us or our stockholders. If we are unable to raise additional funds when needed, we may be required to delay, reduce, or terminate some or all of our development programs and clinical trials. We may also be required to sell or license to others rights to our investigational products in certain territories or indications that we would prefer to develop and commercialize ourselves.
See “Risk Factors” for additional risks associated with our substantial capital requirements.
Summary Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash for each of the periods presented below (in thousands):
Cash Provided by (Used in) Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $184.7 million to $111.2 million provided by operating activities as compared to $73.5 million cash used in operating activities for the prior year. The increase in cash provided is primarily due to $265.6 million in cash received at the close of the Gilead Collaboration Agreement in July 2020. The overall increase in net cash provided is partially offset by the $38.1 million increase in our net loss to $122.9 million and changes in non-cash items, including $12.8 million of increased expense from stock-based compensation, and changes in our asset and liability balances due to the timing of payments to or from our vendors and collaborators.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased by $30.5 million to $73.5 million as compared to $43.0 million for the prior year. The increase in cash used is primarily due to the $35.1 million increase in our net loss to $84.7 million. The change in our net loss is primarily a result of our expanded clinical development activities and general and administrative costs incurred to support our operations. The overall increase in cash used is partially offset by year-over-year changes in non-cash items, including increased expense from stock-based compensation. Additional increase in cash used resulted from changes in our asset and liability balances due to the timing of payments to or from our vendors and collaborators.
Cash Provided by (Used in) Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities was $434.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $59.2 million cash provided in the prior year. The change in cash flow was primarily due to net purchases of our investments in fixed-income marketable securities, as we invested proceeds received from our May 2020 Public Offering, the Gilead Collaboration Agreement, and the Stock Purchase Agreement.
Cash provided by investing activities was $59.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $113.4 million cash used in the prior year. The change in cash flow was primarily due to year-over-year changes in the timing of purchases and maturities of our investments in fixed-income marketable securities.
Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities was $438.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $1.1 million in the prior year. The increase in cash provided is primarily due to $326.2 million in net cash received from our May 2020 Public Offering, $107.5 million in net cash received under the Stock Purchase Agreement with Gilead, and funds received during the year for issuance of common stock pursuant to equity award plans.
Cash provided by financing activities was $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $129.1 million in the prior year. The decrease in cash provided is primarily due to a decrease in funds received in 2019 for issuance of common stock as compared to net proceeds received from our IPO in March 2018.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our non-cancelable contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
As of December 31, 2020, we had obligations consisting of operating leases for our operating facilities for approximately 245,530 square feet. Under the terms of the agreements, we have lease obligations consisting of $112.6 million in undiscounted minimum lease payments through 2031.
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with third parties for clinical trial management and execution, non-clinical studies and testing, manufacturing, and other services and products for operating purposes. These contracts are generally cancelable on 30 days’ notice, and therefore we believe that our non-cancelable obligations under these agreements are not material.
We have not included contingent milestone or royalty payments or other contractual payment obligations in the table to the extent the timing and amount of such obligations are unknown or uncertain.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Since our inception, we have not engaged in any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See “Recent Accounting Pronouncements” in Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of recently adopted accounting pronouncements and accounting pronouncements not yet adopted, and their expected impact on our financial position and results of operations.