Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our consolidated financial statements, the accompanying notes, and other information included in this annual report. In particular, the risk factors contained in Item 1A may reflect trends, demands, commitments, events, or uncertainties that could materially impact our results of operations and liquidity and capital resources.
The following discussion contains forward-looking statements, such as statements regarding our future operating results and financial position, our business strategy and plans, our market growth and trends, and our objectives for future operations. See "Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements" for more information about relying on these forward-looking statements. The following discussion also contains information using industry publications. See "Note Regarding Industry and Market Data" for more information about relying on these industry publications.
When we use the term "basis points" in the following discussion, we refer to units of one-hundredth of one percent.
Overview
We help people buy and sell homes. Representing customers in over 95 markets in the United States and Canada, we are a residential real estate brokerage. We pair our own agents with our own technology to create a service that is faster, better, and costs less. We meet customers through our listings-search website and mobile application.
We use the same combination of technology and local service to originate mortgage loans and offer title and settlement services; we also buy homes directly from homeowners who want an immediate sale, taking responsibility for selling the home while the original owner moves on.
Our mission is to redefine real estate in the consumer’s favor.
Key Business Metrics
In addition to the measures presented in our consolidated financial statements, we use the following key metrics to evaluate our business, develop financial forecasts, and make strategic decisions.
Monthly Average Visitors
The number of, and growth in, visitors to our website and mobile application are important leading indicators of our business activity because these channels are the primary ways we meet customers. For a particular period, monthly average visitors refers to the average of the number of unique visitors to our website and mobile application for each of the months in that period. Monthly average visitors are influenced by, among other things, market conditions that affect interest in buying or selling homes, the level and success of our marketing programs, seasonality, and how our website appears in search results. We believe we can continue to increase monthly visitors, which helps our growth.
Given the lengthy process to buy or sell a home, a visitor during one month may not convert to a revenue-generating customer until many months later, if at all.
When we refer to "monthly average visitors" for a particular period, we are referring to the average number of unique visitors to our website and our mobile applications for each of the months in that period, as measured by Google Analytics, a product that provides digital marketing intelligence. Google Analytics tracks visitors using cookies, with a unique cookie being assigned to each browser or mobile application on a device. For any given month, Google Analytics counts all of the unique cookies that visited our website and mobile applications during that month. Google Analytics considers each unique cookie as a unique visitor. Due to third-party technological limitations, user software settings, or user behavior, it is possible that Google Analytics may assign a unique cookie to different visits by the same person to our website or mobile application. In such instances, Google Analytics would count different visits by the same person as separate visits by unique visitors. Accordingly, reliance on the number of unique cookies counted by Google Analytics may overstate the actual number of unique persons who visit our website or our mobile applications for a given month.
Real Estate Services Transactions
We record a brokerage real estate services transaction when one of our lead agents represented the homebuyer or home seller in the purchase or sale, respectively, of a home. We record a partner real estate services transaction (i) when one of our partner agents represented the homebuyer or home seller in the purchase or sale, respectively, of a home or (ii) since the third quarter of 2019 after we commenced a referral partnership with Opendoor, when a Redfin customer sold his or her home to a third-party institutional buyer following our introduction of that customer to the buyer. We include a single transaction twice when our lead agents or our partner agents serve both the homebuyer and the home seller of the transaction. Additionally, when one of our lead agents represents RedfinNow in its sale of a home, we include that transaction as a brokerage real estate services transaction.
Increasing the number of real estate services transactions is critical to increasing our revenue and, in turn, to achieving profitability. Real estate services transaction volume is influenced by, among other things, the pricing and quality of our services as well as market conditions that affect home sales, such as local inventory levels and mortgage interest rates. Real estate services transaction volume is also affected by seasonality and macroeconomic factors.
Real Estate Services Revenue per Transaction
Real estate services revenue per transaction, together with the number of real estate services transactions, is a factor in evaluating revenue growth. We also use this metric to evaluate pricing changes. Changes in real estate services revenue per transaction can be affected by, among other things, our pricing, the mix of transactions from homebuyers and home sellers, changes in the value of homes in the markets we serve, the geographic mix of our transactions, and the transactions we refer to partner agents and any third-party institutional buyer. We calculate real estate services revenue per transaction by dividing brokerage, partner, or aggregate revenue, as applicable, by the corresponding number of real estate services transactions in any period.
We generally generate more real estate services revenue per transaction from representing homebuyers than home sellers. However, we believe that representing home sellers has unique strategic value, including the marketing power of yard signs and digital marketing campaigns, and the market effect of controlling listing inventory. To keep revenue per brokerage transaction about the same from year to year, we expect to reduce our commission refund to homebuyers if a greater portion of our brokerage transactions come from home sellers.
From 2019 to 2020, the percentage of brokerage transactions from home sellers was essentially unchanged at approximately 44%.
Aggregate Home Value of Real Estate Services Transactions
The aggregate home value of brokerage and partner real estate services transactions is an important indicator of the health of our business, because our revenue is largely based on a percentage of each home’s sale price. This metric is affected chiefly by the number of customers we serve, but also by changes in home values in the markets we serve. We compute this metric by summing the sale price of each home represented in a real estate services transaction. We include the value of a single transaction twice when our lead agents or our partner agents serve both the homebuyer and home seller of the transaction.
U.S. Market Share by Value
Increasing our U.S. market share by value is critical to our ability to grow our business and achieve profitability over the long term. We believe there is a significant opportunity to increase our share in the markets we currently serve.
We calculate the aggregate value of U.S. home sales by multiplying the total number of U.S. existing home sales by the mean sale price of these homes, each as reported by the National Association of REALTORS®. We calculate our market share by aggregating the home value of brokerage and partner real estate services transactions. Then, in order to account for both the sell- and buy-side components of each transaction, we divide that value by two-times the estimated aggregate value of U.S. home sales.
Revenue from Top-10 Markets as a Percentage of Real Estate Services Revenue
Our top-10 markets by real estate services revenue are the metropolitan areas of Boston, Chicago, Denver (including Boulder and Colorado Springs), Los Angeles (including Santa Barbara), Maryland, Northern Virginia, Portland (including Bend), San Diego, San Francisco, and Seattle. This metric is an indicator of the geographic concentration of our real estate services segment. We expect our revenue from top-10 markets to decline as a percentage of our total real estate services revenue over time.
Average Number of Lead Agents
The average number of lead agents, in combination with our other key metrics such as the number of brokerage transactions, is a basis for calculating agent productivity and is one indicator of the potential future growth of our business. We systematically evaluate traffic to our website and mobile application and customer activity to anticipate changes in customer demand, helping determine when and where to hire lead agents.
We calculate the average number of lead agents by taking the average of the number of lead agents at the end of each month included in the period.
Properties Transactions
We record a properties transaction when we sell a home that we previously bought directly from a homeowner. RedfinNow is our primary properties offering. The number of properties transactions is a useful indicator for investors to understand the underlying transaction volume growth of our RedfinNow business. Properties transaction volume is influenced by, among other things, the level and quality of our homes available for sale inventory, and market conditions that affect home sales, such as local inventory levels and mortgage interest rates.
Properties Revenue per Transaction
Properties revenue per transaction, together with the number of properties transactions, is a factor in evaluating revenue growth. Changes in properties revenue per transaction can be affected by, among other things, the geographic mix of our transactions, the types and sizes of homes that we have previously purchased, our pricing, and changes in the value of homes in the markets we serve. We calculate properties revenue per transaction by dividing properties revenue by the number of properties transactions in any period.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
We generate revenue primarily from commissions and fees charged on each real estate services transaction closed by our lead agents or partner agents, and from the sale of homes.
Real Estate Services Revenue
Brokerage Revenue-Brokerage revenue includes our offer and listing services, where our lead agents represent homebuyers and home sellers. We recognize commission-based brokerage revenue upon closing of a brokerage transaction, less the amount of any commission refunds, closing-cost reductions, or promotional offers that may result in a material right. Brokerage revenue is affected by the number of brokerage transactions we close, the mix of brokerage transactions, home-sale prices, commission rates, and the amount we give to customers.
Partner Revenue-Partner revenue consists of fees paid to us from partner agents or under other referral agreements, less the amount of any payments we make to homebuyers and home sellers. We recognize these fees as revenue on the closing of a transaction. Partner revenue is affected by the number of partner transactions closed, home-sale prices, commission rates, and the amount we refund to customers. If the portion of customers we introduce to our own lead agents increases, we expect the portion of revenue closed by partner agents to decrease.
Properties Revenue
Properties Revenue-Properties revenue consists of revenue earned when we sell homes that we previously bought directly from homeowners. Properties revenue is recorded at closing on a gross basis, representing the sales price of the home.
Other Revenue
Other Revenue-Other services revenue includes fees earned from mortgage origination services, title settlement services, Walk Score data services, and advertising. Substantially all fees and revenue from other services are recognized when the service is provided.
Intercompany Eliminations
Intercompany Eliminations-Revenue earned from transactions between operating segments are eliminated in consolidating our financial statements. Intercompany transactions primarily consist of services performed from our real estate services segment for our properties segment.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Cost of revenue consists primarily of personnel costs (including base pay, benefits, and stock-based compensation), transaction bonuses, home-touring and field expenses, listing expenses, home costs related to our properties segment, office and occupancy expenses, and depreciation and amortization related to fixed assets and acquired intangible assets. Home costs related to our properties segment include home purchase costs, capitalized improvements, selling expenses directly attributable to the transaction, and home maintenance expenses.
Gross profit is revenue less cost of revenue. Gross margin is gross profit expressed as a percentage of revenue. Our gross margin has and will continue to be affected by a number of factors, but the most important are the mix of revenue from our relatively higher-gross-margin real estate services segment and our relatively lower-gross-margin properties segment, real estate services revenue per transaction, agent and support-staff productivity, personnel costs and transaction bonuses, and, for properties, the home purchase costs.
Operating Expenses
Technology and Development
Our primary technology and development expenses are building software for our customers, lead agents, and support staff to work together on a transaction, and building a website and mobile application to meet customers looking to move. These expenses primarily include personnel costs (including base pay, bonuses, benefits, and stock-based compensation), data licenses, software and equipment, and infrastructure such as for data centers and hosted services. The expenses also include amortization of capitalized internal-use software and website and mobile application development costs. We expense research and development costs as incurred and record them in technology and development expenses.
Marketing
Marketing expenses consist primarily of media costs for online and offline advertising, as well as personnel costs (including base pay, benefits, and stock-based compensation).
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs (including base pay, benefits, and stock-based compensation), facilities costs and related expenses for our executive, finance, human resources, and legal organizations, depreciation related to our fixed assets, and fees for outside services. Outside services are principally comprised of external legal, audit, and tax services. For 2020, general and administrative expenses also include expenses related to actions taken in response to COVID-19, as these costs were determined to be direct and incremental and not related to revenue generating activities.
Interest Income, Interest Expense, and Other, Net
Interest Income
Interest income consists primarily of interest earned on our cash, cash equivalents, and investments.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest payable on our 2023 notes and the amortization of debt discounts and issuance cost related to our convertible senior notes. See Note 15 to our consolidated financial statements for information regarding interest on our convertible senior notes.
Beginning in August 2019, interest expense also includes interest on borrowings and the amortization of debt issuance costs related to our secured revolving credit facility. See Notes 15 and 16 to our consolidated financial statements for information regarding interest for the facility.
Other Income (Loss), Net
Other Income (Loss) consists primarily of realized and unrealized gains and losses on investments. See Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements for information regarding unrealized losses on our investments.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented and as a percentage of our revenue for those periods.
(1) Includes stock-based compensation as follows:
(2) Includes direct and incremental costs related to COVID-19 of $7,864, which are partially offset by $1,348 in employee retention credits allowed under the CARES Act, for the year ended December 31, 2020.
(1) Includes stock-based compensation as follows:
(2) Includes direct and incremental costs related to COVID-19 of $7,864, which are partially offset by $1,348 in employee retention credits allowed under the CARES Act, for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
In 2020, revenue increased by $106.3 million, or 14%, as compared with 2019. This increase in revenue was primarily attributable to a $127.7 million increase in real estate services revenue, and a $30.8 million decrease in properties revenue. Brokerage revenue increased by $111.0 million, and partner revenue increased by $16.6 million. Brokerage revenue increased 22% during the period, driven by a 14% increase in brokerage transactions and a 8% increase in brokerage revenue per transaction. We believe this increase in brokerage transactions was attributable to higher levels of customer awareness of Redfin and increasing customer demand. Other revenue increased $10.6 million, or 60%, as compared with 2019. This was partially offset by a $30.8 million decrease in properties revenue. Properties revenue decreased 13%, driven by a 10% decrease in properties transactions and a 3% decrease in properties revenue per transaction. Properties transactions decreased during the period, because we had lower average inventory, due in part to pausing making new offers to purchase homes from mid-March to mid-May in response to COVID-19.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
In 2020, total cost of revenue increased by $18.3 million, or 3%, as compared with 2019. This increase in cost of revenue was primarily attributable to a $50.7 million increase in personnel costs and transaction bonuses, due to increased headcount and increased brokerage transactions, respectively. This was partially offset by a $32.0 million decrease in home purchase costs and related capitalized improvements due to selling fewer homes by our properties business.
Total gross margin increased 770 basis point as compared with 2019, driven primarily by our properties business contributing to a lesser proportion of revenue relative to our real estate services and other businesses, and improvements in real estate services and other gross margin.
In 2020, real estate services gross margin increased 720 basis points as compared with 2019. This was primarily attributable to a 270 basis-point decrease in personnel costs and transaction bonuses, a 220 basis-point decrease in home-touring and field expenses, a 60 basis-point decrease in listing expenses, and a 60 basis-point decrease in travel and entertainment expenses, each as a percentage of revenue.
In 2020, properties gross margin decreased 30 basis points as compared with 2019. This was primarily attributable to a 110 basis-point increase in personnel costs and transaction bonuses, and a 60 basis-point increase in home selling expenses, each as a percentage of revenue. This was partially offset by a 170 basis-point decrease in home purchase costs and related capitalized improvements as a percentage of revenue.
In 2020, other gross margin increased by 1,880 basis points. This was primarily attributable to a 620 basis-point decrease in outside services costs, a 590 basis point decrease in personnel costs and transaction bonuses, a 200 basis-point decrease in personal technology expenses, and a 120 basis-point decrease in occupancy and office expenses, each as a percentage of revenue.
Operating Expenses
(1) Includes direct and incremental costs related to COVID-19 of $7,864, which are partially offset by $1,348 in employee retention credits allowed under the CARES Act, for the year ended December 31, 2020
In 2020, technology and development expenses increased by $14.5 million, or 21%, as compared with 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to a $11.9 million increase in personnel costs due to increased headcount, and a $2.7 million increase in technology infrastructure expenses, primarily hosted services.
In 2020, marketing expenses decreased by $21.8 million, or 28%, as compared with 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to a $20.2 million decrease in marketing media costs as we temporarily ceased advertising campaigns during the three months ended June 30, 2020 as a result of COVID-19.
In 2020, general and administrative expenses increased by $15.3 million, or 20%, as compared with 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to a $7.9 million increase in direct and incremental costs associated with our actions taken in response to COVID-19, primarily from severance payments. These costs were partially offset by $1.3 million of employee retention credits claimed under the CARES Act. These costs for restructuring are classified as general and administrative expenses for employees across our organization, including approximately $6.5 million, net, that would otherwise be classified as cost of revenue. We had no such restructuring expenses for any periods prior to the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The increase was also attributable to a $4.0 million increase in personnel costs due to increased headcount, a $2.9 million increase in outside services costs, primarily legal services and contractors, and a $2.9 million increase in technology infrastructure expenses, primarily hosted services.
Interest Income, Interest Expense, and Other, Net
In 2020, interest income decreased by $5.1 million primarily due lower interest rates on our cash, cash equivalents, and investments compared to 2019. Additionally, interest expense increased by $10.6 million in 2020, due to a $4.6 million loss on the partial extinguishment of our 2023 notes and additional non-cash interest expense related to the accretion of the debt discount related to our 2025 notes.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Revenue
In 2019, revenue increased by $292.9 million, or 60%, as compared with 2018. Brokerage revenue represented $90.2 million, or 31%, of the increase. Brokerage revenue grew 22% during the period, driven by a 24% increase in brokerage real estate transactions and a 1% increase in real estate services revenue per brokerage transaction. The increase in brokerage transactions was attributable to higher levels of customer awareness of Redfin and increasing customer demand for Redfin services. Properties revenue increased $195.5 million or 435% as compared with 2018, driven by greater market presence and consumer awareness of RedfinNow, which resulted in a 407% increase in the number of homes sold. Other revenue increased $7.8 million or 78%, as compared with 2018.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
In 2019, total cost of revenue increased by $268.2 million, or 73%, as compared with 2018. This increase in cost of revenue was primarily attributable to a $180.8 million increase in home purchase costs and related capitalized improvements, due to selling more homes by our properties business, a $50.3 million increase in personnel costs and transaction bonuses due to increased headcount and increased brokerage transactions, respectively, and a $13.7 million increase in home-touring and field costs.
Total gross margin decreased 600 basis points for 2019 as compared with 2018, driven primarily by the relative growth of our properties business compared to our real estate services and other businesses, partially offset by improvements in real estate services, properties and other gross margin.
In 2019, real estate services gross margin increased 20 basis points as compared with 2018. This was primarily attributable to a 110 basis-point decrease in personnel costs and transaction bonuses as a percentage of revenue. This was partially offset by a 30 basis-point increase in home-touring and field costs, a 30 basis-point increase in occupancy and office expenses, and a 20 basis-point increase in listing expenses, each as a percentage of revenue.
In 2019, properties gross margin increased 170 basis points as compared with 2018. This was primarily attributable to a 90 basis-point decrease in home purchase costs and related capitalized improvements, a 30 basis-point decrease in personnel costs, and a 30 basis-point decrease in listing expenses, each as a percentage of revenue.
In 2019, other gross margin increased 1,170 basis points as compared with 2018. This was primarily attributable to a 340 basis-point decrease in personnel costs, a 310 basis-point decrease in operating expenses, a 290 basis-point decrease in office and occupancy expenses, and a 230 basis-point decrease in depreciation and amortization, each as a percentage of revenue.
Operating Expenses
In 2019, technology and development expenses increased by $16.0 million, or 30%, as compared with 2018. The increase was primarily attributable to a $13.5 million increase in personnel costs due to increased headcount.
In 2019, marketing expenses increased by $32.6 million, or 74%, as compared with 2018. The increase was primarily attributable to a $29.2 million increase in marketing media costs as we expanded advertising.
In 2019, general and administrative expenses increased by $11.4 million, or 17%, as compared with 2018. The increase was attributable to an $7.2 million increase in personnel costs, largely the result of increases in headcount to support continued growth, a $2.0 million increase in outside services expenses, primarily Internet-based software services, and a $1.3 million increase in corporate events costs.
Interest Income, Interest Expense, and Other, Net
In 2019 interest income increased by $1.7 million primarily due to a higher average cash, cash equivalents, and investments balances, or assets subject to interest income, throughout 2019 as compared to 2018. Interest expense increased by $5.2 million in 2019 due to a full year of interest expense, both cash interest and non-cash accretion of debt discount, of our 2023 notes. Our 2023 notes were issued in the third quarter of 2018.
Quarterly Results of Operations and Key Business Metrics
The following tables set forth our unaudited quarterly statements of operations data for the most recent eight quarters, as well as the percentage that each line item represents of our revenue for each quarter presented. The information for each quarter has been prepared on a basis consistent with our consolidated financial statements and reflect, in the opinion of management, all adjustments of a normal, recurring nature that are necessary for a fair presentation of the financial information contained in those statements. The following quarterly financial data should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements.
Quarterly Results
(1) Includes stock-based compensation as follows:
(2) Includes direct and incremental costs related to COVID-19 and employee retention credits allowed under the CARES Act as follows:
(1) Includes stock-based compensation as follows:
(2) Includes direct and incremental costs related to COVID-19 and employee retention credits allowed under the CARES Act as follows:
Our revenue has typically followed the seasonal pattern of the residential real estate industry. As such, revenue increases sequentially from the first quarter to the second quarter and sequentially again during the third quarter. Fourth quarter revenue typically declines sequentially from the third quarter.
As the result of the impact of COVID-19 on customer demand, this pattern was disrupted in 2020. Beginning in March 2020, COVID-19 began having a negative effect on our customer demand, which negatively impacted our revenue during the second quarter. Starting in May, customer demand rebounded, resulting in a sequential increase in revenue from the second quarter to the third quarter. Revenue also increased from the third quarter to the fourth quarter.
Cost of revenue typically also has reflected seasonality, and was similarly impacted by COVID-19 during 2020 as revenue was.
Marketing expenses are influenced by seasonal factors and the timing of advertising campaigns. We have historically spent more on advertising during the first half of the year than the second half of the year. During 2020, we ceased most performance and mass media advertising campaigns in March and April in response to COVID-19. We restarted most performance marketing and mass media campaigns in May, including running a new television commercial from June through September.
During 2020, general and administrative expenses were also impacted by the actions that we took in response to COVID-19. During the second quarter, we reduced our number of employees by approximately 400 people and placed an additional 1,000 employees on furlough. These actions resulted in a charge of $7,525 in the second quarter of 2020. These costs are included in general and administrative expenses, as these costs were determined to be direct and incremental, and not related to revenue generating activities. See Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements.
Quarterly Key Business Metrics
Similar to our revenue, monthly average visitors to our website and mobile application has typically followed the seasonal pattern of the residential real estate industry. Beginning in March 2020, COVID-19 began having a negative effect on our customer demand, which negatively affected our monthly average visitors during March and April. Starting in May, customer demand rebounded, resulting in a sequential increase in monthly average visitors from the second quarter to the third quarter.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $925.3 million and investments of $143.5 million, which consist primarily of operating cash on deposit with financial institutions, money market instruments, U.S. treasury securities, and agency bonds. On February 19, 2021, we entered into an agreement to acquire RentPath for $608.0 million in cash and, on the same day, deposited $60.8 million into an escrow account. See Note 16 to our consolidated financial statements for more information about our agreement to acquire RentPath.
Also, as of December 31, 2020, we had $686.9 million aggregate principal amount of convertible senior notes outstanding. $25.6 million of the notes mature on July 15, 2023 and $661.3 million of the notes mature on October 15, 2025, in each case unless earlier repurchased, redeemed or converted. Interest on our 2023 notes is payable in arrears on January 15 and July 15 of each year. Our 2025 notes do not bear regular cash interest, and the principal amount will not accrete. See Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements regarding the accounting treatment of $1.8 million principal amount of our 2023 notes for which we received conversion notices in December 2020.
With respect to the cash outlay for our properties business, for the year ended December 31, 2020, we relied on (i) a combination of our cash on hand and borrowings from a secured revolving credit facility to fund home purchase prices and (ii) solely on our cash on hand to fund capitalized improvement costs and home maintenance expenses. See Note 4 to our consolidated financial statements for more information on changes to inventory related to home purchases and home sales for our properties business. See Note 15 to our consolidated financial statements for more information regarding the secured revolving credit facility.
Our mortgage business has significant cash requirements due to the period of time between its origination of a mortgage loan and the sale of that loan. We have relied on warehouse credit facilities with different lenders to fund substantially the entire portion of the mortgage loans that our mortgage business originates. Once our mortgage business sells a loan in the secondary mortgage market, we use the proceeds to reduce the outstanding balance under the related facility. See Note 15 to our consolidated financial statements for more information regarding our warehouse credit facilities.
We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents and investments, together with cash we expect to generate from future operations, and borrowings from our secured revolving credit facility and our warehouse credit facilities, will provide sufficient liquidity to meet our operational needs, fulfill our debt obligations, and fund our pending acquisition of RentPath. However, our liquidity assumptions may change or prove to be incorrect, and we could exhaust our available financial resources sooner than we currently expect. As a result, we may seek new sources of credit financing or elect to raise additional funds through equity, equity-linked, or debt financing arrangements. We cannot assure you that any additional financing will be available to us on acceptable terms or at all.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Net Cash Provided By (Used In) Operating Activities
Our operating cash flows result primarily from cash generated by commissions paid to us from our real estate services business and sales of homes from our properties business. Our primary uses of cash from operating activities include payments for personnel-related costs, including employee benefits and bonus programs, marketing and advertising activities, purchases of homes for our properties business, office and occupancy costs, and outside services costs. Additionally, our mortgage business generates a significant amount operating cash flow activity from the origination and sale of loans held for sale.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $61.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily attributable to a net loss of $18.5 million, offset by $77.2 million of non-cash items related to stock- based compensation, depreciation and amortization, amortization of debt discounts and issuances costs, lease expense related to right-of-use assets, impairment charges related to one of our cost-method investments, and other non-cash items. Changes in assets and liabilities increased cash provided by operating activities by $2.6 million. The primary sources of cash related to changes in our assets and liabilities were a $41.2 million increase in accounts payable and other accrued liabilities related to the timing of vendor payments and payroll related expenses, and a $25.4 million decrease in inventory related to our properties business. The primary uses of cash related to changes in our assets and liabilities were a $35.5 million increase in accounts receivable related to the timing of escrow payments in-transit, a $19.5 million increase in net loans held for sale related to our mortgage business, and a $11.3 million decrease in lease liabilities.
Net cash used in operating activities was $107.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily attributable to a net loss of $80.8 million, offset by $49.2 million of non-cash items related to stock- based compensation, depreciation and amortization expenses, amortization of debt discounts and issuances costs, and lease expense related to right-of-use assets. Changes in assets and liabilities increased cash used in operating activities by $76.0 million driven primarily by an increase of $51.9 million in inventory related to our properties business and a $16.8 million increase in net loans held for sale related to our mortgage business.
Net cash used in operating activities was $36.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, primarily attributable to a net loss $42.0 million, offset by $31.3 million of non-cash items related to stock- based compensation, depreciation and amortization expenses and amortization of debt discounts and issuances costs. Changes in assets and liabilities increased cash used in operating activities by $26.0 million driven primarily by an increase of $19.3 million in inventory related to our properties business. This was partially offset by a $4.1 million increase in accrued liabilities due primarily to $3.3 million of payroll liabilities.
Net Cash Used In Investing Activities
Our primary investing activities include the purchase of investments and property and equipment, primarily related to capitalized software development expenses and leasehold improvements.
Net cash used in investing activities was $57.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily attributable to $42.4 million in net investments in U.S. government securities, $5.8 million related to equipment, furnishings and leasehold improvements for new or expansion of existing office space, and $8.9 million of capitalized software development expenses.
Net cash used in investing activities was $115.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily attributable to $100.4 million in net investments in U.S. treasury securities, $7.9 million related to equipment, furnishings and leasehold improvements for new or expansion of existing office space, and $7.1 million of capitalized software development expenses.
Net cash used in investing activities was $10.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, primarily attributable to $8.3 million of purchases of property and equipment, related to $5.3 million of capitalized software development expenses, $1.2 million of leasehold improvements, and a $2.0 million equity investment.
Net Cash Provided By Financing Activities
Our primary financing activities have come from (i) our initial public offering in August 2017, (ii) sales of our common stock and 2023 notes in July 2018, our common stock and convertible preferred stock in April 2020, and our 2025 notes in October 2020, and (iii) the sale of our common stock pursuant to stock option exercises and our ESPP. Additionally, we generate a significant amount of financing cash flow activity due to borrowings from and repayments to our warehouse credit facilities and, since July 2019, our secured revolving credit facility.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $694.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily attributable to $647.5 million in net proceeds from the issuance of our 2025 notes offering, $109.5 million in net proceeds from the issuance of common stock and our convertible preferred stock offering, $21.1 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock pursuant to employee equity plans, a $19.5 million increase in net borrowings under our secured revolving credit facility, and a $17.7 million increase in our net borrowings under warehouse credit facilities. This was partially offset by $108.1 million used in connection with repurchases and conversions of our 2023 notes.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $31.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily attributable to a $16.6 million increase in our net borrowings under warehouse credit facilities, and $16.1 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock pursuant to employee equity plans.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $273.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, primarily attributable to net proceeds from our issuance of common stock and our 2023 notes. The net proceeds consisted $107.6 million from the issuance of common stock $139.0 million from the issuance of notes.
Contractual Obligations
Contractual obligations are cash amounts that we are obligated to pay as part of certain contracts that we have entered into during the normal course of business. Below is a table that shows our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
Payment of the principal amount of our convertible senior notes and any accrued and unpaid interest may be accelerated as a result of an "event of default" or "fundamental change," each as defined in the indenture governing the notes.
Our operating and finance leases include direct lease obligations, excluding any taxes, insurance and other related expenses.
Our purchase obligations primarily relate to the noncancelable portion of commitments related to our network infrastructure, our annual employee meeting, and homes that we are under contract to purchase. We do not include in the table above obligations under contracts that we can cancel without significant penalty.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities, revenue, and expenses at the date of the financial statements. Generally, we base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions in accordance with GAAP that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Critical accounting policies and estimates are those that we consider the most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations because they require our most difficult, subjective, or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Based on this definition, we have identified the critical accounting policies and estimates addressed below. In addition, we have other key accounting policies and estimates that are described in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements.
2025 Notes
On October 20, 2020, we issued $661.3 million aggregate principal amount of convertible senior notes that mature on October 15, 2025 unless earlier repurchased, redeemed or converted. Conversion of the notes can be settled by paying or delivering, as the case may be, cash, shares of our common stock, or a combination of cash and shares of our common stock, at our election.
We account for our 2025 notes in accordance with FASB ASC Subtopic 470-20, Debt with Conversion and Other Options, which requires that we separately value the notes excluding the conversion feature (liability component), with the residual attributed to the conversion feature (equity component). The carrying amount of the liability component was estimated using a discounted cash flow analysis utilizing a risk-adjusted yield derived from a combination of (i) use of benchmarks of comparable debt securities and (ii) modeling that incorporates synthetic credit rating estimation and volatility estimation. The carrying amount of the equity component was calculated by deducting the fair value amount of the liability component from the aggregate principal amount of the notes.
See Note 15 to our consolidated financial statements for further discussion of our 2025 notes.
Revenue Recognition
Our key revenue components are brokerage revenue, partner revenue, property revenue, and other revenue. Of these, we consider the most critical of our revenue recognition policies relate to commissions and fees charged on brokerage transactions closed by our lead agents, and from the sale of homes. We recognize commission-based brokerage revenue upon closing of a brokerage transaction, less the amount of any commission refunds, closing-cost reductions, or promotional offers that may result in a material right. We determined that brokerage revenue primarily contains a single performance obligation that is satisfied upon the closing of a transaction, at which point the entire transaction price is earned. We evaluate our brokerage contracts and promotional pricing to determine if there are any additional material rights and allocate the transaction price based on standalone selling prices.
Properties revenue is earned when we sell homes that were previously bought directly from homeowners. Our contracts with customers contain a single performance obligation that is satisfied upon a transaction closing. Properties revenue is recorded at closing on a gross basis, representing the sales price of the home.
We have utilized the practical expedient in ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, and elected not to capitalize contract costs for contracts with customers with durations less than one year. We do not have significant remaining performance obligations or contract balances.
See Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements for further discussion of our revenue recognition policy.
Inventory
Our inventory represents homes purchased with the intent of resale and are accounted for under the specific identification method. Direct home acquisition and improvement costs are capitalized and tracked directly with each specific home. Homes are stated in inventory at cost and are reviewed on a home by home basis. When evidence exists that the net realizable value of a home is lower than its cost, we recognize the difference as a loss in the period in which it occurs. In determining net realizable value, management must use judgment and estimates, including assessment of readily available market value indicators such as the Redfin Estimate and other third-party home value indicators, assessment of a current listing or pending offer price if either are available, and the value of any improvements made to the home. If a home's estimated market value is less than the inventory cost then the home is written down to net realizable value. While no significant adjustments were required to our home inventory as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020, material adjustments may be required in the future due to changing market conditions, natural disasters, or other forces outside of our control.
See Note 4 to our consolidated financial statements for a summary of our inventory categories and any net realizable write-downs.
Recent Accounting Standards
For information on recent accounting standards, see Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4) of Regulation S-K.