ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes to the consolidated financial statements included later in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, beliefs and expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
Ridgefield Acquisition Corp. (“we”, “us”, “our”, “Ridgefield” or the “Company”) was originally incorporated as a Colorado corporation on October 13, 1983 under the name Ozo Diversified, Inc. On June 23, 2006, the Company filed Articles of Merger with the Secretary of State of the State of Nevada that effected the merger between the Company and a wholly-owned subsidiary formed under the laws of the State of Nevada ("RAC-NV"), pursuant to the Articles of Merger, whereby RAC-NV was the surviving corporation. The merger changed the domicile of the Company from the State of Colorado to the State of Nevada. Furthermore, as a result of the Articles of Merger the Company is authorized to issue 35,000,000 shares of capital stock consisting of 30,000,000 shares of common stock, $.001 par value per share and 5,000,000 shares of preferred stock, $.01 par value per share.
Since July 2000, the Company has suspended all operations, except for necessary administrative matters relating to the timely filing of periodic reports as required by the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. The Company is a “shell company” as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act. Accordingly, during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 we earned no revenues.
Our principal executive office is located at 3250 Retail Drive, Suite 120-518, Carson City, NV 89706-0686 and the telephone number is (805) 484-8855. Our website address is www.ridgefieldacquisition.com. None of the information on our website is part of this Form 10-K.
Outlook
Our plan of operation is to arrange for a merger, acquisition, business combination or other arrangement by and between the Company and a viable operating entity. We have not identified a viable operating entity for a merger, acquisition, business combination or other arrangement, and there can be no assurance that the Company will ever successfully arrange for a merger, acquisition, business combination or other arrangement by and between the Company and a viable operating entity.
We anticipate that the selection of a business opportunity will be a complex process and will involve a number of risks, because potentially available business opportunities may occur in many different industries and may be in various stages of development. Due in part to economic conditions in a number of geographic areas, rapid technological advances being made in some industries and shortages of available capital, we believe that there are numerous firms seeking either the limited additional capital which the Company will have or the benefits of a publicly traded corporation, or both. The perceived benefits of a publicly traded corporation may include facilitating or improving the terms upon which additional equity financing may be sought, providing liquidity for principal shareholders, creating a means for providing incentive stock options or similar benefits to key employees, and other factors.
In some cases, management of the Company will have the authority to effect acquisitions without submitting the proposal to the shareholders for their consideration. In some instances, however, the proposed participation in a business opportunity may be submitted to the shareholders for their consideration, either voluntarily by the Board of Directors to seek the shareholders' advice and consent, or because of a requirement of state law to do so.
The Company may need additional funds in order to effectuate a merger, acquisition or other arrangement by and between the Company and a viable operating entity, although there is no assurance that we will be able to obtain such additional funds, if needed.
In seeking to arrange a merger, acquisition, business combination or other arrangement by and between the Company and a viable operating entity, our objective will be to obtain long-term capital appreciation for the Company's shareholders. As stated before, there can be no assurance that we will be able to complete any merger, acquisition, business combination or other arrangement by and between the Company and a viable operating entity, and there can be no assurance that such a transaction will result in long-term capital appreciation.
In connection with its Acquisition Strategy, the Company expects to encounter competition from other entities having business objectives similar to those of the Company. Many of these entities, including venture capital firms, blind pool companies, large industrial and financial institutions, small business investment companies and wealthy individuals, are well-established and have extensive experience in connection with identifying and effecting acquisitions directly or through affiliates. Many of these competitors possess greater financial, technical, human and other resources than the Company and there can be no assurance that the Company will have the ability to compete successfully with such entities. The Company's financial resources will be limited in comparison to those of many of its competitors. The Company's limited financial resources may compel the Company to select certain less attractive acquisition prospects.
Results of Operations for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019
Revenues
During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, the Company earned no revenues from operations. Overall, the Company incurred a net loss of $68,230 during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $55,912 during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019.
Because the Company’s operations are primarily administrative, the increase in net loss relates entirely to additional interest expense and general and administrative (G&A) expenses.
General and Administrative Expenses
G&A expenses consist of professional fees, service charges, office expenses and similar items. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, the Company incurred G&A expenses of $42,057, compared to G&A expenses of $33,255 during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $8,802 is largely attributable to increased costs related to compliance and expenses of being a public company. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 we saw an increase in compliance costs related to filing SEC forms, as well as other related costs such as legal and audit fees.
Other Expenses
Other expenses primarily represent state licenses, filing fees, minimum tax expense and net interest expense. Other expenses increased to $26,155 during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $22,657 during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The increase related primarily to interest expense, offset partially by reduced franchise tax expense.
The Company incurred net interest expense of $23,450 during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 versus $19,054 during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. Substantially all of this is a result of a loan from the President of the Company. Interest expense increased consistent with the increase in the underlying principal balance.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash requirements for working capital and capital expenditures have been funded from cash balances on hand and loans. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $2,816 and a working capital deficit of $339,589, which includes short-term indebtedness of $251,161 and related accrued interest of $87,624. Current liabilities also include related party accrued expenses of $2,800, leaving positive working capital of $1,996 when related parties are excluded.
Cash and cash equivalents consist of cash and money market funds. We did not have any short-term or long-term investments as of December 31, 2020.
During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, the Company satisfied its working capital needs from related party loans from Steven N. Bronson, the Chairman, President, CEO, and majority shareholder. The note agreement was a Revolving Promissory Note (the “Note”) under which the aggregate unpaid principal amount of all outstanding advances shall not exceed $250,000. As of November 1, 2020, the Company and Mr. Bronson amended and restated the Note to allow for borrowings over the $250,000 limit. The Maximum Credit Amount is now increased to $500,000. Borrowings under the Note (plus any accrued interest) bear interest at a rate of 10% per annum. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the Company borrowed the following amounts under the Note:
While this arrangement will satisfy the Company's immediate financial needs, it may not by itself have the capacity to provide the Company with sufficient capital to finance a merger, acquisition or business combination between the Company and a viable operating entity. The Company may need additional funds in order to complete a merger, acquisition or business combination between the Company and a viable operating entity. There can be no assurances that the Company will be able to obtain additional funds if and when needed.
Critical Estimates and Judgments
The preparation of the Company’s financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Management evaluates its estimates and judgments, including those related to receivables and accrued expenses. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors that are believed to be reasonable based on the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. The most significant accounting estimates inherent in the preparation of the Company’s financial statements include estimates as to the appropriate carrying value of the Company’s deferred income tax asset valuation allowance. These accounting policies are described at relevant sections in this discussion and analysis and in the notes to the consolidated financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles of the United States (“U.S. GAAP”) requires estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities in the financial statements and accompanying notes. The SEC has defined a company’s critical accounting policies as the ones that are most important to the portrayal of the company’s financial condition and results of operations, and which require the company to make its most difficult and subjective judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates of matters that are inherently uncertain. Based on this definition, we have identified the critical accounting policies and judgments addressed below. We also have other key accounting policies, which involve the use of estimates, judgments, and assumptions that are significant to understanding our results. Although we believe that our estimates, assumptions, and judgments are reasonable, they are based upon information presently available. Actual results may differ significantly from these estimates under different assumptions, judgments, or conditions.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method, whereby deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax basis and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. We assess the likelihood that our deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income and to the extent we believe that recovery is not determinable beyond a “more likely than not” standard, we establish a valuation allowance. To the extent we establish a valuation allowance or increase or decrease this allowance in a period, we include an expense or benefit within the tax provision in the statement of operations. We also utilize a “more likely than not” recognition threshold and measurement analysis for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. The Company does not have any uncertain tax positions. We recognize potential accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits within the consolidated statements of operations as income tax expense.
Income Per Common Share
Basic income (loss) per common share is calculated by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the year. Diluted income per common share is calculated by adjusting outstanding shares, assuming conversion of all potentially dilutive convertible equity instruments consisting of options. There is no difference in the calculation of basic and diluted income per share for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
Cash Equivalents
The Company considers as cash equivalents all highly liquid investments with a maturity of 90 days or less at the time of purchase. At December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the Company had no cash equivalents.
Going Concern
The Company has an accumulated deficit balance as of December 31, 2020 and net loss during the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company’s financial statements are prepared using U.S. GAAP applicable to a going concern for the next twelve months from the date of this filing, which contemplates the realization of assets and liquidation of liabilities in the normal course of business. The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent on the Company obtaining adequate capital to fund operating losses until it establishes a revenue stream and becomes profitable. The Company is continually analyzing its current costs and is attempting to make additional cost reductions where possible. We expect that we will continue to generate losses from operations throughout 2021.
In order to continue as a going concern and to develop a reliable source of revenues and achieve a profitable level of operations the Company will need, among other things, additional capital resources. Management’s plans to continue as a going concern include raising additional capital through borrowing and/or sales of equity and debt securities. However, management cannot provide any assurances that the Company will be successful in accomplishing any of its plans.
Economy and Inflation
We do not believe that inflation has had a material effect on our Company’s results of operations.
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus (COVID-19) emerged in Wuhan, Hubei Province, China. While initially the outbreak was largely concentrated in China and caused significant disruptions to its economy, it has now spread to most other countries and a high number of infections have been reported globally. While we do not expect the coronavirus to impact our operations, it could impact our acquisition strategy, positively or negatively. The extent to which new opportunities are presented to us will depend on future developments, which remain highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence.
Off-Balance-Sheet and Contractual Obligations
Our liquidity is not dependent on the use of off-balance-sheet financing arrangements.