ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included in this Annual Report and the historical financial statements of Rekor Systems, Inc., and the related notes thereto.
Overview
We are a leader in the field of vehicle identification and intelligent roadway management systems developed to exploit the benefits of recent advances in artificial intelligence (“AI”). In development for over six years using deep learning algorithms, our core proprietary software enables the creation of more powerful and capable vehicle recognition systems that can be deployed at a fraction of the cost of traditional legacy systems. The software provides a wider field of view, greater light sensitivity and recognitions at faster speeds and with higher accuracy rates. It also includes the ability to identify the color, make and body type of a vehicle and its direction of travel. These capabilities are particularly useful to governmental entities and businesses in solving a wide variety of real-world vehicle related operational challenges. In addition, the ability to enhance existing Internet Protocol (“IP”) connected cameras has enabled significant new uses for vehicle recognition technology that were not previously available or cost effective. We currently provide products and services for governmental organizations, for large and small businesses and for individuals throughout the world. Customers currently use our products or services in approximately 80 countries in applications that include public safety, security, customer experience, transportation, parking, operational efficiencies and logistics. 
Rekor’s vision is to enable “AI Driven Decisions” by enhancing the capabilities in commercial and government sectors with actionable, real-time insights. We deliver these insights through an expanding software portfolio that is being designed not only to address the challenges our customers are currently facing but empowers them to effectively deal with their evolving needs.
General
The information provided in this discussion and analysis of Rekor’s financial condition and results of operations covers the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. During 2019, we completed the acquisition of certain assets and assumed certain liabilities of OpenALPR Technology, Inc. (the “OpenALPR Technology Acquisition”). During 2020 we sold our fully owned subsidiaries AOC Key Solutions Inc. (“AOC Key Solutions”) and Global Technical Services Inc. (“TeamGlobal”). As a result of the dispositions, we determined in 2020 that all the remaining operations that comprised our Professional Services Segment met the criteria to be considered discontinued and they are no longer presented as continuing operations.
Our financial results are impacted principally by the demand by clients for our products and services, the degree to which full-time staff can be kept occupied in revenue-generating activities and the success of our sales team in generating client engagements.
Unexpected changes in the demand for our products and services can result in significant variations in revenues, and present a challenge to optimal hiring, staffing and use of consultants. The volume of work performed can vary from period to period.
Acquisitions and Dispositions
On March 12, 2019, we completed the OpenALPR Technology Acquisition for an aggregate purchase price of $12,397,000, consisting of $7,000,000 in cash, $5,000,000 related to the issuance of note payable and $397,000 of stock consideration.
On June 1, 2019, we sold all the interest we had acquired in Secure Education Consultants, LLC, which we acquired on January 1, 2018. At that time, we also discontinued operations of BC Management.
On April 2, 2020, we sold AOC Key Solutions for an aggregate purchase price of $4,000,000, consisting of $3,400,000 in cash and a subordinated promissory note in the amount of $600,000.
On June 29, 2020, we sold TeamGlobal for an aggregate purchase price of $4,000,000, consisting of $2,300,000 in cash and a secured promissory note in the amount of $1,700,000.
Opportunities, Trends and Uncertainties
We look to identify the various trends, market cycles, uncertainties and other factors that may provide us with opportunities and present challenges that impact our operations and financial condition from time to time. Although there are many that we may not or cannot foresee, we believe that our results of operations and financial condition for the foreseeable future will be primarily affected by the following:
●
AI for the Roadway - We believe that the application of AI to the analysis of roadway conditions will significantly affect vehicular travel in the future by assisting in the intelligent optimization of traffic flows and the identification of anomalous and unsafe movements - e.g. wrong way vehicles, stopped vehicles, or/and pedestrian on the roadway. Marketers and drive-thru retailers with loyalty programs can also benefit from rapid, lower cost identification of existing and potential customers in streamlining and accelerating vehicular flow.
●
Graphic Processing Unit (“GPU”) Improvements - We expect our business to benefit as a result of more powerful and affordable GPU hardware that has recently been developed. These GPUs are more efficient for image processing because their highly parallel structure makes them more efficient than general-purpose central processing units (“CPUs”) for algorithms that process large blocks of data, such as those produced by video streams. GPUs also provide superior memory bandwidth and efficiencies as compared to their CPU counterparts. The most recent versions of our software have been designed to use the increased GPU speeds to accelerate image recognitions. The GPU market is predicted to grow as a result of a surge in adoption of the Internet of Things (“IoT”) by the industrial and automotive sectors. As GPU manufacturers increase production volume, we hope to benefit from the reduced cost to manufacture the hardware included in our products or available to others using our services.
●
Edge Processing - Demand for actionable roadway information continues to grow in parallel with camera resolutions. Over the last several decades, cameras have evolved from 25K pixels to 8.3 million pixels and beyond, with each advancement unlocking new capabilities thereby fueling growth. Further, cellular networks are optimized for downloading data not for uploading data, and while speeds have improved over time, what amounts to large infrastructure changes has resulted in relatively small improvements to cellular upload speeds. With road-side deployments experiencing explosive growth in count and density, scalability has become an obstacle for competition in the market. All of these factors mean that scalability, latency and bandwidth concerns require edge processing which are enabled by the continued growth of the increasingly effective graphic processing units and continual improvements in efficiency of our AI algorithms. Edge processing ingests local high definition (“HD”) video streams and converts the raw video data to text data, thus reducing the volume of data that needs to be transferred. Edge processing allows massive scale without the bandwidth, cost, latency and dependability limitations that would be experienced with a streaming to the cloud solution.
●
Adaptability of the Current ALPR Market - We have made a considerable investment in our advanced vehicle recognition systems because we believe their increased accuracy, affordability and ability to capture additional vehicle data will allow them to compete effectively with existing providers. Based on published benchmarks, our software currently outperforms competitors in almost every metric. However, large users of existing ALPR technology, such as toll roads, have long-term contracts with service providers that have made considerable investments in their existing technologies and may not consider the improvements in accuracy or reductions in cost sufficient to justify abandoning their current systems in the near future. In addition, existing providers may be able to reduce the cost of their current offerings or elect to reduce prices and accept reduced profitability while working to develop or secure their own advanced vehicle recognition systems. As a result, our success in establishing a major position in these markets will depend on being able to effectively communicate our presence, develop strong customer relationships, and maintain leadership in providing the capabilities that customers want. As with any large market, this will require considerable effort and resources.
●
New and Expanded Uses for Vehicle Recognition Systems - We believe that reductions in the cost of vehicle recognition products and services will significantly broaden the market for these systems. We currently serve a number of users who could not afford the cost or adapt to, the restrictions of conventional vehicle recognition systems. These include smaller municipalities, homeowners’ associations, and organizations finding new applications such as innovative customer loyalty programs. We have seen and responded to an increase in the number of smaller jurisdictions and municipalities that are testing ALPR systems or that issued requests for proposals to install a network of ALPR cameras. We also expect the availability of faster, higher accuracy, lower cost systems to dramatically increase the ability of crowded urban areas to manage traffic congestion and implement smart city programs. We do not currently have the resources to develop all of these entirely new markets by ourselves, so we will need to rely on affiliations with other partners, who may or may not realize the significant benefits that we envision from these new uses.
●
Expansion of Automated Enforcement of Motor Vehicle Laws - We believe that future legislation will allow for automated enforcement of motor vehicle regulations, including insurance requirements, to be expanded as the types of violations authorized for automated enforcement increase and experience provides localities with a better understanding of the circumstances where automated enforcement is beneficial. For example, there are now 17 states that allow for the automatic enforcement of violations by vehicles that pass a school bus displaying its flashing red lights and a stop sign. In addition, due to high rates of fatalities and injuries to law enforcement and other emergency response crews on roadsides, several states are considering authorizing automated enforcement of violations where motorists fail to slow down and/or move over for emergency responders and law enforcement vehicles at the side of the road. Legislative implementation is a deliberative and necessarily time-consuming process. However, as states expand auto enforcement, the market for our products and services should increase and broaden in the public safety market.
●
Increasing Smart City Market - Nokia has approved the use of our OpenALPR software for its smart city offerings. In the smart cities’ market, real-time vehicle recognition technologies are widely used for traffic management and public safety. As a result, we expect to benefit from the growth of this market.
●
Accelerated Business Development and Marketing - Our ability to compete in a large, competitive and rapidly evolving industry will require us to achieve and maintain a leadership position. As a result, we have accelerated our business development marketing and eCommerce activities to increase awareness and market adoption of our new technology and products within the market. We anticipate that an increased presence in the market, the continued development of strategic partnerships and other economies of scale will significantly reduce the level of costs necessary to support sales of our products and services. However, the speed at which these markets grow to the degree of which our products and services are adopted is uncertain.
●
Sales Cycle - As many of our products are new to market, their acceptance and integration into the intended markets is uncertain and we do not have sufficient historical experience to accurately predict revenues as a result of their implementation.
●
COVID 19 - The spread of a novel strain of COVID-19 around the world since the first quarter of 2020 has caused significant volatility in U.S. and international markets. There is significant uncertainty around the breadth and duration of business disruptions related to COVID-19, as well as its impact on the U.S. and international economies and, as such, we are unable to determine the full impact to our operations.
●
Pressure on Government Budgets - In addition to the COVID-19 crisis crippling businesses revenues, it has caused significant strain on government budgets. With less money to spend and more need for resources, government agencies need affordable, effective, and scalable solutions for revenue recovery and discovery. With subscription pricing and a roadway intelligence platform that accomplishes multiple agency missions from a single camera source, we are uniquely positioned to provide agencies force-multiplying tools when money and man-power are limited. Agencies can be better positioned to identify vehicle registration fee avoidance, enforce parking and find scofflaws, aid motorists in acquiring valid insurance, and dynamically price tolls based on traffic flow. In addition, states adopting UVED programs may be able to garner significant net cash contributions to their annual budgets while reducing the number of uninsured vehicles on their roadways.
●
Unifying Source of Roadway Intelligence with Rekor One™ - The Rekor One platform will support multiple community safety, intelligent roadway and revenue generation activities. Rekor One will provide government agencies with a comprehensive vehicle intelligence system that supports multiple agency-specific missions. With Rekor One, governments will be able to leverage their existing IP cameras and transform them into a safe and smart multi-dimensional intelligent roadway network. By interfacing with multiple databases and operating systems, Rekor One can allow governmental units to observe security and privacy protocols and fractionalize costs based on relative end user value. Each participating agency receives a unique user interface and dashboard, which draws on Rekor One’s unified vehicle recognition intelligence to provide data customized to the agency’s specific needs. This will eliminate redundant systems and single function applications to help use public funds wisely. The platform will aid in identifying licensing and registration non-compliance, uninsured motorists and unpaid parking violations. This will allow agencies to create targeted intervention programs that result in increased safety as well as increased revenue recovery. Smart parking and permitting are also important capabilities that increase government efficiency and provide better citizen and visitor experience. As part of traffic management, Rekor One will also support advanced tolling and congestion pricing as well as parking and other fees.
●
Increased Demand for Contactless Economy Solutions - Even prior to the COVID-19 crisis, efficient, touch-free shopping experiences were becoming increasingly present. Now moving beyond simple tap-to-pay credit card functionality, we can offer businesses such as retail and quick service restaurants the ability to have customers pay-by-plate for a complete contactless experience for curbside pick-up or drive-thru transactions. Pay-by-plate functionality not only keeps customers and employees safe, but it also accelerates service time as the technology fully integrates with existing point of sale (“POS”) and customer loyalty systems.
●
Necessity for On-Demand Mobile Solutions - With app downloads increasing exponentially year-over-year and over 90% of mobile phone time spent within apps, businesses require a means to leverage the ever-present smartphones of employees. By developing a first-of-its-kind iOS and Android app that can read license plates on-device, we can provide businesses an affordable way to scale by using existing devices as license plate recognition sensors. Now businesses can efficiently manage visitors, streamline parking operations, enhance campus/event security, and even recover costly assets.
We believe that recent developments in computing capabilities, such as GPU advances, and new techniques of analysis, sometimes referred to broadly as AI, have broadened the market for vehicle recognition technology and created new opportunities in existing markets. With our new line of products and services, we are working to actively exploit these opportunities.
Other than as discussed above and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we are not aware of any trends, events or uncertainties that are likely to have a material effect on our financial condition.
Components of Operating Results
Revenues
We derive our revenues substantially from license and subscription fees for software and related products and services. A portion of the subscription fees are generated through our eCommerce website rather than through in-person sales. In addition, we derive revenues in connection with certain citation and collection services in connection with UVED, automated traffic safety and parking enforcement services.
Revenue is recognized upon transfer of control of promised products and services to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those products and services. If the consideration promised in the contract includes a variable amount, for example maintenance fees, we include an estimate of the amount it expects to receive for the total transaction price, if it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur.
Costs of Revenues
Direct costs of revenues consist primarily of the portion of technical and non-technical salaries and wages and payroll-related costs incurred in connection with revenue generating activities. Direct costs of revenues also include production expenses, sub-consultant services, and other expenses that are incurred in connection with our revenue generating activities. Direct costs of revenues exclude the portion of technical and non-technical salaries and wages related to marketing efforts, vacations, holidays, and other time not spent directly generating fees under existing contracts. Such costs are included in operating expenses. We expense direct costs of revenues when incurred.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of general and administrative expenses, sales and marketing and research and development. Personnel costs are the most significant component of operating expenses and consist of salaries, benefits, bonuses, payroll taxes and stock-based compensation expense. Operating expenses also include depreciation, amortization and impairment of assets.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense consists of personnel costs for our executive, finance, legal, human resources and administrative departments. Additional expenses include office leases, professional fees and insurance.
We expect our general and administrative expense to continue to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future due to additional costs associated with accounting, compliance, insurance and investor relations as a public company. However, we expect our general and administrative expense to decrease as a percentage of our revenue over the long term, although our general and administrative expense may fluctuate as a percentage of our revenue from period to period due to the timing and extent of these expenses.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist of personnel costs, marketing programs, travel and entertainment associated with sales and marketing personnel, expenses for conferences and trade shows. We intend to make significant investments in our sales and marketing expenses to grow revenue, further penetrate the market and expand our customer base. With the release of our Partners Program we expect our sales and marketing expense to increase in the future.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consists of personnel costs, software used to develop our products and consulting and professional fees for third-party development resources. Our research and development expenses support our efforts to continue to add capabilities to and improve the value of our existing products and services, as well as develop new products and services.
We expect our research and development expense to continue to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future as we continue to invest in research and development efforts to enhance the functionality of our AI software. However, we expect our research and development expense to decrease as a percentage of our revenue over the long term, although our research and development expense may fluctuate as a percentage of our revenue from period to period due to the timing and extent of these expenses.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of interest expense in connection with our debt arrangements, costs associated with the extinguishment of our debt arrangements, gains on the sale of subsidiaries, gains or losses on the sale of fixed assets and interest income earned on cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments and note receivables.
Income Tax Provision
Income tax provision consists primarily of income taxes in certain domestic jurisdictions in which we conduct business. We have recorded deferred tax assets for which a full valuation allowance has been provided, including net operating loss carryforwards and tax credits. We expect to maintain this full valuation allowance for the foreseeable future as it is more likely than not that some or all of those deferred tax assets may not be realized based on our history of losses.
Results of Operations
Our historical operating results in dollars are presented below. The results below and the analysis of operation is solely related to continuing operations and do not include results of operations from TeamGlobal, AOC Key Solutions and Firestorm. The following selected consolidated financial data should be read in conjunction with the foregoing information contained in this Item 7 and with the consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto in Item 8 of Part II, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” Only historical operating results are presented below. Historical results are not necessarily indicative of future results.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and
Restructuring
As part of our shift in strategic direction since 2019, we have focused on our technology offerings and have disposed of or discontinued operations in the subsidiaries in our legacy Professional Services Segment. In April 2020, we completed the Sale of AOC Key Solutions and in June 2020, we completed the sale of TeamGlobal. As part of evaluating the future of Firestorm, management decided to sell Secure Education and transfer the BC Management line of business to its founder in the second quarter of 2019. In addition, management determined to discontinue the operation of Firestorm Franchising, LLC, a division of Firestorm, due to non-performance by franchisees. The Company has also commenced an action for rescission of the original purchase of Firestorm.
As a result, we have completed the final steps of our announced change in strategic direction to sell lower margin assets and focus on our core Technology Segment. Beginning in 2020, all of the subsidiaries that were previously presented as part of Professional Services operations are classified as discontinued operations and not presented as part of continuing operations.
Revenue
The increase in revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily attributable to the expanded technology offerings, the implementation and substantial completion of a perpetual software license and hardware contract which generated up front revenues from building infrastructure and continuing growth in our eCommerce platform as described below. Additionally, revenues attributable to the acquisition of OpenALPR assets were only included in operations since March 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, revenue attributable to OpenALPR assets was recognized for the full year compared to only a nine and half a month period in the corresponding period in 2019.
Additionally, part of the growth in revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was attributable to revenues earned through our eCommerce platform which organically increased, $426,000 or 97%, to $865,000 from $439,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Cost of Revenue, Gross Profit and Gross Margin
For the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, the increase in gross profit was primarily attributable to the increase in revenue for the corresponding period.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 the gross margin decreased to 62%, which was primarily attributable to building infrastructure in connection with large software and hardware contracts. These contracts included construction and assembly of fixtures for our vehicle recognition cameras and the infrastructure necessary to support database and communications operations on a shared basis with other municipalities. In this early stage, the cost of building the network is higher and the initial margins for such projects are consequently lower than expected than for future operations that will be able to use the same infrastructure.
Operating Expenses
General and Administrative Expenses
The majority of the increase to general and administrative expenses is attributable to the increased staffing. For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, we brought on additional headcount of the Company to support our growth plan and build our corporate structure including executives. In addition, we incurred higher legal costs associated with litigations as described in Item 3 - Legal Proceedings.
Selling and Marketing Expenses
The increase in the selling and marketing expenses during the year is mainly attributable to the increased marketing efforts to promote our products and services including digital marketing and other sales efforts. In connection with these efforts there was an increase in staffing to support the Company’s growth plan.
Research and Development Expense
The overall increase in research and development expenses is primarily attributable to the strategic shift to develop new products and additional software capabilities, as a result of our increased focus on our technology offerings. This shift took place at the end of the first quarter of 2019. The increase in our research and development expenses is mainly attributable to an increase in headcount and hours associated with the research and development activities.
Other Expense
The decrease in interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 is due to the staged retirement of the 2019 Promissory notes in 2020.
The loss on the extinguishment of debt for the year ended December 31, 2020, was related to the fees associated with the early extinguishment of the principal balance of our 2019 Promissory Notes. During 2019, we incurred costs of $1,113,000 associated with the extinguishment of debt.
In connection with the sale of AOC Key Solutions and TeamGlobal, we recognized a gain on the sale of business of $3,631,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income Tax Expense
The income tax provision for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $23,000, is due primarily to the state taxes, as compared to tax expense of $47,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019. There is also approximately $14,000 of additional deferred taxes related to the goodwill recognized related to the OpenALPR acquisition recognized in the year ended December 31, 2020. We established a valuation allowance against deferred tax assets in the fourth quarter of 2017 and have continued to maintain a full valuation allowance through the year ended December 31, 2020.
Non-GAAP Measures
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
We calculate EBITDA as net loss before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization. We calculate Adjusted EBITDA as net loss before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, adjusted for (i) impairment of intangible assets, (ii) loss on extinguishment of debt, (iii) stock-based compensation, (iv) losses or gains on sales of subsidiaries, and (v) other unusual or non-recurring items. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are not measurements of financial performance or liquidity under accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. (“U.S. GAAP”) and should not be considered as an alternative to net earnings or cash flow from operating activities as indicators of our operating performance or as a measure of liquidity or any other measures of performance derived in accordance with U.S. GAAP. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are presented because we believe they are frequently used by securities analysts, investors and other interested parties in the evaluation of a company’s ability to service and/or incur debt. However, other companies in our industry may calculate EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA differently than we do.
The following table sets forth the components of the EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for the periods included (dollars in thousands):
Lease Obligations
At December 31, 2020, we leased building space at the following locations in the U.S.:
●
Columbia, Maryland - The corporate headquarters
●
Linthicum, Maryland - Storage facility for inventory related to our technology hardware
●
Orlando, Florida - Florida implementation office
We believe our facilities are in good condition and adequate for their current use. We may improve, replace or reduce facilities as considered appropriate to meet the needs of our operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The net cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the periods below were as follows (dollars in thousands):
Net cash used in operating activities - continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 had a net increase of $3,919,000 which was primarily attributable to the increase in the loss from continuing operations of $1,557,000. Additionally, there were large non-cash adjustments such as the $3,631,000 gain on the sale of AOC Key Solutions and TeamGlobal. The gain on the sale is shown as a decrease in cash flow from operations and an increase in cash flow from investing activities to reflect the nature of the transactions. This gain on the sale of AOC Key Solutions and TeamGlobal was partially offset by an increase in depreciation, amortization of intangible asset and a $3,281,000 loss on extinguishment of debt related to the retirement of the 2019 Promissory Notes.
The net increase of net cash provided by (used in) investment activities - continuing operations of $5,736,000 was primarily due to the cash proceeds of the sale of AOC Key Solutions and TeamGlobal and the cash proceeds from the note receivable issued in connection with the sale of AOC Key Solutions.
Net cash provided by financing activities - continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $18,060,000 from the prior year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, $29,930,000 cash was provided by financing activities related to the issuance of our common stock as part of the at-the-market agreement. In 2020, this amount was offset by $7,226,000 of cash outflows related to the modification and retirement of the 2019 Promissory Notes. During the year ended December 31, 2019, cash provided by financing activities was related to the $3,839,000 proceeds from the 2019 Promissory Notes issued the first quarter of 2019 and $2,949,000 related to the at-the-market agreement.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we funded our operations primarily through cash from operating activities from our subsidiaries, secured borrowing arrangements, issuance of debt, the sale of our subsidiaries and the sale of equity. As of December 31, 2020, we had unrestricted cash and cash equivalents from continuing operations of $20,595,000 and working capital of $18,324,000, as compared to unrestricted cash and cash equivalents of $1,075,000 and a working capital deficit of $1,786,000 as of December 31, 2019.
Performance Obligations
Operating assets and liabilities consist primarily of receivables from billed and unbilled services, accounts payable, accrued expenses, secured borrowing arrangements, and accrued payroll and related benefits. The volume of billings and timing of collections and payments affect these account balances.
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $16,705,000 of contracts that were closed prior to December 31, 2020 but have a contractual period beyond December 31, 2020. These contracts generally cover a term of one to five years, in which the Company will recognize revenue ratably over the contract term. We currently expect to recognize approximately 30% of this amount over the succeeding twelve months, and the remainder is expected to be recognized over the following five years. On occasion our customers will prepay the full contract or a substantial portion of the contract. Amounts related to the prepayment of the contract for a service period that is not yet met are recorded as part of our contract liabilities balance.
We have experienced growth of 65% in the remaining value of contracts from December 31, 2019 through December 31, 2020.
The table below shows the quarter by quarter growth in contract value (dollars in thousands):
Series A Preferred Stock
The holders of Rekor Series A Preferred Stock were entitled to quarterly dividends in the amount of $0.175 (7% per annum) per share. Dividends accrued quarterly and dividend payments for declared dividends were due within five business days following the end of a quarter. Subsequent to the year ended December 31, 2020, the Series A Preferred Stock and accrued dividends related to the Series A Preferred Stock were automatically converted into shares of our common stock, pursuant to the terms of the Series A Preferred Stock Certificate of Designations.
Series B Preferred Stock
As part of the acquisition of TeamGlobal, we issued 240,861 shares of $0.0001 par value Series B Preferred Stock. All Series B Preferred Stock was issued at a price of $10.00 per share with a conversion price of $5.00 per share. Each Series B Preferred Stock had an automatic conversion feature based on our common stock share price. The Series B Preferred Stock was entitled to quarterly cash dividends of 1.121% (4.484% per annum) per share. Dividends accrued quarterly and dividend payments for declared dividends were due within five business days following the end of a quarter. Subsequent to the year ended December 31, 2020, the Series B Preferred Stock and accrued dividends related to the Series B Preferred Stock were converted into shares of our common stock, pursuant to the terms of the Series B Preferred Stock Certificate of Designations.
Promissory Notes
On March 12, 2019, we issued the 2019 Promissory Notes and the March 2019 Warrants to investors, including OpenALPR Technology, Inc. (the “2019 Lenders”). The loan was due and payable on March 11, 2021. In March 2020, we received an extension of the maturity date of the loan until June 12, 2021. In June 2020, we received an extension of the maturity date of the loan until December 31, 2021. The loan bore interest at 16% per annum, of which at least 10% per annum was required to be paid in cash. The full remaining portion of all interest, if any, accrued and was to be paid-in-kind (“PIK”). The notes also required a premium, if paid before the maturity date, a $1,000,000 exit fee due at maturity, and compliance with affirmative, negative and financial covenants.
On June 30, 2020, we entered into the Exchange Agreements with certain holders of our 2019 Promissory Notes. Under the Exchange Agreements, approximately $17,398,000 of the 2019 Promissory Notes was redeemed in exchange for 4,349,497 shares of our common stock, at a rate of $4 per share (the “Note Exchange”). At the time of the Note Exchange the net amount of long-term debt redeemed for common stock was $14,688,000, this included the existing principal balance subject to conversion, the portion of the exit fee associated with the notes subject to conversion, offset by the portion of unamortized issuance costs associated with the notes subject to conversion. There was also $226,000 related to the PIK interest associated to the notes subject to conversion that was exchanged as part of the Note Exchange. The difference between the market value of the shares issued and the net carrying amount of the obligations above, was recorded as part of debt extinguishments costs in the consolidated statement of operations.
On September 16, 2020, we issued a cash payment for the remaining aggregate principal balance of the 2019 Promissory Notes. As a result of this optional prepayment, the 2019 Promissory Notes, have been fully redeemed pursuant to their terms, and as a result we have no further obligations under the Note Purchase Agreement, as amended. As of December 31, 2020, a total of 81,250 warrants previously issued pursuant to the Note Purchase Agreement, as amended, remain outstanding pursuant to their terms.
At-the-Market Offering
On August 14, 2019, we entered into the Sales Agreement with B. Riley FBR, Inc. (“B. Riley FBR”) to create an at-the-market equity program under which we, from time to time offered and sold shares of our common stock, having an aggregate offering price of up to $15,000,000, through or to B. Riley FBR. Subject to the terms and conditions of the Sales Agreement, B. Riley FBR used its commercially reasonable efforts to sell the shares of our common stock from time to time, based upon our instructions. B. Riley FBR was entitled to a commission equal to 3.0% of the gross proceeds from each sale. We incurred issuance costs of approximately $226,000 related to legal, accounting, and other fees in connection with the Sales Agreement. These costs were charged against the gross proceeds of the Sales Agreement and presented as a reduction to additional paid-in capital on the consolidated balance sheets.
On August 28, 2020, we filed Amendment No. 1 to the Sales Agreement dated August 14, 2019 to increase the size of the market equity program under which we, from time to time offered and sold shares of our common stock, from an aggregate offering price of up to $15,000,000 to an amended maximum aggregate offering price of up to $40,000,000 through or to B. Riley FBR. We incurred issuance costs of approximately $25,000 related to legal fees in connection with the amendment to the Sales Agreement.
Sales of the Company’s common stock under the Sales Agreement were issued and sold pursuant to the Company’s shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (File No 333-224423), previously filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) on April 24, 2018 and declared effective by the SEC on April 30, 2018. For the year ended December 31, 2020, based on settlement date, we sold 5,216,562 shares of common stock at a weighted-average selling price of $5.92 per share in accordance with the Sales Agreement. Net cash provided for the year ended December 31, 2020 from the Sales Agreement was $29,930,000 after paying 3.0% or $926,000 related to cash commissions provided to B. Riley FBR.
On September 21, 2020, we elected to voluntarily terminate the Sales Agreement with B. Riley FBR pursuant to the terms of the Sales Agreement. As of the termination, we had offered and sold an aggregate of 6,509,202 shares of common stock pursuant to the Sales Agreement, which resulted in aggregate gross proceeds of $34,154,000.
Balance Sheet Arrangements, Contractual Obligations and Commitments
As of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have had or are reasonably likely to have a material effect on our financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital resources or capital expenditures.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon Rekor’s consolidated financial statements which have been prepared in accordance US GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires the management of Rekor to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts in our consolidated financial statements.
We believe the application of accounting policies, and the estimates inherently required therein, are reasonable. These accounting policies and estimates are periodically reevaluated, and adjustments are made when facts and circumstances dictate a change. Rekor bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that management of Rekor believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form management’s basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that may not be readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions, or if management made different judgments or utilized different estimates.
Our accounting policies are further described in its historical audited consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized upon transfer of control of promised products and services to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those products and services. If the consideration promised in the contract includes a variable amount, for example maintenance fees related to hardware, we include an estimate of the amount we expect to receive for the total transaction price, if it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur.
We determine the amount of revenue to be recognized through application of the following steps:
●
Identify the contract with a customer
●
Identify the performance obligations in the contract
●
Determine the transaction price
●
Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
●
Recognize revenue when or as performance obligations are satisfied
We generate revenue from our licensing and subscription agreements and automated traffic and safety enforcement agreements.
Licensing and subscription revenue
Our licensing and subscription revenues are derived principally from fees for technology products and services, including software licenses and subscriptions, hardware leases and sales, and other related support services.
Licensing and subscription services include providing, through a web server, access to our proprietary vehicle recognition software, a self-managed database and a powerful, cross-platform application programming interface.
During the second quarter of 2019, we changed our primary method of selling software from perpetual software licenses, with associated maintenance services, to service subscriptions of limited duration. These subscriptions give the customer access to the use of the latest version of our software only during the term of the subscription. Revenue is generally recognized ratably over the contract term. Our subscription services arrangements are non-cancelable and do not contain refund-type provisions. Revenues from our perpetual software licenses are recognized up-front at the point in time when the software is made available to the customer.
Automated traffic safety enforcement
Automated traffic safety enforcement revenues reflect arrangements to provide traffic safety systems to a number of municipalities in North America. Revenue is recognized monthly based on the number of camera systems that are operated, or the number of citations issued by the relevant municipality. We also install and maintain public safety systems, which may involve a combination of installation and lease payments or simply software licenses to use our software in connection with a previously installed camera network. Revenue is recognized at various stages of completion of installation and monthly for lease or license payments.
For those contracts that have multiple performance obligations, we allocate the total transaction price to each performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price, which is determined based on our overall pricing objectives, taking into consideration market conditions and other factors.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable are customer obligations due under normal trade terms. We perform continuing credit evaluations of our clients’ financial condition, and we generally do not require collateral.
Management reviews accounts receivable to determine if any receivables will potentially be uncollectible. Factors considered in the determination include, among other factors, number of days an invoice is past due, client historical trends, available credit rating information, other financial data and the overall economic environment. Collection agencies may also be used if management so determines.
We record an allowance for doubtful accounts based on specifically identified amounts that are believed to be uncollectible. We also record as an additional allowance a certain percentage of aged accounts receivable, based on historical experience and our assessment of the general financial conditions affecting its customer base. If actual collection experience changes, revisions to the allowance may be required. After all reasonable attempts to collect an account receivable have failed, the amount of the receivable is written off against the allowance. The balance in the allowance for doubtful accounts from continuing operations was $22,000 and $0 as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Income Taxes
We use the liability method of accounting for income taxes as set forth in the authoritative guidance for accounting for income taxes. This method requires an asset and liability approach for the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the consolidated financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
Management has evaluated the recoverability of the net deferred income tax assets and the level of the valuation allowance required with respect to such net deferred income tax assets. After considering all available facts, we fully reserved for our net deferred tax assets because management believes that it is more likely than not that their benefits will not be realized in future periods. We will continue to evaluate net deferred tax assets to determine whether any changes in circumstances could affect the realization of their future benefit. If it is determined in future periods that portions of the net deferred income tax assets satisfy the realization standard, the valuation allowance will be reduced accordingly.
The tax effects of uncertain tax positions are recognized in the consolidated financial statements only if the position is more likely than not to be sustained on audit, based on the technical merits of the position. For tax positions meeting the more likely than not threshold, the amount recognized in the consolidated financial statements is the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized. It is our accounting policy to account for Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 740-10-25-related penalties and interest as a component of the income tax provision in the consolidated statements of operations.
As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, our evaluation revealed no uncertain tax positions that would have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements. The 2017 through 2019 tax years remain subject to examination by the IRS, as of December 31, 2020. Our management does not believe that any reasonably possible changes will occur within the next twelve months that will have a material impact on the financial statements.
Liquidity and Management’s Plan
For all annual and interim periods, management will assess going concern uncertainty in our consolidated financial statements to determine whether there is sufficient cash on hand and working capital, including available borrowings on loans, to operate for a period of at least one year from the date the consolidated financial statements are issued or available to be issued, which is referred to as the “look-forward period”, as defined in U.S. GAAP. As part of this assessment, based on conditions that are known and reasonably knowable to management, management will consider various scenarios, forecasts, projections, estimates and will make certain key assumptions. These assumptions including among other factors, the expected timing and nature of our programs and projected cash expenditures, our ability to delay or curtail these expenditures or programs and our ability to raise additional capital, if necessary, to the extent management has the proper authority to execute them and considers it probable that those implementations can be achieved within the look-forward period.
We have generated losses since our inception in February 2017 and have relied on cash on hand, external bank lines of credit, the sale of a note, proceeds from the sale of common stock, proceeds from the private sale of our non-core subsidiaries, proceeds from note receivables, debt financings and a public offering of our common stock to support cashflow from operations. We attribute losses to public company corporate overhead and non-capital expenditures related to the scaling and development of new products and service offerings in connection with the focus on the technology of the Company. As of and for the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had a net loss from continuing operations of $13,962,000 and working capital of $18,324,000.
Our net cash position was increased by $18,860,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 due primarily to the net proceeds of $29,930,000 from the At Market Issuance Sales Agreement (the "Sales Agreement") and the net cash proceeds of $6,300,000 from the sale of AOC Key Solutions and TeamGlobal, which includes the repayment of the $600,000 AOC Key Solutions Subordinate Note, offset by the net loss from operations in the period. As of September 21, 2020, we voluntarily terminated the Sales Agreement.
On February 4, 2021, we entered into an underwriting agreement (the “Underwriting Agreement”) with B. Riley Securities, Inc. and Lake Street Capital Markets, LLC, as representatives of the several underwriters named therein (collectively, the “Underwriters”), pursuant to which we issued and sold, in a registered public offering by Rekor (the “Public Offering”), 6,126,936 shares of our common stock (which included 799,166 shares of common stock sold pursuant to the exercise of an overallotment option) at an offering price of $12.25 per share of common stock.
In addition, pursuant to the Underwriting Agreement, we granted the Underwriters a 30-day option (the “Overallotment Option”) to purchase up to 799,166 additional shares of common stock. The Overallotment Option was exercised in full on February 8, 2021.
Upon completion of the Underwriting Agreement, we raised over $70,000,000 in net cash proceeds in February 2021.
We believe that based on relevant conditions and events that are known and reasonably knowable, our current forecasts and projections, for one year from the date of the filing of the consolidated financial statements in this Yearly Report on Form 10-K, indicate our ability to continue operations as a going concern for that one-year period. We are actively monitoring our operations, the cash on hand and working capital. Should access to funds be unavailable, we will need to seek out additional sources of funding. Furthermore, we have contingency plans to reduce or defer expenses and cash outlays should operations weaken in the look-forward period or additional financing, if needed, is not available.
Our ability to generate positive operating results and complete the execution of our business strategy will depend on (i) our ability to continue the growth of our technology business, (ii) the continued performance of our contractors, subcontractors and vendors, (iii) our ability to maintain and build good relationships with our lenders and financial intermediaries, (iv) our ability to maintain timely collections from existing customers, and (v) the stabilization of the world economy and global financial markets. To the extent that events outside of our control have a significant negative impact on economic and/or market conditions, they could affect payments from customers, services and supplies from vendors, our ability to continue to secure and implement new business, raise capital, and otherwise, depending on the severity of such impact, materially adversely affect our operating results.
Our operations have been affected by the recent and ongoing outbreak of the coronavirus disease (“COVID-19”) which was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization in March 2020. The impact has resulted in a slowdown in our rate of growth and includes disruptions in the delivery and installation of equipment, slower than expected contract approvals and implementation of projects by our customers, the need for employees to work remotely, restrictions on travel affecting our ability to attend meetings, conferences, consultations and installations and otherwise provide and market our products and services, and disruptions to our customers' operations which may affect our revenues. We benefited from the financing under the CARES Act. We continue to evaluate the potential impact of the pandemic and the ultimate disruption that may be caused by the outbreak is uncertain. Possible additional effects may include, but are not limited to, continuing disruption to our customers and revenue, absenteeism in our labor workforce, unavailability of products and supplies used in operations, and a decline in value of assets held by us. As a result, the pandemic may result in a material adverse impact on our financial position, operations and cash flow.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See Item 8 of Part II, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 1 - Business and Significant Accounting Policies”