ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of the Company’s historical performance and financial condition should be read together with the consolidated financial statements and related notes in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplemental Data” of this Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based on the views and beliefs of our management, as well as assumptions and estimates made by our management, see “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Information”. These statements by their nature are subject to risks and uncertainties, and are influenced by various factors. As a consequence, actual results may differ materially from those in the forward-looking statements. See “Item 1A. Risk Factors” of this report for the discussion of risk factors.
Plan of Operations
We had a working capital deficit of $110,920 as of December 31, 2020. With our current cash on hand, expected revenues, and based on our current average monthly expenses, we don’t currently anticipate the need for additional funding in order to continue our operations at their current levels, to pay the costs associated with being a public company, for the next 12 months, and to satisfy a settlement in principle of outstanding claims with a former customer as described under “Part II” - “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in “Note 6. Commitments and Contingencies”. We may also require additional funding in the future to expand or complete acquisitions. Our plan for the next twelve months is to continue using the same marketing and management strategies and continue providing a quality product with excellent customer service while also seeking to expand our operations organically or through acquisitions as funding and opportunities arise, and, as discussed above, we have also purchased a homesite which we intend to construct a custom home on which we then plan to sell. As our business continues to grow, customer feedback will be integral in making small adjustments to improve the product and overall customer experience. We plan to raise additional required funding when required through the sale of debt or equity, which may not be available on favorable terms, if at all, and may, if sold, cause significant dilution to existing stockholders. If we are unable to access additional capital moving forward, it may hurt our ability to grow and to generate future revenues.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
For the Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
We had revenue of $2,131,388 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to revenue of $1,822,437 for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $308,951 or 17.0% from the prior period. Revenue increased due to an increase in pool count during the comparable periods and general timing of contracts as well as the higher priced pools being completed in the current period. We recognize revenue based on the percentage that a job is complete rather than upon completion. As such, total revenue recognized for each period may be different than the product of total completed pools during each period multiplied by the average pool contract price of each pool during such period, as the construction of certain pools may have started in one period and ended in another.
We had cost of goods sold of $1,475,833 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to cost of goods sold of $1,225,373 for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $250,460 or 20.4% from the prior period, mainly due to mainly due to the increase in projects during the period.
Cost of goods sold decreased mainly due to the number of pools completed combined with the increase in other costs, including masonry, stone and tile, excavation and steel and gunite. We have seen increased costs of gunite, masonry, concrete, steel, plumbing and pool equipment costs associated with higher end projects and increases in the average cost of constructed pools during the current period compared to the last. The expenses which attributed to the increase in cost of goods sold for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, included:
Cost of goods sold represent our pool construction costs, including raw materials, outsourced labor, installed equipment, tile and coping expenses, excavation costs and permit expenses. We anticipate our cost of goods sold increasing in approximate proportion to increases in revenue and decreasing in approximate proportion to decreases in revenue, moving forward, as our cost of goods sold are factored into the price we charge for our pools and represent the cost of pool construction, the majority of which is not fixed and varies depending on the total number of pools and construction projects we complete during each period and the size and complexity of such projects.
We had gross margin of $655,555 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to gross margin of $597,064 for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $58,491 or 9.8% from the prior period due to the reasons described above. Gross margin as a percentage of revenue was 30.8% and 32.8% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
We had operating expenses consisting solely of general and administrative expenses of $960,261 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to operating expenses consisting solely of general and administrative expenses of $484,186 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Operating expenses increased by $476,075 or 98.3% from the prior period mainly due to an accrual related to lawsuit settlement expenses. General and administrative expenses include the salaries of our employees, commissions and the fees paid to contract employees.
We had interest income of $22 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to interest income of $104 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Interest income was in connection with interest generated by funds the Company maintained in its savings account.
We had interest expense of $1,946 and $388, for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, due to interest paid in connection with the purchase of a car used by our Chief Executive Officer, as described in greater detail under “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below.
We had a benefit for income tax of $562, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a provision for income tax of $9,584, for the year ended December 31, 2019.
We had a net loss of $306,068 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net income of $103,010 for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase in net loss of $409,078, mainly due to the increase in general and administrative expenses as described above in connection with accruals related to lawsuits, offset by the increase in revenues and increase in cost of revenues, each as discussed above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We had total assets of $340,344 as of December 31, 2020, consisting of total current assets of $302,122, which included cash of $192,567, real estate inventory of $33,948, federal income tax receivable of $978, contract assets of $69,510, and accounts receivable of $5,119 and equipment, net of accumulated depreciation, of $38,222. Federal income tax receivable relates to a payment made by the Company to the United States Treasury in March 2016, in anticipation of Federal income tax the Company estimated would be owed at the end of the 2016 calendar year. There was no tax due for the years ended December 31, 2016, 2017, 2018, 2019 or 2020, due to the utilization of a net loss carryforward and application of prepaid taxes. Included in real estate inventory as of December 31, 2020 is the value of the land which the Company acquired in the third quarter of 2019, which it plans to build a custom home on. Equipment increased by $30,883 in connection with the purchase of a new vehicle as discussed below. Contract assets include estimated earnings in excess of billings on uncompleted contracts.
We had total liabilities of $486,350 as of December 31, 2020, which included current liabilities of $413,042, including accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $139,011 (which included accrued lawsuit settlements of $80,000, contract liabilities, relating to billings in excess of costs and estimated earnings on uncompleted jobs of $267,156, and current portion of note payable of $6,875, and long-term liabilities consisting of a long-term note payable, net of current portion of $73,308 relating to a vehicle (discussed below) and the PPP Note discussed below. The $80,000 of accrued lawsuit settlements represents amounts accrued in connection with the lawsuits described in greater detail under “Part II” - “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in “Note 6. Commitments and Contingencies”.
On February 11, 2020, we purchased a Hyundai Genesis G80 for use by Mr. May. The Vehicle had a total purchase price of $50,616, including $11,000 which was paid as a down payment in cash. We entered into a term note, secured by the vehicle, for the remaining amount of the purchase price, which amount accrues interest at the rate of 3.99% per annum and is payable at the rate of $660 per month through maturity on February 27, 2025.
On April 28, 2020, the Company secured a construction loan from First United Bank and Trust Company to be used to develop the land purchased in the third quarter of 2019. The loan is in the amount of $221,000, bears interest at the rate of 6.25% per annum and is repayable on April 28, 2021. As of December 31, 2020, and through the date of this filing, no amount had been advanced on the loan.
On May 11, 2020, we (through Reliant Pools) received a loan (the “Loan”) from Wells Fargo Bank N.A. (the “Lender”) in the principal amount of $51,113, pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”), which was enacted on March 27, 2020. The Loan is evidenced by a promissory note (the “Note”), dated effective May 4, 2020, issued by the Company to the Lender. The Note is unsecured, matures on May 4, 2022 and bears interest at a rate of 1.00% per annum, payable monthly commencing on November 2, 2020, following an initial deferral period as specified under the PPP. The Note may be prepaid at any time prior to maturity with no prepayment penalties. Proceeds from the Loan will be available to the Company to fund designated expenses, including certain payroll costs, rent, utilities and other permitted expenses, in accordance with the PPP. Under the terms of the PPP, up to the entire amount of principal and accrued interest may be forgiven to the extent Loan proceeds are used for qualifying expenses as described in the CARES Act and applicable implementing guidance issued by the U.S. Small Business Administration under the PPP (including that up to 60% of such Loan funds are used for payroll). The Company has used the entire Loan amount for designated qualifying expenses and has applied for forgiveness of the respective Loan in accordance with the terms of the PPP. No assurance can be given that the Company will obtain forgiveness of the Loan in whole or in part. With respect to any portion of the Loan that is not forgiven, the Loan will be subject to customary provisions for a loan of this type, including customary events of default.
We had a working capital deficit of $110,920 as of December 31, 2020, compared to working capital of $147,056 as of December 31, 2019.
We had $121,494 of net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was mainly due to $306,068 of net loss, offset by an increase of $170,666 in contract liabilities and $84,037 of accounts payable and accrued liabilities. During the period, a $275,000 lawsuit was settled and an additional lawsuit was settled for $145,000, of which $65,000 was paid in the last quarter of 2020 and of which $22,500 was paid during the first quarter of 2021. We had $117,835 of net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019, due mainly to net income of $103,010.
We had $11,000 of net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was solely due to the down payment on the vehicle purchase described above.
We had $44,381 of net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was due to the proceeds from the PPP Loan discussed above, offset by payments on our vehicle loan. We had $18,248 of cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019, which was due solely to payments on note payable and related party advances.
We do not currently have any additional commitments or identified sources of additional capital from third parties or from our officers, directors or majority stockholders. Additional financing may not be available on favorable terms, if at all.
In the future, we may be required to seek additional capital by selling additional debt or equity securities, or otherwise be required to bring cash flows in balance when we approach a condition of cash insufficiency. The sale of additional equity or debt securities, if accomplished, may result in dilution to our then stockholders. Financing may not be available in amounts or on terms acceptable to us, or at all. In the event we are unable to raise additional funding and/or obtain revenues sufficient to support our expenses, we may be forced to curtail or abandon our business operations, and any investment in the Company could become worthless.
Critical Accounting Policies:
Emerging Growth Company. Section 107 of the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) provides that an “emerging growth company” can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. In other words, an “emerging growth company” can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to take advantage of the benefits of this extended transition period. Our financial statements may therefore not be comparable to those of companies that comply with such new or revised accounting standards.
Revenue Recognition
On January 1, 2018, we adopted Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“new revenue standard”) to all contracts using the modified retrospective method. The adoption of the new revenue standard had no material impact on our consolidated financial statements as it did not require a change in revenue recognition. As such, comparative information has not been restated and continues to be reported under the accounting standards in effect for those periods.
Revenue is recognized based on the following five step model:
-
Identification of the contract with a customer
-
Identification of the performance obligations in the contract
-
Determination of the transaction price
-
Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
-
Recognition of revenue when, or as, the Company satisfies a performance obligation
All of the Company’s revenue is currently generated from the design and installation of swimming pools. As such no further disaggregation of revenue information is provided.
Performance Obligations
A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer, and is the unit of account in the new revenue standard. The contract transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance obligation and recognized as revenue when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied. Our contracts have a single performance obligation as the promise to transfer the individual goods or services is not separately identifiable from other promises in the contracts and, therefore, not distinct.
Performance Obligations Satisfied Over Time
Revenue for our contracts that satisfy the criteria for over time recognition is recognized as the work progresses. The majority of our revenue is derived from construction contracts and projects that typically span between 4 to 12 months. Our construction contracts will continue to be recognized over time because of the continuous transfer of control to the customer as all of the work is performed at the customer’s site and, therefore, the customer controls the asset as it is being constructed. Contract costs include labor, material, and indirect costs.
Performance Obligations Satisfied at a Point in Time
Revenue for our contracts that do not satisfy the criteria for over time recognition is recognized at a point in time. Substantially all of our revenue recognized at a point in time is for work performed for pool maintenance or repairs. Unlike our construction contracts that use a cost-to-cost input measure for performance, the pool maintenance or repairs utilize an output measure for performance based on the completion of a unit of work. The typical time frame for completion of these services is less than one month. Upon fulfillment of the performance obligation, the customer is provided an invoice (or equivalent) demonstrating transfer of control or completion of service to the customer. We believe that point in time recognition remains appropriate for these contracts and will continue to recognize revenues upon completion of the performance obligation and issuance of an invoice.
Contract modifications are routine in the performance of our contracts. Contracts are often modified to account for changes in the contract specifications or requirements. In most instances, contract modifications are for goods or services that are not distinct, and, therefore, are accounted for as part of the existing contract.
Backlog
On December 31, 2020, we had approximately $2,810,705 of remaining performance obligations on our construction contracts, which we also refer to as backlog. We expect to recognize our current backlog as revenue during 2021.
Contract Estimates
Accounting for long-term contracts and programs involves the use of various techniques to estimate total contract revenue and costs. For long-term contracts, we estimate the profit on a contract as the difference between the total estimated revenue and expected costs to complete a contract and recognize that profit over the life of the contract.
Contract estimates are based on various assumptions to project the outcome of future events. These assumptions include labor productivity and availability, the complexity of the work to be performed, the cost and availability of materials, and the performance of subcontractors.
Variable Consideration
Transaction price for our contracts may include variable consideration, which includes increases to transaction price for approved and unapproved change orders, claims and incentives, and reductions to transaction price for liquidated damages. Change orders, claims and incentives are generally not distinct from the existing contract due to the significant integration service provided in the context of the contract and are accounted for as a modification of the existing contract and performance obligation. We estimate variable consideration for a performance obligation at the most likely amount to which we expect to be entitled (or the most likely amount we expect to incur in the case of liquidated damages), utilizing estimation methods that best predict the amount of consideration to which we will be entitled (or will be incurred in the case of liquidated damages). We include variable consideration in the estimated transaction price to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur or when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is resolved. Our estimates of variable consideration and determination of whether to include estimated amounts in transaction price are based largely on an assessment of our anticipated performance and all information (historical, current and forecasted) that is reasonably available to us. The effect of variable consideration on the transaction price of a performance obligation is recognized as an adjustment to revenue on a cumulative catch-up basis. To the extent unapproved change orders and claims reflected in transaction price (or excluded from transaction price in the case of liquidated damages) are not resolved in our favor, or to the extent incentives reflected in transaction price are not earned, there could be reductions in, or reversals of, previously recognized revenue. No adjustment on any one contract was material to our condensed consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Contract Balances
The timing of revenue recognition, billings and cash collections results in billed accounts receivable and costs and estimated earnings in excess of billings on uncompleted contracts (contract assets) on the consolidated balance sheet. On our construction contracts, amounts are billed as work progresses in accordance with agreed-upon contractual terms, either at periodic intervals (e.g., biweekly or monthly) or upon achievement of contractual milestones. Generally, billing occurs prior to revenue recognition, resulting in contract liabilities. These assets and liabilities are reported on the consolidated balance sheet on a contract-by-contract basis at the end of each reporting period.
The Company recognizes revenue from the design and installation of swimming pools.
Accounts Receivable and Allowances. The Company does not charge interest to its customers and carries its customers’ receivables at their face amounts, less an allowance for doubtful accounts. Included in accounts receivable are balances billed to customers pursuant to retainage provisions in certain contracts that are due upon completion of the contract and acceptance by the customer, or earlier as provided by the contract. Based on the Company’s experience in recent years, the majority of customer balances at each balance sheet date are collected within twelve months. As is common practice in the industry, the Company classifies all accounts receivable, including retainage, as current assets. The contracting cycle for certain long-term contracts may extend beyond one year, and accordingly, collection of retainage on those contracts may extend beyond one year.
The Company grants trade credit, on a non-collateralized basis (with the exception of lien rights against the property in certain cases), to its customers and is subject to potential credit risk related to changes in business and overall economic activity. The Company analyzes specific accounts receivable balances, historical bad debts, customer credit-worthiness, current economic trends and changes in customer payment terms when evaluating the adequacy of the allowance for doubtful accounts. In the event that a customer balance is deemed to be uncollectible, the account balance is written-off against the allowance for doubtful accounts.
Classification of Construction Contract-related Assets and Liabilities. Costs and estimated earnings in excess of billings on uncompleted contracts are presented as a current asset in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets, and billings in excess of costs and estimated earnings on uncompleted contracts are presented as a current liability in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. The Company’s contracts vary in duration, with the duration of some larger contracts exceeding one year. Consistent with industry practices, the Company includes the amounts realizable and payable under contracts, which may extend beyond one year, in current assets and current liabilities. The vast majority of these balances are settled within one year.
Equipment. Equipment, consisting mainly of two vehicles, is stated at cost. The Company depreciates the cost of equipment using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets. When assets are retired or otherwise disposed of, the cost and related accumulated depreciation are removed from the accounts and any resulting gain or loss is reflected in operations for the period. The cost of maintenance and repairs is charged to operations as incurred; significant renewals improvements are capitalized. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, depreciation expense was $15,919 and $6,775, respectively. The estimated useful lives of the Company vehicles are five years.
RECENTLY ISSUED ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
For more information on recently issued accounting standards, see “Note 1. The Company and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included herein under “Item 8. Financial Statement and Supplemental Data”.