ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. When used in this Form 10-K, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on November 20, 2019 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar Business Combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the IPO and the sale of the private securities, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
All activity through December 31, 2020 relates to our formation, IPO, and search for a prospective initial business combination target.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from November 20, 2019 (inception) through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the IPO, described below, and, after our IPO, identifying a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the IPO. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $136,408, which consisted of interest income of $9,325 and unrealized loss on marketable securities of $1,831, as well as interest income from cash held in the Trust Account of $1,590, offset by operating costs of $145,492 which were primarily professional fees and insurance expense.
For the period from November 20, 2019 (inception) to December 31, 2019, our net loss of $3,638 consisted of professional fees.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On October 13, 2020, we consummated the IPO of 7,000,000 units. Each unit consists of one share of common stock of the Company, par value $0.001 per share, and one redeemable warrant of the Company, with each warrant entitling the holder thereof to purchase one share of common stock for $11.50 per share. The units were sold at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds to the Company of $70,000,000.
On October 16, 2020, we consummated the sale of an additional 278,151 units that were subject to the underwriter’s partial exercise of the over-allotment option at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $2,781,510. Simultaneously with the closing of the sale of additional units, the Company consummated the sale of an additional 83,446 Private Warrants at a price of $1.00 per Private Warrant, generating total proceeds of $83,446.
Following the IPO, the exercise of the over-allotment option and sale of additional Private Warrants, an aggregate amount of $73,509,325 was placed in the Company’s trust account established in connection with the IPO. Transaction costs amounted to $4,366,890, consisting of $3,450,000 of underwriting fees and $315,846 of other offering costs.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash held in the Trust Account of $73,510,915 (including approximately $1,590 of interest income) consisting of U.S. treasury bills with a maturity of 185 days or less. Interest income on the balance in the trust account may be used by us to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2020, we withdrew $0 of interest earned on the Trust Account to pay our income taxes.
For the period from November 20, 2019 (inception) through December 31, 2019, cash used in operating activities was $0. For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $218,713. Net loss of $136,408 was affected by an unrealized loss on marketable securities of $1,831. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $84,136 of cash from operating activities.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, to acquire a target business and to pay our expenses relating thereto, including a fee payable to LifeSci Capital LLC, Ladenburg Thalmann, and Ingalls & Snyder LLC, and Northland Securities, Inc., upon consummation of our initial business combination for assisting us in connection with our initial business combination. To the extent that our capital stock is used in whole or in part as consideration to effect a business combination, the remaining funds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business. Such working capital funds could be used in a variety of ways including continuing or expanding the target business’ operations, for strategic acquisitions and for marketing, research and development of existing or new products. Such funds could also be used to repay any operating expenses or finders’ fees which we had incurred prior to the completion of our business combination if the funds available to us outside of the trust account were insufficient to cover such expenses.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $11,734 and marketable securities of $525,287. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account for identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates, performing business due diligence on prospective target businesses, traveling to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses, reviewing corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, selecting the target business to acquire and structuring, negotiating and consummating the business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Insiders, or certain of our officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants identical to the Private Warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our Business Combination. If we are unable to complete our Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Related Party Transactions
Our Sponsor, Petra Investment Holdings LLC, has loaned us an aggregate of $140,000 on a non-interest bearing basis for payment of expenses related to the IPO pursuant to a promissory note issued to Sponsor by us, which allows us to borrow up to an aggregate principal amount of $150,000. The note was repaid on October 16, 2020, including prior advances of $10,000 converted into the note, less $25,000 applied to the purchase of Founder Shares.
Concurrent with the IPO, our sponsor purchased 3,150,000 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.00. Simultaneously with the closing of the sale of the Over-Allotment Option Units, the Company consummated the sale of an additional 83,446 Private Warrants at a price of $1.00 per Private Warrant, generating total proceeds of $83,446.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, Petra Investment Holdings LLC, or certain of the Company’s officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan the us funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). If we complete a business combination, the we would repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the trust account released to the Company. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the trust account. In the event that a business combination does not close, the we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the trust account to repay the Working Capital Loans but no proceeds held in the trust account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1,500,000 of such Working Capital Loans may be converted into warrants of the post Business Combination entity at a price of $1.00 per warrant. There have been no Working Capital Loans to date.
Off-balance sheet financing arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
Contractual obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities.
We have engaged to LifeSci Capital LLC, Ladenburg Thalmann, and Ingalls & Snyder LLC, and Northland Securities, Inc. (collectively, the “Advisors”) as advisors in connection with a Business Combination to assist us in holding meetings with our shareholders to discuss the potential Business Combination and the target business’ attributes, introduce us to potential investors that are interested in purchasing our securities in connection with a Business Combination, assist us in obtaining shareholder approval for the Business Combination and assist us with our press releases and public filings in connection with the Business Combination. We will pay the Advisors a cash fee for such services upon the consummation of a Business Combination in an amount equal to 4% of the gross proceeds received by the Company in the IPO (“Fee”) (exclusive of any applicable finders’ fees which might become payable). The Company will allocate 52.5% of the Fee to LifeSci, 10% of the Fee to Ingalls, 22.5% of the Fee to Ladenburg and 15% of the Fee to Northland.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Common stock subject to possible redemption
We account for common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our condensed balance sheet.
Net loss per common share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Common stock subject to possible redemption which is not currently redeemable and is not redeemable at fair value, have been excluded from the calculation of basic net loss per common share since such shares, if redeemed, only participate in their pro rata share of the trust account earnings. Our net income is adjusted for the portion of income that is attributable to common stock subject to possible redemption, as these shares only participate in the earnings of the Trust Account and not our income or losses.
Recent accounting standards
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.