Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should read the “Cautionary Statement About Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” sections of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the accompanying audited consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
REV Group companies are leading designers, manufacturers, and distributors of specialty vehicles and related aftermarket parts and services. We serve a diversified customer base, primarily in the United States and Canada, through three segments: Fire & Emergency, Commercial, and Recreation. We provide customized vehicle solutions for applications, including essential needs for public services (ambulances, fire apparatus, school buses, and transit buses), commercial infrastructure (terminal trucks and industrial sweepers) and consumer leisure (recreational vehicles). Our diverse portfolio is made up of well-established principal vehicle brands, including many of the most recognizable names within their industry. Several of our brands pioneered their specialty vehicle product categories and date back more than 50 years. We believe that in most of our markets, we hold the first, second or third market share position and approximately 88% of our net sales during fiscal year 2021 came from products where we believe we hold such share positions.
Segments
Fire & Emergency - The Fire & Emergency segment sells fire apparatus equipment under the Emergency One (“E-ONE”), Kovatch Mobile Equipment (“KME”)Ferrara, and Spartan Emergency Response (“Spartan ER”) which consists of Spartan Emergency Response, Smeal, and Ladder Tower brands and ambulances under the American Emergency Vehicles (“AEV”), Horton Emergency Vehicles (“Horton”), Leader Emergency Vehicles (“Leader”), Road Rescue and Wheeled Coach brands. We believe we are the largest manufacturer by unit volume of fire and emergency vehicles in the United States and have one of the industry’s broadest portfolios of products including Type I ambulances (aluminum body mounted on a heavy truck-style chassis), Type II ambulances (van conversion ambulance), Type III ambulances (aluminum body mounted on a van-style chassis), pumpers (fire apparatus on a custom or commercial chassis with a water pump and water tank to extinguish fires), ladder trucks (fire apparatus with stainless steel or aluminum ladders), tanker trucks and rescue, aircraft rescue firefighting (“ARFF”), custom cabs & chassis and other vehicles. Each of our individual brands is distinctly positioned and targets certain price and feature points in the market such that dealers often carry, and customers often buy more than one REV Fire & Emergency product line.
Commercial - Our Commercial segment serves the bus market through the Collins Bus and ENC brands. We serve the terminal truck market through the Capacity brand and the sweeper market through the Lay-Mor brand. Our products in the Commercial segment include transit buses (large municipal buses where we build our own chassis and body), Type A school buses (small school bus built on commercial chassis), sweepers (three- and four-wheel versions used in road construction activities), and terminal trucks (specialized vehicles which move freight in warehouses, intermodal yards, distribution and fulfillment centers and ports). Within each market, we produce many customized configurations to address the diverse needs of our customers.
Recreation - Our Recreation segment serves the RV market through the following principal brands: American Coach, Fleetwood RV, Holiday Rambler, Renegade, Midwest and Lance. We believe our brand portfolio contains some of the longest standing, most recognized brands in the RV industry. Under these brands, REV provides a variety of highly recognized motorized and towable RV models such as: American Eagle, Bounder, Pace Arrow, Discovery LXE, Verona, Weekender and Lance, among others. Our products in the Recreation segment include Class A motorized RVs (motorhomes built on a heavy-duty chassis with either diesel or gas engine configurations), Class C and “Super C” motorized RVs (motorhomes built on a commercial truck or van chassis), Class B RVs (motorhomes built out within a van chassis and high-end luxury van conversions), and towable travel trailers and truck campers. The Recreation segment also includes Goldshield Fiberglass, which produces a wide range of custom molded fiberglass products for the heavy-duty truck, RV and broader industrial markets.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
The primary factors affecting our results of operations include:
General Economic Conditions
Our business is impacted by the U.S. economic environment, employment levels, consumer confidence, municipal spending, municipal tax receipts, changes in interest rates and instability in securities markets around the world, among other factors. In particular, changes in the U.S. economic climate can impact demand in key end markets. In addition, we are susceptible to supply chain disruptions resulting from the impact of tariffs and global macro-economic factors (refer to “Impact of COVID-19” section below), which can have a dramatic effect, either directly or indirectly, on the availability, lead-times and costs associated with raw materials and parts.
RV purchases are discretionary in nature and therefore sensitive to the availability of financing, consumer confidence, unemployment levels, levels of disposable income and changing levels of consumer home equity, among other factors. RV markets are affected by general U.S. and global economic conditions, which create risks that future economic downturns will further reduce consumer demand and negatively impact our sales.
While less economically sensitive than the Recreation segment, the Fire & Emergency segment and the Commercial segment are also impacted by the overall economic environment. Local tax revenues are an important source of funding for fire and emergency response departments. Fire and emergency products and buses are typically a larger cost item for municipalities and their service life is relatively long, making the purchase more deferrable, which can result in reduced demand for our products. In addition to commercial demand, local, state and federal tax revenues can be an important source of funding for many of our bus products including Type A school buses and transit buses. Volatility in tax revenues or availability of funds via budgetary appropriation can have a negative impact on the demand for these products.
A decrease in employment levels, consumer confidence or the availability of financing, or other adverse economic events, or the failure of actual demand for our products to meet our estimates, could negatively affect the demand for our products. Any decline in overall customer demand in markets in which we operate could have a material adverse effect on our operating performance.
Seasonality
In a typical year, our operating results are impacted by seasonality. Historically, the slowest sales volume quarter has been the first fiscal quarter when the purchasing seasons for vehicles, such as school buses, RVs and sweepers are the lowest due to the colder weather and the relatively long time until the summer vacation season, and the fact that the school year is underway with municipalities and school bus contractors utilizing their existing fleets to transport student populations. Sales of our products have typically been higher in the second, third and fourth fiscal quarters (with the fourth fiscal quarter typically being the strongest) due to better weather, the vacation season, buying habits of RV dealers and end-users, timing of government/municipal customer fiscal years, and the beginning of a new school year. Our quarterly results of operations, cash flows, and liquidity are likely to be impacted by these seasonal patterns. Sales and earnings for other vehicles that we produce, such as essential emergency vehicles and commercial bus fleets, are less seasonal, but fluctuations in sales of these vehicles can also be impacted by timing surrounding the fiscal years of municipalities and commercial customers, as well as the timing and amounts of multi-unit orders.
Impact of Acquisitions
We actively evaluate opportunities to improve and expand our business through targeted acquisitions that are consistent with our strategy. We also may dispose of certain components of our business that no longer fit within our overall strategy. Historically, a significant component of our growth has been through acquisitions of businesses. We typically incur upfront costs as we integrate acquired businesses and implement our operating philosophy at newly acquired companies, including consolidation of supplies and materials, purchases, improvements to production processes, and other restructuring initiatives. The benefits of these integration efforts and divestiture activities may not positively impact our financial results until subsequent periods.
We recognize acquired assets and liabilities at fair value. This includes the recognition of identified intangible assets and goodwill which, in the case of definite-life intangible assets, are then amortized over their expected useful lives, which typically results in an increase in amortization expense. In addition, assets acquired and liabilities assumed generally include tangible assets as well as contingent assets and liabilities. During the second quarter of fiscal year 2020, we acquired Spartan ER, a leading designer, manufacturer and distributor of custom emergency response vehicles, cabs and chassis for the emergency response market.
Impact of COVID-19
During our second quarter of fiscal year 2020, the novel coronavirus known as "COVID-19" spread throughout the world creating a global pandemic. The pandemic triggered a significant downturn in global commerce and these challenging market conditions may continue for an extended period of time. As a result of the spread of COVID-19, we have also experienced disruption and delays in our supply chain, customer demand changes, and logistics challenges, including our customers’ ability to inspect and take delivery of vehicles.
Our Recreation vehicles dealer network was significantly impacted by the pandemic and many of them closed temporarily before reopening in the third quarter of fiscal year 2020 when consumer demand for recreation vehicles began to accelerate due to an increase in consumer preference to vacation in a safe and socially distant manner. As of October 31, 2021 and 2020, backlog levels were significantly higher than the same period in the prior years, respectively.
As the global economy continues to recover from COVID-19 related disruption, labor and significant supply chain challenges, such as shortages in semiconductors, subcomponents and increased prices of raw materials, such as steel and aluminum, have impacted operations of companies on a global scale. Such supply chain disruptions during the fiscal year 2021 impacted our ability to obtain certain raw materials and purchased components that are necessary to our production processes, including the ability to obtain chassis from third party suppliers. We continue to monitor these disruptions and take measures to mitigate the associated risks.
In certain geographies there has been a resurgence of COVID-19 variant cases and governmental authorities continue to implement numerous measures in an attempt to contain and mitigate the spread of COVID-19 and its variants. While the global market impacts, closures and limitations on movement are expected to be temporary, the duration of any demand changes, production and supply chain disruptions, and related financial impacts, cannot be reliably estimated at this time.
Results of Operations
The following table compares results for fiscal years 2021, 2020 and 2019
Net Sales: Consolidated net sales increased $103.2 million in fiscal year 2021 primarily due to increased Recreation segment net sales and the acquisition of Spartan Emergency Response (“Spartan ER”) in February of 2020, partially offset by a decrease in organic net sales in the Fire & Emergency (“F&E”) segment and a decrease in net sales in the Commercial segment, the latter of which,
related to the divesture of two shuttle bus businesses in May of fiscal year 2020. The increase in Recreation segment net sales compared to fiscal year 2020 was primarily the result of increased wholesale shipments across all categories related to increased retail demand as outdoor activities increased in popularity emerging from COVID-19. The decline in F&E organic net sales compared to fiscal year 2020 was primarily the result of a decrease in fire truck and ambulance shipments in the second half of fiscal year 2021 related to supply chain, chassis and labor constraints that limited vehicle production, partially offset by strong price realization and favorable mix.
Consolidated net sales decreased $126.1 million in fiscal year 2020 primarily due to the divesture of two shuttle bus businesses and a decrease in organic net sales in the F&E, Commercial and Recreation segments partially offset by the acquisition of Spartan ER. The decline in F&E organic net sales compared to fiscal year 2019 was primarily the result of a decrease in fire truck and ambulance shipments partially offset by increased price and mix within the Fire division. The decrease in Commercial segment net sales for fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019 was primarily the result of decreased school bus shipments as districts and contractors deferred purchases due to COVID-19 related school closures, as well as a significant decline in sales of terminal trucks and street sweepers that were in line with overall end market demand. The decrease in Recreation segment net sales for fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019 was primarily due to manufacturing shutdowns and stay-at-home orders related to COVID-19 within the second quarter of fiscal year 2020.
Gross Profit: Consolidated gross profit increased $62.9 million in fiscal year 2021 primarily due to increased gross profit in the F&E and Recreation segments partially offset by decreased gross profit in the Commercial segment. The increase in gross profit in the F&E segment was primarily the result of increased efficiencies resulting from operational improvement initiatives and strong price realization, partially offset by lower production volumes and inefficiencies related to supply chain, chassis and labor constraints. The increase in gross profit in the Recreation segment was primarily the result of higher shipments and efficiencies related to increased production volumes and strong price realization related to lower discounts and sales allowances. The decrease in gross profit in the Commercial segment was primarily the result of lower production volumes of municipal transit buses, as well as Type A school buses related to chassis constraints, and an unfavorable mix due to increased contribution of terminal trucks and street sweepers unit sales, partially offset by the sale of the two shuttle bus businesses in May of fiscal year 2020.
Consolidated gross profit decreased $23.7 million in fiscal year 2020 primarily due to a reduction in gross profit in the Commercial and Recreation segments, partially offset by an increase in gross profit in the F&E segment. Gross profit in the Commercial segment was negatively impacted by lower production volumes of terminal trucks, street sweepers and Type A school buses. Gross profit in the Recreation segment was negatively impacted by temporary production shutdowns related to COVID-19 and lingering supply chain disruptions. The increase in gross profit in the F&E segment was primarily the result of the Spartan ER acquisition as well as increased throughput at a primary fire plant, partially offset by lower ambulance shipments and negative impacts due to absenteeism related to COVID-19 within the segment.
Selling, General and Administrative: Consolidated selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) costs decreased $15.9 million in fiscal year 2021 primarily due to reduced corporate SG&A expense related to certain restructuring activities and the divestiture of two shuttle bus businesses in May of fiscal year 2020, partially offset by the acquisition of Spartan ER, the return of certain travel and trade show related costs that were reduced in fiscal year 2020 due to COVID-19, and an increase in incentive compensation in fiscal year 2021.
Consolidated SG&A costs increased $5.6 million in fiscal year 2020 primarily due to the Spartan ER acquisition partially offset by reduced discretionary spending as well as travel and trade show related costs and the divestiture of two shuttle bus businesses in May of fiscal year 2020.
Restructuring: Consolidated restructuring costs decreased $7.4 million in fiscal year 2021. Restructuring costs of $2.5 million resulted from the announced closure of certain production operations within the F&E segment and corporate related charges.
Consolidated restructuring costs increased $4.2 million in fiscal year 2020. Restructuring costs of $9.9 million resulted from the move from a centralized to a decentralized aftermarket parts business, severance costs related to reductions in force across all segments, dealer termination payments associated with the sunset of certain ambulance brands, and lease termination costs related to the closure of a Spartan ER facility.
Restructuring costs for fiscal year 2019 of $5.7 million were primarily attributable to headcount reductions in the F&E Segment and our corporate office as well as a facility closure in the Recreation Segment and lease termination costs.
Impairment charges: Impairment charges for fiscal year 2021 were related to the certain buildings within the F&E segment where the Company announced the closure of productions operations.
Impairment charges for fiscal year 2020 were related to the liquidation of the Company’s rental fleet, certain fixed assets associated with the decentralization of the Company’s aftermarket parts business and the value of trade names associated with sunset of certain ambulance brands.
Impairment charges for fiscal year 2019 were primarily related to assets held for sale and other assets which were liquidated during the year.
Loss on Early Extinguishment of Debt: Reflects losses in fiscal year 2021 recognized upon extinguishment of our 2017 ABL Facility and Term Loan. The loss is entirely comprised of unamortized debt issuance costs that were written off in connection with this extinguishment.
Loss on sale of Business: In the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2021, in connection with a strategic review of the product portfolio, we completed the sale of our REV Brazil business for $2.0 million cash plus $2.0 million cash to be received over the subsequent two years. As a result, a loss of $2.8 million was recorded during the fiscal year ended 2021. Refer to Note 7, Divestitures to our 2021 audited consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In the third quarter of fiscal year 2020, we completed the sale of our shuttle bus businesses for $50.5 million in cash. As a result, we recorded a loss on sale of $11.1 million during fiscal year ended 2020. Refer to Note 7, Divestitures to our 2021 audited consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Loss on investment in China JV: In the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2021, the Company made the strategic decision to exit its interests in the China JV and began soliciting offers to sell the investment and settle the loan. In connection with this decision, the Company recorded a loss of $6.2 million, which represents the difference between the carrying value of the investment and loan and the estimated proceeds to be received upon sale and settlement, respectively.
Loss (gain) on acquisition of business: During the first quarter of fiscal year 2021, purchase price allocation of the Spartan ER acquisition was updated to reflect immaterial measurement period adjustments made to inventories, warranty, and certain other assets acquired and liabilities assumed. These updates resulted in a decrease to the cumulative gain on acquisition of $0.4 million. Refer to Note 3, Acquisition, to our 2021 audited consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
During the second quarter of fiscal year 2020, we acquired Spartan ER for $47.3 million. We recorded the preliminary purchase accounting, which resulted in a gain on acquisition of $8.6 million. Refer to Note 3, Acquisition, to our 2021 audited consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Provision (benefit) for income taxes: Consolidated income tax provision was $11.3 million or 20.3% of pretax income and benefit of $15.6 million or 33.8% of pretax loss for fiscal years 2021 and 2020, respectively. Tax provision for fiscal year 2021 was favorably impacted by tax benefits related to net operating loss carrybacks allowable under the CARES Act of $4.2 million. Tax expense was unfavorably impacted by the valuation allowances related to the loss on our China JV of $1.3 million.
Results for fiscal year 2020 were favorably impacted by tax benefits related to loss carryback allowable under the CARES Act and the nontaxable gain on the acquisition of Spartan ER, for $3.5 million and $2.2 million, respectively.
Consolidated income tax benefit was $15.6 million or 33.8% of pretax loss and $3.5 million or 20.9% of pretax loss for fiscal years 2020 and 2019, respectively. Results for fiscal year 2020 were favorably impacted by tax benefits related to a loss carryback allowable under the CARES Act and the nontaxable gain on the acquisition of Spartan ER for $3.5 million and $2.2 million, respectively. Results for fiscal year 2019 were favorably impacted by incentives for U.S. research for $0.6 million and unfavorably impacted by share-based compensation tax deductions for $0.8 million.
Net income (loss): Consolidated net income increased $74.9 million in fiscal year 2021 primarily due to increased gross profit described above plus lower restructuring and restructuring related charges, lower losses related to sale of business, and lower interest expense, partially offset by higher provision for income tax and loss on investments.
Consolidated net loss increased $18.2 million in fiscal year 2020 primarily due to a reduction in gross profit described above plus increased restructuring, restructuring related and impairment charges attributable to severance costs related to reductions in force, leadership changes, decentralizing the Company’s aftermarket parts business, the sunset of certain ambulance brands and liquidation of vehicles in our rental business, partially offset by lower interest expense and a greater tax benefit. The increase in the Company’s tax benefit in fiscal year 2020 as compared to 2019, relates primarily to the aforementioned tax changes.
Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA increased $74.0 million in fiscal year 2021 due to higher Adjusted EBITDA in the F&E and Recreation segments, partially offset by lower Adjusted EBITDA in the Commercial segment.
Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA decreased $34.6 million in fiscal year 2020 due to lower Adjusted EBITDA across all segments.
Refer to the “Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income” section of “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a reconciliation of Net Income (Loss) to Adjusted EBITDA tables and related footnotes.
Refer to the “Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income” section of “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a reconciliation of Net Income (Loss) to Adjusted Net Income tables and related footnotes.
Fire & Emergency Segment
Net Sales. F&E segment net sales increased $3.1 million in fiscal year 2021, primarily due to the acquisition of Spartan ER in February of 2020. Excluding the impact of Spartan ER, F&E net sales decreased by $46.4 million, or 5.0% compared to the prior year period. The decrease in organic net sales was primarily related to lower shipments of fire trucks and ambulance units in the second half of fiscal year 2021 related to supply chain, chassis and labor constraints, partially offset by strong price realization and favorable mix.
F&E segment net sales increased $164.1 million in fiscal year 2020. Excluding the impact of Spartan ER, F&E net sales decreased by $48.3 million, or 5.0% compared to the prior year period. The decrease in sales was primarily related to lower shipments of fire trucks from two other plants and lower shipments of ambulance units due to lingering COVID-19 related supply chain disruptions and the timing of deliveries partially offset by increased throughput and improved mix at a primary fire plant.
Adjusted EBITDA. F&E segment Adjusted EBITDA increased $17.8 million in fiscal year 2021. Excluding the impact of Spartan ER, F&E Adjusted EBITDA increased by $17.6 million, or 64.9% compared to the prior year period. The increase in profitability was primarily related to increased efficiencies related to productivity improvement initiatives at the largest fire and largest ambulance plants, partially offset by inefficiencies related to supply chain, chassis and labor constraints, primarily in the second half of fiscal year 2021.
F&E segment Adjusted EBITDA decreased $3.3 million in fiscal year 2020. Spartan ER contributed $12.8 million of Adjusted EBITDA during fiscal year 2020. Excluding the impact of Spartan ER, F&E Adjusted EBITDA decreased by $16.1 million, or 37.3%
compared to the prior year period. The decrease in profitability was primarily related to inefficiencies at two fire plants and delayed deliveries of ambulance units due to absenteeism and supply chain disruptions related to COVID-19, partially offset by increased throughput at a large fire plant.
Commercial Segment
Net Sales. Commercial segment net sales decreased $97.5 million in fiscal year 2021 primarily due to a reduction in net sales associated with the disposition of two shuttle bus businesses in May of fiscal year 2020. Excluding the impact of the shuttle bus divestiture, net sales decreased by $3.9 million, or 1.0% compared to the prior fiscal year. The decrease in net sales was primarily due to lower shipments of Type A school buses related to the suspension of normal production activities in fourth quarter fiscal 2021 due to limited chassis availability and lower shipments of municipal transit buses, partially offset by increased shipments of terminal trucks and street sweepers.
Commercial segment net sales decreased $235.2 million in fiscal year 2020 primarily due to a reduction in net sales associated with the disposition of two shuttle bus businesses in May of fiscal year 2020. Excluding the impact of the shuttle bus divestiture, net sales decreased by $100.5 million, or 20.6% compared to the prior year. The decrease in net sales was primarily due to lower demand and related shipments of Type A school buses due to uncertainty surrounding school attendance policies, lower shipments of street sweepers related to reduced capital budgets at large customers and lower shipments of terminal trucks.
Adjusted EBITDA. Commercial segment Adjusted EBITDA decreased $3.5 million in fiscal year 2021. The decrease in Adjusted EBITDA compared to the prior year was primarily due to lower production volumes and shipments of school buses, inefficiencies related to the suspension of production activities mentioned above, and lower shipments of municipal transit buses, partially offset by increased production volumes and shipments of terminal trucks and street sweepers.
Commercial segment Adjusted EBITDA decreased $21.5 million in fiscal year 2020. Adjusted EBITDA for the prior year period included $0.9 million of profitability attributable to the shuttle bus businesses. Excluding the impact of the shuttle bus divestiture, Adjusted EBITDA decreased by $20.6 million, or 37.4% compared to the prior year. The decrease in Adjusted EBITDA compared to the prior year was primarily due to reduced production volume and shipments of Type A school buses, terminal trucks and street sweepers.
Recreation Segment
Net Sales. Recreation segment net sales increased $200.7 million in fiscal year 2021 primarily due to increased wholesale shipments across all categories related to increased retail demand as outdoor activities increased in popularity emerging from COVID-19 as well as increased pricing and lower discounts and sales allowances.
Recreation segment net sales decreased $58.5 million in fiscal year 2020 primarily due to manufacturing shutdowns and Stay-At-Home orders related to COVID-19 within the second quarter of fiscal year 2020.
Adjusted EBITDA. Recreation segment Adjusted EBITDA increased $47.6 million primarily due to increased production volumes and shipments, strong price realization, and lower discounts and sales allowances, partially offset by inefficiencies related to supply chain disruption and labor constraints.
Recreation segment Adjusted EBITDA decreased $8.4 million primarily due to lower shipments across most product categories due to temporary manufacturing shutdowns of all Recreation businesses during the second quarter of fiscal year 2020 and lingering supply chain disruptions through the remainder of the year.
Backlog
Backlog represents firm orders received from dealers or directly from end customers. The following table presents a summary of our backlog by segment:
Each of our three segments has a backlog of new vehicle orders that generally extends out from two to twenty-four months in duration.
Orders from our dealers and end customers are evidenced by a contract, firm purchase order or reserved production slot for delivery of one or many vehicles. These orders are reported in our backlog at the aggregate selling prices, net of discounts or allowances.
At the end of fiscal year 2021, our backlog was $3,127.8 million, compared to $1,778.5 million at the end of fiscal year 2020. The increase in total backlog was due to increased F&E, Commercial, and Recreation segment backlogs. The increase in F&E segment backlog was primarily due to the result of strong demand and orders for fire apparatus and ambulance units. The increase in Commercial segment backlog was primarily the result of increased orders for Type A school buses, terminal trucks and street sweepers, partially offset by production against a large order within the municipal transit backlog. The increase in Recreation segment backlog was primarily the result of increased orders across all product categories.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
Our primary requirements for liquidity and capital are working capital, the improvement and expansion of existing manufacturing facilities, debt service payments and general corporate needs. Historically, these cash requirements have been met through cash provided by operating activities, cash and cash equivalents and borrowings under our term loan and ABL credit facility.
We believe that our sources of liquidity and capital will be sufficient to finance our continued operations, growth strategy and additional expenses we expect to continue to incur as a public company. However, we cannot assure you that cash provided by operating activities and borrowings under the current revolving credit facility will be sufficient to meet our future needs. If we are unable to generate sufficient cash flows from operations in the future, and if availability under the current revolving credit facility is not sufficient due to the size of our borrowing base or other external factors, we may have to obtain additional financing. If additional capital is obtained by issuing equity, the interests of our existing stockholders will be diluted. If we incur additional indebtedness, that indebtedness may contain financial and other covenants that may significantly restrict our operations or may involve higher overall interest rates. We cannot assure you that we will be able to obtain refinancing or additional financing on favorable terms or at all.
Cash Flow
The following table shows summary cash flows for fiscal years 2021, 2020 and 2019:
Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities for fiscal year 2021 was $158.3 million, compared to $55.7 million for fiscal year 2020. The increase in positive cash generation from operating activities for fiscal year 2021 compared to the prior year was related to the increase in net income and improved net working capital efficiency, specifically related to inventory and customer advances.
Net cash provided by operating activities for fiscal year 2020 was $55.7 million, compared to $52.5 million for fiscal year 2019. The increase in positive cash generation from operating activities for fiscal year 2020 compared to the prior year was related to improved net working capital efficiency, specifically related to receivables and inventory.
Net Cash (Used in) Provided by Investing Activities
Net cash used by investing activities for fiscal year 2021 was $10.2 million, compared to $1.7 million cash provided by investing activities for fiscal year 2020. The increase in net cash used by investing activities was primarily due to increased investment of PPE partially offset by proceeds from the sale of assets.
Net cash provided by investing activities for fiscal year 2020 was $1.7 million, compared to $0.2 million for fiscal year 2019. The increase in net cash provided by investing activities was primarily due to cash proceeds from the sale of shuttle bus, partially offset by cash used to purchase Spartan ER, and reductions in proceeds from asset sales and capital expenditures.
Net Cash Used in Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities for fiscal year 2021 was $146.2 million, compared to $49.3 million for fiscal year 2020. The increase in cash used was primarily due to the net proceeds from our 2021 ABL Facility offset by the use of those proceeds to repay the 2017 ABL Facility and Term Loan, payments for debt issuance costs, share repurchases and payments for dividends.
Net cash used in financing activities for fiscal year 2020 was $49.3 million, compared to $61.3 million for fiscal year 2019. The decrease in cash used was primarily due to no stock repurchases in fiscal year 2020 and a reduction in dividends paid. The net cash used in fiscal year 2020 was primarily to repay debt and pay dividends.
Dividends
Subject to legally available funds and the discretion of our board of directors, we may or may not pay a quarterly cash dividend in the future on our common stock. We announced the suspension of our quarterly dividend beginning the second quarter of fiscal year 2020. In the year ended October 31, 2020 we paid cash dividends of $9.5 million.
On June 3, 2021, our Board of Directors reinstated a quarterly cash dividend in the amount of $0.05 per share of common stock, which equates to a rate of $0.20 per share of common stock on an annualized basis, and declared the regular dividend for the three months ended April 30, 2021 and July 31, 2021, payable on July 15, 2021 and October 15, 2021, to shareholders of record on June 30, 2021 and September 30, 2021, respectively. During the fiscal year 2021, we paid cash dividends of $6.6 million.
Stock Repurchase Program
During fiscal year 2018, the Company’s Board of Directors authorized up to $100.0 million of repurchases of the Company’s issued and outstanding common stock. During fiscal year 2019, the Company repurchased 717,597 shares under this repurchase program at a total cost of $8.3 million at an average price per share of $11.62. There were no repurchases under this program during fiscal year 2020 and the program expired on September 4, 2020.
On September 2, 2021, the Company’s Board of Directors approved the authorization of a new share repurchase program that allows the repurchase of up to $150.0 million of the Company’s outstanding common stock, effective immediately. The share repurchase authorization expires in 24 months and gives management the flexibility to determine conditions under which shares may be purchased. During fiscal year 2021, the Company repurchased 250,000 shares under this repurchase program at a total cost of $3.9 million at an average price of $15.45.
2021 ABL Facility
On April 13, 2021, the Company entered into a $550.0 million revolving credit agreement (the “2021 ABL Facility” or “2021 ABL Agreement”) with a syndicate of lenders. The 2021 ABL Facility provides for revolving loans and letters of credit in an aggregate amount of up to $550.0 million. The total credit facility is subject to a $30.0 million sublimit for swing line loans and a $35.0 million sublimit for letters of credit (plus up to an additional $20.0 million of letters of credit at issuing bank’s discretion), along with certain borrowing base and other customary restrictions as defined in the 2021 ABL Agreement. The 2021 ABL Agreement allows for incremental facilities in an aggregate amount of up to $100.0 million, plus the excess, if any, of the borrowing base then in effect over total commitments then in effect. Any such incremental facilities are subject to receiving additional commitments from lenders and certain other customary conditions. The 2021 ABL Agreement serves as refinancing of indebtedness and terminates the Company’s 2017 ABL Facility and Term Loan. The Company repaid $303.4 million of existing principal on the 2017 ABL Facility and Term Loan in connection with this refinancing. The Company also paid $7.0 million of debt issuance costs and recognized a $1.4 million loss on early extinguishment of debt, the latter of which is included in the Consolidated Statement of Operations and Comprehensive Income (loss) for the twelve months ended October 31, 2021. The debt issuance costs capitalized in connection with the 2021 ABL Facility less accumulated amortization are included in other long-term assets in the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheets.
The 2021 ABL Facility matures on April 13, 2026. The Company may prepay principal, in whole or in part, at any time without penalty.
All revolving loans under the 2021 ABL Facility bear interest at rates equal to, at the Company’s option, either a base rate plus an applicable margin, or a Eurodollar rate plus an applicable margin. Applicable interest rate margins are initially 0.75% for all base rate loans and 1.75% for all Eurodollar rate loans (with the Eurodollar rate having a floor of 0.25%), subject to adjustment based on the Company’s fixed charge coverage ratio in accordance with the 2021 ABL Agreement. Interest is payable quarterly for all base rate loans and is payable the last day of any interest period or every three months for all Eurodollar rate loans. The weighted-average interest rate on borrowings outstanding under the 2021 ABL Facility was 1.75% as of October 31, 2021.
The lenders under the 2021 ABL Facility have a first priority security interest in substantially all personal property assets and certain real property assets of the Company. The 2021 ABL Facility’s borrowing base is comprised of eligible receivables and eligible inventory, plus a fixed asset sublimit of certain eligible real property and eligible equipment, which fixed asset sublimit reduces by quarterly amortization as specified in the 2021 ABL Agreement.
The 2021 ABL Agreement contains customary representations and warranties, affirmative and negative covenants, subject in certain cases to customary limitations, exceptions and exclusions. The 2021 ABL Agreement also contains certain customary events of default. The occurrence of an event of default under the 2021 ABL Agreement could result in the termination of the commitments under the 2021 ABL Facility and the acceleration of all outstanding borrowings under it. The 2021 ABL Agreement requires the Company to maintain a minimum fixed charge coverage ratio of 1.10 to 1.00 during certain compliance periods as specified in the 2021 ABL Agreement.
The Company was in compliance with all financial covenants under the 2021 ABL Agreement as of October 31, 2021. As of October 31, 2021, the Company’s availability under the 2021 ABL Facility was $290.0 million.
The fair value of the 2021 ABL Facility approximated book value on October 31, 2021.
April 2017 ABL Facility
The 2017 ABL Facility consisted of: (i) Revolving Loans, (ii) Swing Line Loans, and (iii) Letters of Credit, aggregating up to a combined maximum of $500.0 million. The total amount borrowed under the 2017 ABL Facility was subject to a $30.0 million sublimit for Swing Line loans and a $35.0 million sublimit for Letters of Credit, along with certain borrowing base and other customary restrictions as defined in the 2017 ABL Agreement.
The 2017 ABL Facility was set to mature on April 25, 2022. In connection with the Company’s entry into the 2021 ABL Facility on April 13, 2021, the 2017 ABL Facility was fully prepaid as part of the refinancing. All related security interests were cancelled.
The fair value of the 2017 ABL Facility approximated book value on October 31, 2020.
Term Loan
On April 29, 2020, the Company entered into a Fifth Amended and Restated $175.0 million term loan agreement (“Term Loan” and “Term Loan Agreement”), as Borrower with certain subsidiaries of the Company, acting as guarantors of debt. Principal could be prepaid at any time during the term of the Term Loan without penalty.
The Term Loan agreement required quarterly payments of 0.25% of the original principal balance. The Term Loan was set to mature on April 25, 2022. In connection with the Company’s entry into the 2021 ABL Facility on April 13, 2021, the Term Loan was fully prepaid as part of the refinancing. All related security interests were cancelled.
The fair value of the Term Loan approximated book value on October 31, 2020.
Refer to Note 11, Long-Term Debt, to our 2021 audited consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Subsequent Events
The Company evaluated subsequent events through December 15, 2021, the date on which the financial statements were available to be issued. Other than the items noted below, no other events were identified.
Quarterly Dividend
On December 9, 2021, the Company’s Board of Directors declared a quarterly cash dividend in the amount of $0.05 per share of common stock, which equates to a rate of $0.20 per share of common stock on an annualized basis, payable on January 14, 2022 to shareholders of record on December 31, 2021.
Contractual Obligations
Significant contractual commitments at October 31, 2021 are expected to affect our cash flows in future periods as set forth in the table below.
(a)
Includes estimated principal payments due under our the 2021 ABL Facility as of October 31, 2021.
(b)
Based on interest rates in effect as of October 31, 2021.
(c)
Includes obligations under non-cancellable purchase orders for raw materials and chassis as of October 31, 2021.
(d)
Unrecognized tax benefits totaling $3.6 million as of October 31, 2021, excluding related interests and penalties, are not included in the table because the timing of their resolution cannot be estimated. See Note 17, Income Taxes, to our 2021 audited consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for disclosures regarding uncertain income tax positions under ASC Topic 740.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income
In considering the financial performance of the business, management analyzes the primary financial performance measures of Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income. Adjusted EBITDA is defined as net income for the relevant period before depreciation and amortization, interest expense, loss on early extinguishment of debt and provision for income taxes, as adjusted for certain items described below that we believe are not indicative of our ongoing operating performance. Adjusted Net Income is defined as net income, as adjusted for certain items described below that we believe are not indicative of our ongoing operating performance.
We believe Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income are useful to investors because these performance measures are used by our management and the Company’s Board of Directors for measuring and reporting the Company’s financial performance and as a measurement in incentive compensation for management. These measures exclude the impact of certain items which we believe have less bearing on our core operating performance because they are items that are not needed or available to the Company’s managers in the daily activities of their businesses. We believe that the core operations of our business are those which can be affected by our management in a particular period through their resource allocation decisions that affect the underlying performance of our operations conducted during that period. We also believe that decisions utilizing Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income allow for a more meaningful comparison of operating fundamentals between companies within our markets by eliminating the impact of capital structure and taxation differences between the companies.
To determine Adjusted EBITDA, we adjust Net Income for the following items: non-cash depreciation and amortization, interest expense, loss on early extinguishment of debt, income taxes and other items as described below. Stock-based compensation expense and sponsor expense reimbursement is excluded from both Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EBITDA because it is an expense, which cannot be impacted by our business managers. Stock-based compensation expense also reflects a cost which may obscure trends in our underlying vehicle businesses for a given period, due to the timing and nature of the equity awards. We also adjust for exceptional items, which are determined to be those that in management’s judgment are not indicative of our ongoing operating performance and need to be disclosed by virtue of their size, nature or incidence, and include non-cash items and items settled in cash. In determining whether an event or transaction is exceptional, management considers quantitative as well as qualitative factors such as the frequency or predictability of occurrence.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income have limitations as analytical tools. These are not presentations made in accordance with U.S. GAAP, are not measures of financial condition and should not be considered as an alternative to net income or net loss for the period determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure to Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income is Net Income for the relevant period. Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income are not necessarily comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies. As a result, you should not consider this performance measure in isolation from, or as a substitute analysis for, our results of operations as determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Moreover, such measures do not reflect:
•
our cash expenditures, or future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
•
changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•
the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments on our debt;
•
the cash requirements to pay our taxes.
The following table reconciles net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA for the periods presented:
The following table reconciles Net Income (loss) to Adjusted Net Income for the periods presented:
(a)
Reflects costs incurred in connection with business acquisitions, dispositions and capital market transactions. These expenses consist primarily of legal, accounting and due diligence expenses.
(b)
Reflects the reimbursement of expenses to the Company’s primary equity holder.
(c)
Restructuring costs for fiscal year 2021 incurred in connection with the announced closure of certain facilities within the F&E segment and termination and severance costs incurred within the corporate segment.
Restructuring costs for fiscal year 2020 resulted from the sunset of certain ambulance brands, move from a centralized to a decentralized aftermarket parts business, severance costs related to reductions in force across all segments, and lease termination costs related to the closure of a Spartan ER facility.
Restructuring costs for fiscal year 2019 were primarily attributable to headcount reductions in the F&E Segment and our corporate office as well as a facility closure in the Recreation Segment and lease termination costs.
(d)
Reflects costs that are directly attributable to restructuring activities, including leadership changes and inventory liquidation associated with the decentralization of the Company’s aftermarket parts business, but do not meet the definition of restructuring under ASC 420.
(e)
Reflects impairment charges associated with the closing of certain facilities within the F&E segment for fiscal year 2021.
Reflects impairment charges associated with the liquidation of all rental vehicles, sunset of certain ambulance brands and decentralization of the Company’s aftermarket parts business.
Refer to Note 8, Restructuring and Impairments, to our 2021 audited consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(f)
Reflects expenses associated with the vesting of equity awards and award modifications.
(g)
Reflects legal fees and costs incurred to litigate and settle legal claims against us which are outside the normal course of business. Costs include payments: (i) for fees and costs to litigate and settle non-ordinary course intellectual property disputes, (ii) for fees and costs to litigate the putative securities class actions and derivative action pending against us and certain of our directors and officers and (iii) for fees to settle certain claims arising from a putative class action in the state of California.
(h)
Reflects losses related to the sale of REV Brazil of $2.8 million, and the loss recognized on the Company’s investment in its China JV of $6.2 million, offset by a $1.1 million gain related to the sale of land within the F&E segment for fiscal year 2021, and the losses related to the sale of our shuttle bus businesses for fiscal year 2020. Refer to Note 7, Divestitures, to our 2021 audited consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(i)
Reflects gain cumulative on acquisition of Spartan ER. Refer to Note 3, Acquisitions, to our 2021 audited consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(j)
Reflects one-time costs including (i) a recall campaign announced on Spartan apparatus that were designed pre-acquisition for which the company is seeking legal indemnification of the losses incurred of $1.3 million; (ii) cumulative costs related to workers compensation liabilities of $4.2 million; (iii) other costs that management does not believe to be recurring in nature of $0.6 million.
(k)
Adjusted EBITDA attributable to businesses that were classified as held for sale during the respective period.
(l)
Reflects the expense associated with the deferred purchase price payments to sellers of Lance. The Company paid $5.0 million during the second quarter of fiscal year 2020 to fully settle the deferred liability.
(m)
Reflects losses recognized upon extinguishment of our 2017 ABL Facility and Term Loan. The loss is entirely comprised of unamortized debt issuance costs that were written off in connection with this extinguishment.
(n)
Reflects the impact of net operating loss carrybacks as a result of the CARES Act. Refer to Note 17, Income Taxes, to our 2021 audited consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(o)
Income tax effect of adjustments using a 26.5% effective income tax rate for fiscal years 2021, 2020 and 2019, except for certain items with differing tax treatments.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not created, and are not party to, any special-purpose or off-balance sheet entities for the purpose of raising capital, incurring debt or operating our business. We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements or relationships with entities that are not consolidated into or disclosed in our consolidated financial statements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a material current or future effect on our financial condition, revenues, expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures and capital resources. In addition, we do not engage in trading activities involving non-exchange traded contracts. See Note 18, Commitments and Contingencies, to our 2021 audited consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional discussion.
Seasonality
In a typical year, our operating results are impacted by seasonality. Historically, the slowest sales volume quarter has been the first fiscal quarter when the purchasing seasons for vehicles, such as school buses, RVs and sweepers are the lowest due to the colder weather and the relatively long time until the summer vacation season, and the fact that the school year is underway with municipalities and school bus contractors utilizing their existing fleets to transport student populations. Sales of our products have typically been higher in the second, third and fourth fiscal quarters (with the fourth fiscal quarter typically being the strongest) due to better weather, the vacation season, buying habits of RV dealers and end-users, timing of government/municipal customer fiscal years, and the beginning of a new school year. Our quarterly results of operations, cash flows, and liquidity are likely to be impacted by these seasonal patterns. Sales and earnings for other vehicles that we produce, such as essential emergency vehicles and commercial bus fleets, are less seasonal, but fluctuations in sales of these vehicles can also be impacted by timing surrounding the fiscal years of municipalities and commercial customers, as well as the timing and amounts of multi-unit orders.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 to our 2021 audited consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional discussion. The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect amounts of assets and liabilities reported in our consolidated financial statements, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the consolidated financial statements and reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the year. We believe our estimates and assumptions are reasonable; however, future results could differ from those estimates. We consider the following accounting estimates to be the most critical in understanding the judgments that are involved in preparing our consolidated financial statements.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of aggregate cost or net realizable value. Cost is determined using the first-in, first-out (“FIFO”) method. If inventory costs exceed expected net realizable value due to obsolescence or quantities on hand are in excess of expected demand, the Company records reserves for the difference between the cost and the expected net realizable value. These reserves are recorded based on various factors, including recent sales history and sales forecasts, industry market conditions, vehicle model changes and general economic conditions. The Company evaluates these reserves multiple times during the year and makes adjustments as necessary based on the factors observed above.
Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
The Company accounts for business combinations by estimating the fair value of consideration paid for acquired businesses, including contingent consideration, and assigning that amount to the fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the remainder assigned to goodwill. If the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed exceeds the fair value of consideration paid, a gain on bargain purchase is recognized. The estimates of fair values are determined utilizing customary valuation procedures and techniques, which require us, among other things, to estimate future cash flows and discount rates. Such analyses involve significant judgments and estimations.
Goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets, consisting of trade names, are not amortized, however, the Company reviews goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment at least annually or more often if an event occurs or circumstances change which indicates that its carrying amount may not exceed its fair value. The annual impairment review is performed as of the first day of the fourth quarter of each fiscal year based upon information and estimates available at that time. To perform the impairment testing, the Company first assesses qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair values of the Company’s reporting units or indefinite-lived intangible assets are less than their carrying amounts as a basis for determining whether or not to perform the quantitative impairment test. Qualitative testing includes the evaluation of economic conditions, financial performance and other factors such as key events when they occur. The Company then estimates the fair value of each reporting unit and each indefinite-lived intangible asset not meeting the qualitative criteria and compares their fair values to their carrying values.
Under the quantitative method, the fair value of each reporting unit of the Company is determined by using primarily the income approach and involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. The income approach involves discounting management’s projections of future interim and terminal cash flows to a present value at a risk-adjusted discount rate which corresponds with the Company’s and market-participant weighted-average cost of capital (“WACC”). Key assumptions used in the income approach include future sales growth, gross margin and operating expenses trends, depreciation and amortization expense, taxes, capital expenditures and changes in working capital. Projected future cash flows are based on income forecasts and management’s knowledge of the current operating environment and expectations for the Company on a going-forward basis. The WACC represents a blended cost of equity and debt capital applicable to the Company based on observed market participant rates of return for a group of
comparable public companies in the industry, utilizes market participant capital structure assumptions by reference to the industry’s average debt to total invested capital ratios, and is also being adjusted for relative risk premiums specific to each reporting unit tested. The terminal residual value is based upon the projected cash flow for the final projected year and is calculated using a capitalization rate based on estimates of growth of the net cash flows based on the Company’s estimate of sustainable growth for each financial reporting unit. The inputs and assumptions used in the determination of fair value are considered Level 3 inputs within the fair value hierarchy.
Under the market approach, the Company utilizes multiples of revenue and earnings from other publicly traded companies with comparable operations, to determine the fair value of the reporting unit.
If the fair value of any reporting unit, as calculated using the income approach and weighted as necessary to the market approach, when applicable, is less than its carrying value, an impairment charge is recorded for any excess of the reporting unit’s carrying value over it’s fair value, not to exceed the carrying amount of goodwill of that reporting unit.
When determining the fair value of indefinite-lived trade names, the Company uses the relief-from-royalty (“RFR”) method, within the income approach. The RFR method assumes that an intangible asset is valuable because the owner of the asset avoids the cost of licensing that asset. Under the RFR method, an estimate is made as to the appropriate royalty income that would be negotiated in an arm’s-length transaction if the subject intangible asset were licensed from an independent third party. The royalty savings are then calculated by multiplying a royalty rate, expressed as a percentage of revenues, times a determined applicable level of future revenues provided per each trade name as estimated by the Company. The royalty rate is based on research of industry and market data related to transactions involving the licensing of comparable intangible assets. The resulting future royalty savings are then discounted to their present value equivalent utilizing market participant rates of return, adjusted for relative risk premiums specific to each trade name as well as the reporting unit housing it. In considering the fair value of trade names, the Company also considers relative age, consistent use, quality, expansion possibilities, relative profitability, relative market potential, and how a market participant may employ these intangible assets from a financial and economic point of view.
During the fiscal year 2021, the Company performed its annual goodwill test using both a quantitative and qualitative approach and did not identify and goodwill impairments and did not identify any reporting units at risk of failing the goodwill impairment test. The goodwill balances at the F&E segment are $88.6 million, Commercial segment of $26.2 million and Recreation segment of $42.5 million.
During the fiscal year 2021, the Company performed its annual indefinite-lived trade name intangibles and did not identify any impairment and the intangibles were all in considerably in excess of their carrying value.
Warranty
Provisions for estimated warranty and other related costs are recorded in cost of sales and are periodically adjusted to reflect actual experience. The amount of accrued warranty liability reflects management’s best estimate of the expected future cost of honoring our obligations under our limited warranty plans. The costs of fulfilling our warranty obligations principally involve replacement parts, labor and sometimes travel for any field retrofit or recall campaigns. Our estimates are based on historical experience, the number of units involved and the cost per claim. A significant increase in replacement parts, labor and travel could have a material adverse impact on our operating results. If our reserve were to change by 5%, it would not have a material impact on our net income for the year ended October 31, 2021. Also, each quarter we review actual warranty claims to determine if there are systemic effects that would require a field retrofit or recall campaign.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2 to our 2021 audited consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of the impact of new accounting standards on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.